
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
SUBJECT CHAPTER
City Charter 1
City Code 2
Municipal Infractions 3
City Boundaries 4
Precincts and Wards 5
Elections 6
Mayor 7
Mayor Pro Tem 8
Council 9
City Officers and Employees 10
City Departments 11
Fiscal Management 12
Personnel Procedures 13
Adjudicative Appeals and Hearings 14
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 1 – City Charter
SECTIONS:
1-1-1 Purpose
1-1-2 Charter
1-1-3 Form of Government
1-1-4 Powers and Duties
1-1-5 Number and Term of Council
1-1-6 Term of Mayor
1-1-7 Copies on File
1-1-1 Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for a Charter embodying the form
of government existing in the City of Muscatine, Iowa, on August 17, 1972.
1-1-2 Charter. This Ordinance may be cited as the Charter of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
1-1-3 Form of Government. The form of government of the City of Muscatine, Iowa, is the
special charter form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.12)
1-1-4 Powers and Duties. The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers
and perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the ordinances,
resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
1-1-5 Number and Term of Council. The Council consists of two (2) Council members
elected at large and one (1) Council member from each of five (5) wards, as established by
ordinance, elected for four (4) year staggered terms.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
1-1-6 Term of Mayor. The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
1-1-7 Copies on File. The City Clerk shall keep an official copy of this Charter on file with the
official records of the City Clerk, shall immediately file a copy with the Secretary of State of
the State of Iowa, and shall keep copies of the Charter available at the City Clerk's Office for
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 2 – City Code
SECTIONS:
1-2-1 Title
1-2-2 Definitions
1-2-3 Rules of Construction
1-2-4 Severability
1-2-5 City Powers
1-2-6 Indemnity
1-2-7 Personal Injuries
1-2-8 Extension of Authority
1-2-9 Amendments
1-2-10 Catchlines and Notes
1-2-11 Altering Codes
1-2-12 Warrants
1-2-13 General Standards for Action
1-2-14 Standard Penalty
1-2-15 Appendix to this Code of Ordinances
1-2-1 Title. This Code of Ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Muscatine, Iowa, 2014.
1-2-2 Definitions. The following definitions shall be definitions of the words so defined unless
the context of the section dictates otherwise:
A. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary means
of access to abutting property.
B. "City" shall mean the City of Muscatine, in the County of Muscatine, in the State of
Iowa.
C. "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Muscatine.
D. “Clerk” means the City Clerk of Muscatine, Iowa.
E. "Code" shall mean the City Code of Muscatine, Iowa, and all amendments
thereto.
F. “Council”means the City Council of Muscatine, Iowa.
G. "County" shall mean Muscatine County in the State of Iowa.
H. "In the City" shall mean and include all territory over which the City now has or shall
hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers and regulatory
functions.
I. “May” confers a power.
J. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
K. "Month" shall mean one calendar month.
L. “Municipal Property” means all property owned, leased, or managed by the
City of Muscatine, either inside or outside of city limits, shall be under the
statutes of the Municipal Code and the City’s jurisdiction.
M. "Oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation. "Sworn" shall be construed to include
the word "Affirmed".
N. "Occupant" or "Tenant", when applied to a building or land, shall mean any person
who holds a written or oral lease of, or actually occupies the whole or part of said
building or land, either alone or with others.
O. “Ordinances” shall mean the ordinances of the City of Muscatine, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
P. "Owner", when applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant of the whole or part
of such building, land, or any property, either alone or with others.
Q. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation,
company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other legal entity, and
includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does
not include a governmental body.
R. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk, or
other public thoroughfare.
S. “Shall” imposes a duty or requirement.
T. “Right-of-way” means the area on, below, or above any real property in which the
City has an interest, including, without limitation, any street, road, highway, alley,
sidewalk or any other place, area or real property owned by or under the control of
the City, including other dedicated right-of-way for travel purposes and utility
easements.
U. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the public way (See R above) between
the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
V. “State” means the State of Iowa.
W. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
X. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of every way
or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public,
as a matter of right.
Y. “Urban Design Standards and Urban Standard Specifications (U.D.S. & U.S.S.)”
means the latest edition of the Urban Design Standards Manual and the Urban
Standard Specifications for Public Improvements Manual as compiled by the Urban
Standards and Specifications Committee.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa have their
ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent
of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the provision.
1-2-3 Rules of Construction. In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of
statutory construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term “statute” as used
therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term “ordinance” when applied to this
Code of Ordinances
1-2-4 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code for
any reason is held to be unconstitutional and invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Code as a whole or any section, provision or part
thereof not held invalid or unconstitutional.
1-2-5 City Powers. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution,
and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power
and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and preserve and improve the
peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents and each and
every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the
foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1-2-6 Indemnity. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances,
by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death of any
person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property whatsoever,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or related to,
directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of
anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants
of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by
making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits
or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, including all costs and
expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The provisions of this Section shall
be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or
any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein or not.
1-2-7 Personal Injuries. When action is brought against the City for personal injuries
alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person
by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the pendency
of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the
action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that
the City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against
the City and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is
conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of
the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the
plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The City
may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment
together with all the expenses incurred by the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1-2-8 Extension of Authority. Whenever an officer or employee is required or
authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be
construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1-2-9 Amendments. All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this
Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1-2-10 Catchlines and Notes. The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of
Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross
references and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and are
intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section.
1-2-11 Altering Codes. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend
by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of Ordinances in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)
1-2-12 Warrants. If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful right to
exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or conduct the
inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the county, pursuant to Section
808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative search warrant. No owner, operator or
occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, rooming
unit, structure, building or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1-2-13 General Standards for Action. Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any
discretionary power to the Council or any commission, board or officer or employee of the
City and does not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall
be exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant, deny or
revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and circumstances then existing
and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due consideration shall be given to the impact
upon the public health, safety and welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably
prudent person under similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1-2-14 Standard Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for violation of
any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty or obtain
a license required by this Code of Ordinances or violating any provision of this Code of
Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of at least sixty-five dollars ($65.00) but not to exceed six hundred
twenty-five dollars ($625.00).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
1-2-15 Appendix to this Code of Ordinances. The City is hereby authorized to create
and maintain an Appendix to this Code of Ordinances. The contents of the Appendix shall
be approved by resolution of the City Council. The Appendix shall contain, but not be
limited to the following contents:
A. A schedule of minimum penalties for specific city offenses.
B. A schedule of permit and licensing requirements, which shall include application
fees and any and all bond and insurance requirements.
C. A schedule of fees for use of city services, including but not limited to sewer and
sanitation fees.
D. A schedule of miscellaneous charges and fees related to platting subdivisions,
building permits, inspection and zoning matters.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 3 – Municipal Infractions
SECTIONS:
1-3-1 Municipal Infraction
1-3-2 Penalties
1-3-3 Civil Citations
1-3-4 Alternative Relief
1-3-5 Criminal Penalties
1-3-1 Municipal Infraction. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or
code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under
State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple
misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal
infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[2] and [3])
1-3-2 Penalties. Unless provided for elsewhere in this Code or another amount is
provided for in the Schedule of Penalties in the Appendix to this Code of Ordinances, a
violation of a City ordinance is punishable by the following civil penalties:
Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First Offense – Not to exceed $500.00
B. Each Repeat Offense – Not to exceed $750.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.
Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial user is punishable by
a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each day a violation exists or continues.
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is punishable by a
penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence. However, an
environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of the following
conditions are satisfied:
1. The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup, cleaning,
repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed
to reduce or eliminate the violation.
2. The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24) hours from the time
that the violation begins.
3. The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8) hours.
1-3-3 Civil Citations. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of
Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. The
citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.305, by
certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant‘s last known mailing address,
return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of
the citation shall be served to the defendant, a copy of the citation shall be retained by the
issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court. The
citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain
the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [4])
A. The name and address of the defendant.
B. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the
citation.
C. The location and time of the infraction.
D. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both.
E. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
F. The time and place of court appearance.
G. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
1-3-4 Alternative Relief. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this Chapter does not
preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive
relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [9])
1-3-5 Criminal Penalties. This Chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a
criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties
are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the City to
enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful
means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[12])
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 4 – City Boundaries
SECTIONS:
1-4-1 Designation of Boundaries
1-4-2 Boundaries; Record of
1-4-1 Designation of Boundaries. The boundaries of the City of Muscatine shall be as
they now appear on file at the office of the City Clerk and as from time to time updated in
accordance with applicable law.
1-4-2 Boundaries; record of. A current map of the boundaries of the City of Muscatine
shall be kept and made available during regular business hours at the office of the City
Clerk.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 5 – Precincts and Wards
SECTIONS:
1-5-1 Precincts Established
1-5-2 Wards Established
1-5-3 Polling Places Established
1-5-4 Correction of Errors
1-5-5 Publication of Changes
1-5-1 Precincts Established. For the purpose of best serving the convenience of the City,
the City is hereby divided into ten (10) precincts which shall consist of the real property as
detailed on the map on file in the office of the City Clerk.
1-5-2 Wards Established. The City is hereby divided into five (5) wards as follows:
A. The First Ward shall consist of the First and Second Precincts.
B. The Second Ward shall consist of the Third and Fourth Precincts.
C. The Third Ward shall consist of the Fifth and Sixth Precincts.
D. The Fourth Ward shall consist of the Seventh and Eighth Precincts.
E. The Fifth Ward shall consist of the Ninth, Tenth Precincts, and portions of the
Sweetland precinct located within the City of Muscatine.
1-5-3 Polling Places Designated. The polling places shall be designated by the
Commissioner of Elections as provided by the Iowa Code.
1-5-4 Correction of Errors. If this Ordinance fails to place any part of the City within a
precinct established by this Ordinance, the Commissioner of Elections shall assign the
omitted area to an adjacent precinct or assign to a combined City-County precinct
established in accordance with any signed agreement between the City of Muscatine and
Muscatine County, with the same legislative district. If this Ordinance places any part of the
City in more than one precinct established by this Ordinance, the Commissioner of Elections
shall assign that territory to an adjacent precinct within the proper legislative district. The
Commissioner of Elections may also correct obvious clerical errors in this Ordinance.
1-5-5 Publication of Changes. Changes to boundaries and polling places for precincts
and wards shall be published in accordance with Chapter 49 of the Code of Iowa.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 6 – Elections
SECTIONS:
1-6-1 Municipal Elections
1-6-2 Offices to be Filled
1-6-3 Nominating Method to be Used
1-6-4 Nomination by Petition
1-6-5 Adding Name by Petition
1-6-6 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
1-6-7 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections
1-6-8 Persons Elected
1-6-9 Permanent Registration
1-6-10 Use of Public Resources for Political Purposes Prohibited
1-6-1 Municipal Elections. All municipal elections shall be conducted as provided by the
Code of Iowa and shall be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November of odd
numbered years.
1-6-2 Offices to be Filled. The times at which officers of cities shall be elected and their
terms of office shall be as provided by or established pursuant to Sections 376.1 and 376.2
of the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 39.20)
1-6-3 Nominating Method to be Used. All candidates for elective municipal offices shall
be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
1-6-4 Nomination by Petition. Nominations for candidates for the office of Mayor and
Council Members may be made by nomination papers signed by not less than 25 eligible
electors, residents of the City or Ward.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
1-6-5 Adding Name by Petition. A candidate whose name appeared on the ballot by
reason of having been nominated, cannot have his name appear a second time by petition.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2) (Op. Atty. Gen. 1898, p.174 Iowa)
1-6-6 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit. Nomination papers shall include a petition
and an affidavit of candidacy. The petition and affidavit shall be in substantially the form
prescribed by the State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the
Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)
1-6-7 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections. The time and place of filing
nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right of a candidate so
nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal
sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the
appropriate provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
1-6-8 Persons Elected. The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each
office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8)
1-6-9 Permanent Registration. There is hereby adopted the plan of permanent voter
registration as provided by the Code of Iowa.
1-6-10 Use of Public Resources for a Political Purpose Prohibited. For purposes of this
subsection, the following definitions apply:
A. “Ballot issue” means a question that has been approved to be placed before the voters
or is otherwise required by law to be placed before the voters. “Ballot issue” does not
include the nomination or election of a candidate.
B. “Campaign” means the organized effort to expressly advocate the nomination,
election, or defeat of a candidate for state or local office in Iowa. “Campaign” also
means the organized effort to expressly advocate the passage or defeat of a ballot
issue.
C. “Candidate” means any individual who has taken affirmative action to seek
nomination or election to a state or local office in Iowa.
D. “Expressly advocate” means “express advocacy” as defined in Iowa Code Section
68A.102(14) and Iowa Admin. Code r. 351-4.53(1). “Express advocacy” includes a
communication that uses any word, term, phrase, or symbol that exhorts an individual
to vote for or against a clearly identified candidate or for the passage or defeat of a
clearly identified ballot issue.
E. “Political purpose” means to expressly advocate the nomination, election, or defeat of
a candidate or to expressly advocate the passage or defeat of a ballot issue.
F. “Public resources” means the moneys, time, property, facilities, equipment, and
supplies of the executive branch of state government, a county, city, public school, or
other political subdivision.
(Iowa Admin. Code r. 351-5.3(68A))
General prohibition. Unless one of the exceptions in rule 351-5.5(68A) applies, the public
officials and public employees of the City shall not permit public resources to be used to
expressly advocate the nomination, election, or defeat of a candidate or to expressly
advocate the passage or defeat of a ballot issue.
(Iowa Admin. Code r. 351-5.4(68A))
Specific Conduct Prohibited. The following specific conduct or actions are deemed to be
the prohibited use of public resources for a political purpose:
A. Using public resources to solicit or accept campaign contributions.
B. Using public resources to solicit votes, engage in campaign work, or poll voters on
their preferences for candidates or ballot issues. The prohibition on polling voters by
using public resources does not apply to authorized research at a public university.
C. Using a publicly owned motor vehicle to transport political materials, placing campaign
signs on a publicly owned motor vehicle, or traveling to campaign-related events in a
publicly owned motor vehicle.
Using public resources to produce and distribute communications that expressly
advocate for or against candidates or that expressly advocate for or against ballot
issues.
D. Placing campaign materials on public property including the placement of campaign
signs in the public right-of-way.
(Iowa Admin. Code r. 351-5.4[68A])
Construction. This Section shall not be construed to limit the freedom of speech of officials
or employees of the City.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 7 – Mayor
SECTIONS:
1-7-1 T erm of Office
1-7-2 Powers and Duties of the Mayor
1-7-3 Compensation
1-7-4 Voting
1-7-5 Qualifications of the Mayor
1-7-6 Removal of the Mayor
1-7-1 Term of Office. The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
1-7-2 Powers and Duties of the Mayor. The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of
the City; shall take care that the laws of the State of Iowa and the provisions of this City
Code are duly respected, observed, and enforced within the City; shall preside at all council
meetings, preserve order and decorum and shall decide all questions of order, subject to an
appeal from the Council; shall from time to time give the Council information for its
consideration on such measures as may be in the interest of the City; shall be the
conservator of the peace and may call for the assistance of the police and, if necessary, any
citizen of the City to aid in quelling or preventing any riot or unlawful assembly, or in
preventing or restraining any breach of the peace and any such police officer or citizen, when
so called upon, who shall refuse to obey the orders of the Mayor shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor; shall sign on behalf of the City all contracts between the City and any other
party; and shall perform all duties required by the Charter, the provisions of this Code,
resolutions of the City Council and all other acts which the good of the City may require.
1-7-3 Compensation. The Mayor shall receive, in full compensation for his or her
services, a salary i n t h e a m o u n t a s s e t b y o r d i n a n c e .
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
1-7-4 Voting. The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a
member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1-7-5 Qualifications of the Mayor. The Mayor shall be a resident of the City at the
time a petition for election is filed, at the time of election, and continuing throughout
the term of office.
1-7-6 Removal of the Mayor. The Mayor may be removed from office by action of the City
Council for any of the following reasons:
A. For willful or habitual neglect or refusal to perform the duties of his or her office.
B. For willful misconduct or maladministration in office.
C. For corruption.
D. For extortion.
E. Upon conviction of a felony.
F. For intoxication, or upon conviction of being intoxicated, or for possession of any
illegal substances.
G. Upon conviction of violating the provisions of Chapter 6 8 A , Code of Iowa.
Such removal shall be only after a hearing before the City Council based on written charges
prepared and filed by the City Attorney, which removal can only be made by a two-thirds
vote of the entire Council. Notice of such hearing shall be by personal service on the
Mayor whose removal is being sought not less than ten (10) days before the date of such
hearing.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 8 – Mayor Pro Tem
SECTIONS:
1-8-1 Vice President of Council
1-8-2 Powers and Duties
1-8-3 Voting Rights
1-8-4 Compensation
1-8-1 Vice President of Council. The Mayor Pro Tem is vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
1-8-2 Powers and Duties. Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor
Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor to
perform such duties
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
1-8-3 Voting Rights. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
1-8-4 Compensation. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the
Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of thirty days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council, based upon
the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the
Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 9 - Council
SECTIONS:
1-9-1 Number and Term of Years
1-9-2 Powers and Duties of the Council
1-9-3 Exercise of Powers
1-9-4 Salary of Council Members
1-9-5 Meetings of City Council
1-9-6 Qualifications of Council Members
1-9-7 Vacancies
1-9-8 Removal of Council Members
1-9-1 Number and Term of Years. The Council consists of 2 Council members elected at
large for overlapping terms of 4 years and 5 elected by ward for staggered terms of 4 years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 376.2)
1-9-2 Powers and Duties of the Council. The powers and duties of the Council include, but
are not limited to, the following:
A. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as otherwise provided
by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
B. Wards. By ordinance, the Council shall divide the City into wards based upon
population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or create new wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
C. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and
allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof. It shall make
all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other
work, improvement or repairs which may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38 [1])
D. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the construction of any
improvements, bridges or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
E. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts. Contracts
are approved by motion or as otherwise required by Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 38.10)
F. Employees. The Council shall authorize the number, duties, term of office and
compensation of employees or officers not otherwise provided for by State law or the
Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
G. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall prescribe
the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected City officers, but
a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become effective during the term
in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance
changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of November and
December in the year of a regular City election. A change in the compensation of
Council members becomes effective for all Council members at the beginning of the
term of the Council members elected at the election next following the change in
compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
1-9-3 Exercise of Power. The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a
motion, a resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the following manner (Code of Iowa,
Sec. 364.3[1]):
A. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment or resolution requires a
majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a motion requires a
majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must be passed to spend public
funds in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on any one project, or
to accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each Council
member‘s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure which fails to receive
sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
B. Overriding Mayor‘s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor‘s veto, the Council
may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all of the
members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
C. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become effective in one
of the following ways:
1. An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when the
ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
2. A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
3. A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
4. If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the Council
repasses the measure after the Mayor‘s veto, a resolution becomes effective
immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law
when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
5. If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution, a
resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, and an
ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the
ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of passage,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council including a vacant
seat and a seat where the member is absent but does not include a seat where the Council
member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
1-9-4 Salary of Council Members. Each Council member shall receive, in full
compensation for his or her services, a salary in the amount as set by ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8]).
1-9-5 Meetings of the City Council. The City Council shall hold regular meetings, as may
be designated by the Council, and special meetings called by the Mayor, City Administrator,
or a majority of the Council members. A quorum of the Council shall be a majority of the
members and no action may be taken by the Council unless a quorum is present. The Council
shall prescribe its own rules of procedure by resolution which shall be in conformance with
the provisions of the laws of the State of Iowa.
1-9-6 Qualifications of the Council Members. The Council members shall be residents of
the City of Muscatine and shall maintain his or her primary residence in the Ward they are
elected to represent at the time a petition for election is filed, at the time of election, and
continuing throughout the term of office.
1-9-7 Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of the Mayor and the Council shall be filled in
accordance with the provisions of the laws of the State of Iowa and all officers appointed or
elected to fill such vacancies shall qualify within three (3) days.
1-9-8 Removal of Council Member. Any Council Member may be removed in accordance
with Iowa law from office by action of the City Council for any of the following reasons:
A. For willful or habitual neglect or refusal to perform the duties of his or her office.
B. For willful misconduct or maladministration in office.
C. For corruption.
D. For extortion.
E. Upon conviction of a felony.
F. For intoxication, or upon conviction of being intoxicated, or for possession of any
illegal substances.
G. Upon conviction of violating the provisions of Chapter 68A, Code of Iowa.
Such removal shall be only after a hearing before the City Council based on written charges
prepared and filed by the City Attorney, which removal can only be made by a two-thirds
vote of the entire Council. Notice of such hearing shall be by personal service on the Mayor or
City Council Member whose removal is being sought not less than ten (10) days before the
date of such hearing.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 10 - City Officers and Employees
SECTIONS:
1-10-1 Bond Requirements and Amounts
1-10-2 City Administrator; Clerk
1-10-3 City Attorney
1-10-4 Succession requirements
1-10-1 Bond Requirements and Amounts. The following officers and employees shall
have an official bond in the amount proscribed below and as required under Section 64.2 of
the Code of Iowa. Costs to be paid by City.
A. City Administrator: $500,000
B. Finance Director (Treasurer): $500,000
C. All other City Officers and Employees: $500,000
1-10-2 City Administrator.
A. Establishment, Appointment, and Removal. The office of the City Administrator is
hereby created, which office shall be filled by a majority vote of the Council. The
appointee shall hold office during the pleasure of the Council, and shall be subject to
removal by a majority vote of the Council. He or she shall also be the City Clerk.
B. Qualifications. The City Council shall appoint by majority vote a competent person on
the basis of his or her qualifications as City Administrator.
(Code of Iowa, Section 372.13(4))
C. Excepted Appointment: The City Administrator shall not be considered a department
head.
D. Deputy City Clerk. The City Administrator shall appoint a Deputy City Clerk to perform
the duties of the City Clerk in the Administrator's absence and to perform other duties
as assigned to him or her.
E. Duties and Responsibilities: The City Administrator shall have the following duties:
1. Powers and Duties as City Administrator.
a. The powers and duties of the City Administrator shall include:
i. Enforcement of all City laws and regulations as directed by the Council.
ii. Administration of Council policies and directives.
iii. Continuous study of the City government's operating procedures,
organization, and facilities and to recommend fiscal and other policies to
the Council whenever necessary.
iv. Preparation and administration of the City's annual operating budget.
v. Supervision of the City's administrative policies and procedures, including
personnel.
vi. Keeping the Council informed on the progress of its programs and the
status of its policies.
vii. Coordinating and directing all City services provided through the various
departments.
viii.Appointment and removal of City employees in accordance with City
policies regarding this activity.
ix. Study possible joint arrangements with City boards such as, but not limited
to, the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees or any other
independent board and make recommendations for such arrangements as
are mutually acceptable.
x. Assist the Mayor in any of his or her duties, as requested by him or her and
approved by the Council.
xi. Review and revise imposition of penalties, costs, fees, bond, and insurance
requirements as set out in the Appendices to this Code of Ordinances.
xii. Oversee daily operations of City and staff
b. Any elected official shall deal with City Department Heads and employees, who
are subject to the direction and supervision of the City Administrator solely,
through the City Administrator, and Council Members shall not give orders to
any such Department Heads or employees either publicly or privately. All
departmental activity requiring the attention of the Council shall be brought
before that body by the City Administrator. Elected officials shall have access
to department heads or staff employees for the purpose of open and two-way
communications; however, any meetings, issues or concerns raised by
department heads, staff or elected officials shall be brought to the attention of
the City Administrator
(Code of Iowa, Section 372.13(4))
2. Powers and Duties as Clerk.
a. The Powers and Duties of the Clerk shall include:
i. Record of Appointments on Boards. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to keep
a record of all appointments to all City Advisory Commissions and Boards.
Such record must show the name, the period of the appointment, the date
of its commencement and ending, by whom appointed, and the name of
the board to which the appointment is made.
(Code of Iowa, Section 372.13(4))
ii. Publication of Minutes. Within fifteen days following a regular or special
meeting of the council, the clerk shall cause the minutes of the
proceedings of the council, including the total expenditure from each city
fund, to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The
publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all
receipts and shall show the gross amount of the claims as required by
Iowa Code, Section 372.13[6].
(Code of Iowa, Section 372.13(6))
iii. Recording Measures. The clerk shall promptly record a statement with the
measure, where applicable, indicating whether the mayor signed, vetoed,
or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed
after the mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Section 380.7(2))
iv. Publication of Ordinances. The clerk shall publish a summary of all
ordinances or the complete text of ordinances and amendments in the
manner provided in Section 362.3 of the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Section 380.7(3))
v. Authentication of Measures. The Clerk shall authenticate all measures
except motions with the clerk’s signature and certification as to time and
manner of publication, if any. The clerk’s certification is presumptive
evidence of the facts stated therein.
(Code of Iowa, Section 380.7(4))
vi. Availability of Records. The Clerk shall maintain for public use copies of all
effective ordinances and codes.
(Code of Iowa, Section 380.7(5))
vii. Issuance of Licenses and Permits. Except as otherwise provided, any
person desiring a license or permit for any purpose from the City shall pay
the requisite license fee to the Clerk, who shall thereupon issue the proper
license.
1-10-3 City Attorney.
A. Establishment, Appointment, and Removal. There is hereby established the office of
City Attorney, who shall be appointed by and hold office during the pleasure of the
Council and shall be subject to removal of a majority vote of the Council.
Notwithstanding this Subsection, the Council may use whatever additional legal
counsel is available and appropriate as long as not in conflict with any provision of this
Code of Ordinances.
B. Qualifications. The City Attorney shall not be an employee of the City but shall be
under the administrative direction of the City Administrator. The City Attorney shall be
a graduate of a college of law and shall be a licensed Attorney authorized to practice
in the State of Iowa upon employment.
C. Powers and duties. The City Attorney performs legal services for and on behalf of the
City, its officers, boards, commissions, and departments; attends meetings of various
official bodies and gives oral advice and opinions in writing when requested; performs
the preparation and review of ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and other legal
documents as requested; tries cases and appears in other legal matters before courts,
including district and appellate courts, boards, and commissions; confers with City
officials on legal problems; performs research in connection with constitution,
statutes, ordinances, decisions, rules, and regulations; prepares complaints, answers,
and briefs for court cases; and performs additional administrative duties as assigned.
(Code of Iowa, Section 372.13(4))
D. Compensation. The compensation of the City Attorney shall be such amount as may
from time to time be fixed by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Section 372.13(4))
1-10-4 Succession Requirements. Every City officer shall transfer to his or her successor
in office all books, papers, records, documents and property, in his or her custody and
relating to his or her office.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 11 – City Departments
SECTIONS:
1-11-1 Departments Created
1-11-2 Department Heads; Appointment and Removal
1-11-3 Duties
1-11-4 Other Departments
1-11-5 Creation of New Departments
1-11-1 Departments Created. There is hereby established the following City Departments:
A. Community Development (Community Development Director)
B. Finance (Finance Director-Treasurer)
C. Fire (Fire Chief)
D. Parks and Recreation (Parks and Recreation Director)
E. Police (Police Chief)
F. Public Works (Public Works Director)
G. Water Pollution Control (Water Pollution Control Director)
1-11-2 Department Heads; Appointment and Removal. The departments shall be headed
by a Department Head appointed and removed by the City Administrator, except the appointment
and removal of the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, and the Finance Director-Treasurer, which shall be
subject to the approval of the City Council.
All appointments shall be made to individuals with sufficient qualifications to perform the general
duties of the office at a salary in accordance with the City's Pay Plan.
1-11-3 Duties. Department Heads listed in Section 1-11-1 shall be subordinate and
responsible to the City Administrator and shall have such duties and functions as from time to
time are assigned by the City Administrator.
1-11-4 Other Departments. The following departments are established by the City Council
through Title 2, Chapters 5 and 6 of the City Code:
A. Library (Library Director)
B. Museum and Art Center (Museum and Art Center Director)
These Department Heads shall be appointed and removed by the Library Board and Museum
and Art Center Board respectively and shall be compensated in accordance with the City's Pay
Plan. The two (2) Department Heads shall perform such functions and duties as are assigned
by the respective boards.
All budget, personnel, and purchasing procedures must conform to the policies and
procedures established by the City Council and shall be coordinated with the City
Administrator.
1-11-5 Creation of New Departments. The City Council shall have the authority to create
new or consolidate existing departments by resolution as shall be deemed appropriate and
after full consideration and study by the City Administrator.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 12 – Fiscal Management
SECTIONS:
1-12-1 Purpose
1-12-2 Fiscal Year
1-12-3 Finance Director
1-12-4 Cash Control
1-12-5 Fund Control
1-12-6 Operating Budget Preparation
1-12-7 Budget Amendments
1-12-8 Accounting
1-12-9 Financial Reports
1-12-10 Bidding and Requests for Proposals
1-12-1 Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
1-12-2 Fiscal Year. The fiscal year for the City shall commence on the first day of July and
end on the 30th day of June of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Section 24.2(3))
1-12-3 Finance Director. The Finance Director is the finance and accounting officer of the
City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this Chapter.
1-12-4 Cash Control. To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the
following shall apply:
A. Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City employee or
City representative shall be deposited through the office of the Finance Director.
B. Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be promptly
deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding the
authorized depository limitation established by the Council or invested in accordance
with the City’s written investment policy and State law, including joint investments as
authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
C. Petty Cash Fund. The Finance Director shall be custodian of a petty cash fund for the
payment of small claims for minor purchases and small fees customarily paid at the
time of rendering a service, for which payments the Finance Director shall obtain some
form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such time as
the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the Finance Director shall draw a check
for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check and
supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for
claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary
payments or other personal services or personal expenses.
1-12-5 Fund Control. There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds
in accordance with the following:
A. Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper fund as
required by law, ordinance or resolution.
B. Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such disbursement is
authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly budgeted, and supported by a
claim approved by the Council.
C. Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5 [384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
D. Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may be
transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to meet payments of
principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a
budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
E. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital Improvements Reserve
Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget
amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
F. Utility and Enterprise Funds. Utility and Enterprise funds shall be transferred in
accordance with state law.
G. Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each month and a
report thereof submitted to the Council.
1-12-6 Operating Budget Preparation. The annual operating budget of the City shall be
prepared in accordance with the following:
A. Proposal Prepared. The City Administrator is responsible for preparation of the annual
budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by the Council in
accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
B. Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions and other administrative agencies of
the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must submit their
budget proposals to the Finance Director for inclusion in the proposed City budget at
such time and in such form as required by the Council.
C. Submission to Council. The City Administrator shall submit the completed budget
proposal to the Council no later than the first Monday in February of each year.
D. Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make any
adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before accepting such proposal
for publication, hearing and final adoption.
E. Notice of Hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council shall set a date for
public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice of such hearing and
a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than ten (10) nor more
than twenty (20) days before the date established for the hearing. Proof of such
publication must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
F. Copies of Budget on File. Not less than twenty (20) days before the date that the
budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than ten (10) days before
the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies of the
detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and organizations and have them
available for distribution at the offices of the Mayor, Administrator and Clerk and at the
City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
G. Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by resolution, a
budget for the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy for the
next fiscal year to the County. The tax levy certified may be less than, but not more
than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget. Two copies shall be submitted in
accordance with the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
1-12-7 Budget Amendments. A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year
becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this Section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
A. Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program must be
prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2 [384, 388])
B. Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another must be
prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3 [384, 388])
C. Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to another activity
within a program must be approved by resolution of the Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
1-12-8 Accounting. The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
A. Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books of original
entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and disbursed.
B. General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger controlling
all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording unappropriated surpluses.
C. Checks. Checks shall be signed by the City Clerk and Mayor following Council approval,
except as provided by Subsection E hereof. Notwithstanding anything contained herein,
no City employee or official shall sign any check which authorizes payment to the
person signing the check.
D. Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to record receipts
by source and expenditures by program and activity as will provide adequate
information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the
Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept
that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and
expenditures can be related to the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be
posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense
was incurred.
E. Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may authorize the Finance Director or
Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid
promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest
cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the Council for review and approval
with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such
payment.
1-12-9 Financial Reports. The Finance Director shall prepare and file the following financial
reports:
A. Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a report showing
the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and activity for the
preceding month.
B. Annual Report. Not later than December first of each year there shall be published an
annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections and
receipts, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt
limit of the City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be filed
with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
1-12-10 Bidding; Public Improvements, Purchases, and Requests for Proposals.
A. Public Improvements. All City Public Improvement Projects shall be awarded in
accordance with Iowa Code, Chapter 26.
B. Purchases and Requests for Proposals. Unless otherwise specified or required by law,
all other purchases and requests for proposals shall be approved or awarded in
accordance with guidelines established by Council.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 13 – Personnel Procedures
SECTIONS:
1-13-1 Declaration of Policy
1-13-2 Applicability
1-13-3 Civil Service Provisions
1-13-4 Union Contracts
1-13-5 Prohibitive Activities
1-13-6 Permitted Activities
1-13-7 Personnel Records
1-13-8 Rules and Regulations - Employee Benefits
1-13-9 Department Regulations
1-13-10 Classification Plan
1-13-11 Pay Plan
1-13-12 Grievance Procedures
1-13-1 Declaration of Policy. It is hereby declared the policy of the City that:
A. Employment and promotions in the Municipal Government shall be based on
merit and fitness and predicated on the premise that qualified personnel are
best able to render effective and efficient service.
B. Administration of all personnel policies established by this Chapter shall be the
responsibility of the City Administrator.
C. Appointments shall be free of personal and political considerations.
D. Incentives and conditions of employment consistent with those employed by
business firms and governmental units in the community shall be practiced in
order to maintain a confident, loyal work force interested in performing
efficiently and in the interest of governmental economy.
E. A current position classification system shall be maintained and current Pay
Plans providing for fair compensation of City employees shall be in effect.
F. Positions in the City service shall be classified and compensated on a uniform
basis and keeping with the policy of "equal pay for equal work".
G. The City of Muscatine will not discriminate against any employee or applicant
for employment because of race, creed, color, sex, national origin, ancestry,
religion, age, sexual orientation, or disability. Affirmative actions will be taken
to implement this policy and assure non-discrimination in recruiting, training,
placement, advancement, compensation, working conditions, demotions,
layoffs, and termination.
1-13-2 Applicability. This Chapter shall apply to all employees in the service of the
City except those offices which are elective.
1-13-3 Civil Service Provisions. The City of Muscatine shall operate its Personnel
Program in accordance with the provisions of the State of Iowa Civil Service Code
and the local Civil Service regulations, and the Civil Service requirements shall take
precedence over this Ordinance.
1-13-4 Union Contracts. All City employees covered by Union Contracts shall
perform in accordance with such contracts in respect to wages, hours, and such
conditions of employment which are included in the contract. If this Ordinance is in
conflict with the Union Contract, the Union Contract shall take precedence over this
Ordinance. Where Union Contracts are in conflict with State or local Civil Service
Laws, the Civil Service Law shall take precedence over the Union Contract.
1-13-5 Prohibitive Activities. All employees shall be hired without regard to
political considerations. In accordance with this policy, City employees shall:
A. Refrain from seeking or accepting to use any political endorsement or support
in connection with appointment to a Civil Service or municipal position.
B. Refrain from using their influence publicly in any way for or against any
candidate for elective office in the municipal government.
C. Not circulate petitions or publicly campaign on behalf of any local municipal
elective official.
D. Not engage in nor permit activity prohibited by Section 68A and 68B of the
Code of Iowa.
A Civil Service or municipal employee who becomes a candidate for any
elective public office shall, upon request of the employee and commencing
thirty (30) days prior to any election and continuing until after the election,
automatically be given a leave of absence without pay. An employee who is a
candidate for an elective public office shall not campaign while on duty as a
municipal employee. If elected, such employee is eligible to serve as a Civil
Service or municipal employee only until qualification for the elective office, at
which time the common law rule of conflict of interest would apply.
1-13-6 Permitted Activities. Nothing in Section 5 of this Chapter shall prevent
employees from belonging to any political party, club, or organization; from
attending political meetings; from expressing their political views in private or
outside of working hours and off City premises; or from voting with complete
freedom in any election.
1-13-7 Personnel Records. The Human Resources Manager or his or her designee,
shall maintain the official Civil Service - Personnel Records for each employee. Such
records shall include, but not be limited to, dates of initial appointments, promotions,
job titles, salaries, evaluations, disciplinary actions, merit increases, leaves of any
type taken, longevity, and employee adjustments according to pay and classification
plans.
1-13-8 Rules and Regulations - Employee Benefits. The City Administrator shall
develop rules and regulations on employee benefits and on working conditions, when
required, in order to uniformly, effectively, and efficiently operate the City.
1-13-9 Department Regulations. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the
establishment and administration of departmental regulations not in conflict with this
Ordinance.
1-13-10 Classification Plan. The City shall establish a classification plan which
shall consist of a list of titles, descriptions of the nature and requirements of work in
each class, and the official allocations of positions to appropriate classes. The titles in
the classification plan are to be used as exclusive means of reference for all official
records and personnel transactions.
A. Maintenance of Plan. The City Administrator shall maintain the classification
plan.
B. Change in the Plan. The classification plan may be amended and positions
reclassified by the City Administrator in accordance with the following
procedures, and subject to Council approval:
1. All requests for creation of new positions, abolishment or consolidation of
present positions, reclassification of existing positions, and reallocation of
classifications to new salary ranges shall be submitted to the City
Administrator.
2. Department Heads shall report organizational changes and requests for
change in duty assignments to the City Administrator.
3. An employee may submit a written request to the City Administrator for
review of the duties and responsibilities of the employee's position. All
requests shall be submitted through the Department Heads and shall
include the employee's description of the duties and responsibilities of the
position.
C. Abolishment of a Position. A position may be abolished by the City
Administrator, with the approval of the City Council, and in accordance with
the Civil Service Code of Iowa if applicable.
1-13-11 Pay Plan. It shall be the responsibility of the City Administrator to develop
a compensation plan which will reflect fairly the differences in duties and
responsibilities of the classifications established and which will assure, to the extent
practicable, equal pay for equal work; which will reflect salary and wage rates which
compare favorably with those in the area for comparable positions; and which
provides a means of rewarding employees for continued good or outstanding service.
The Pay Plan of the City shall be adopted annually by resolution of the City Council
and shall coincide with the City's fiscal year. Any changes in the Plan shall be by
recommendation of the City Administrator with approval of Council by resolution.
The City Administrator shall establish rules and regulations for administering the Pay
Plans for Supervisory - Management employees, Confidential and Library employees,
Non-Union Permanent Part Time employees, Temporary employees, Blue and White
Collar Union employees, Police Officers - Union employees, and Firefighters - Union
employees. In such case where there is a conflict between the rules and regulations
and the Union Contract, the Union Contract shall take precedence. The City Council,
upon the recommendation of the City Administrator, may establish such other
employee group Pay Plans as may be required.
1-13-12 Grievance Procedures. An employee of the City of Muscatine has the
right to grieve matters in regard to the interpretation, application, or violation of the
personnel system of the City. For all employees covered under Union Contracts, the
grievance procedures set forth in such contract shall be adhered to. For all non-union
employees, the following grievance procedures shall be followed:
A. Step 1. The grievance shall be discussed informally between the employee
involved and the employee's immediate supervisor within three (3) working
days after knowledge of the event giving rise to the grievance. The supervisor
shall either adjust the grievance or deliver a written answer to the grieving
employee within three (3) working days after such discussion. Failure of the
supervisor to reply within set three (3) day period shall be deemed a denial of
the grievance and may be appealed to the next step.
B. Step 2. If such grievance is not resolved by Step 1, the grieved employee
may appeal. The employee shall within three (3) working days following
completion of Step 1, present the grievance in writing to the Department
Head, or his or her designated representative. The grievance shall contain a
statement from the employee specifying what relief or remedy is desired. The
Department Head, or his or her designated representative, shall investigate
the grievance and issue a decision in writing thereon within a period of five
(5) working days. Failure of the Department Head, or his or her designated
representative, to issue a written statement within five (5) working days shall
be deemed a denial of the grievance and may be appealed to the next Step.
C. Step 3. If such grievance is not resolved in Step 2, the grieved employee
may appeal. The employee shall within three (3) working days following
completion of Step 2 present the grievance in writing to the City
Administrator, or his or her designated representative. The grievance shall
contain a statement from the employee specifying what relief or remedy is
desired. The City Administrator, or his or her designated representative, shall
investigate the grievance and issue a decision in writing thereon within a
period of five (5) working days. The City Administrator's decision on these
matters shall be final.
For issues within the jurisdiction of the Civil Service Commission, the grievance
procedure as established by the Civil Service Commission and the Code of Iowa shall
prevail.
Title 1 – Administrative
Chapter 14 – Adjudicative Appeals and Hearings
SECTIONS:
1-14-1 Statement of Purpose
1-14-2 Definitions
1-14-3 Scheduling and Notice of Hearing
1-14-4 Hearing Procedures
1-14-5 Supplementation by Resolution
1-14-1 Statement of Purpose. This Chapter is intended to establish fair, consistent
and uniform procedures for adjudicative appeals and hearings before the Muscatine
City Council. Adjudicative hearings are quasi-judicial hearings involving named
parties. Testimony during adjudicative hearings is limited to that offered as evidence
by the parties involved in the hearing. Public testimony is not accepted in
adjudicative hearings. Where procedures for appeals and hearings have been
established by ordinance or state law for a specific matter, the Council shall follow
those procedures for that matter. When there are no established procedures for an
adjudicative appeal or hearing, the Council shall preside over the hearing according
to the terms of this Chapter.
1-14-2 Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
“Days after” or “days before” when used in the computation of the time between a
triggering event and some required action shall be calculated by not counting the day
of the triggering event and by counting each day before or after the triggering event,
as appropriate until and including the date the required action is taken.
1-14-3 Scheduling and Notice of Hearing. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal or
written charges filed with the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall promptly notify the
named city official(s) or department(s) that an appeal or action has been filed with
the City Council. In the case of actions or appeals concerning specific departments,
the affected department shall be responsible for investigating the nature and merit of
the appeal, and shall promptly contact the City Clerk to schedule a date and time for
consideration of the appeal by City Council. In the case of actions or charges filed
against named city officials, the City Clerk shall serve on the respondent a written
notice, together with a copy of the complaint or charge as it may have been
amended, requiring the respondent to answer the allegations of the complaint at a
hearing before City Council at a time and place specified in the notice.
A. Contents of Notice. The notice shall include:
1. A statement of the time, place, and nature of the hearing;
2. A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing
is to be held;
3. A copy of the appeal, action, or charge filed against the department or city
official.
B. Manner of Service of Notice. Service of the notice shall be by registered or
certified mail, unless City Code or state law requires another method of
service.
C. Timing of hearing. A hearing shall be scheduled within the time frame
provided for by City Code or state law. If no time frame is provided for by City
Code or state law, the hearing shall be scheduled as promptly as is reasonably
possible, but no less than ten (10) days after the date of service of notice on
the respondent.
1-14-4 Hearing Procedures.
A. Hearing Before City Council. For hearings conducted by the City Council, the
Mayor shall preside over the hearing and preserve order thereat. If the Mayor
is unavailable due to conflict or otherwise, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside at
the hearing. In the event of unavailability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro
Tem, the hearing shall be called to order by the Clerk, and the Council shall
immediately select one of its members to serve as Acting Mayor Pro Tem, and
he or she shall have the same rights and privileges as other members of the
Council.
B. City Council’s Powers. The City Council shall have the power necessary to
conduct fair and impartial hearings including but not limited to, the power to
administer oaths and affirmations, to hear testimony, and to rule upon
motions, objections, and the admissibility of evidence. In addition, Council
shall have the power, at the request of the complainant, the department head
or the respondent, to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses
at such hearing and to compel any person to produce any books or papers
involved in the complaint. If a witness fails or refuses to obey a subpoena
issued by the hearing officer, the hearing officer may petition the district court
having jurisdiction for issuance of a subpoena and the court shall issue the
subpoena as by law provided. Refusal to obey such subpoena shall be subject
to punishment or contempt.
C. Opportunity to Present Argument and Evidence. Opportunity shall be afforded
all parties to respond and present evidence and argument on all issues
involved and to be represented by counsel at their own expense. The case of
the City department may be presented by any member of the City staff, by
the City Attorney or, if the City Attorney is unavailable due to conflict or
otherwise, an attorney appointed by the Council. The hearing need not be
bound by the strict rules of procedure or evidence, but the admission of
evidence should be based on sound discretion.
D. Consequences of Failure to Appear. If a party fails to appear in a contested
case proceeding after proper service of notice, the Council may proceed and
make a decision in the absence of the party.
E. Content of the Record.
1. The record in a case shall include:
a. All pleadings, motions, and intermediate rulings;
b. All evidence received or considered and all other submissions;
c. A statement of all matters officially notified;
d. All questions and offers of proof, objections, and rulings thereon;
e. All findings, orders and exceptions.
F. Public Hearing. The hearing shall be open to the public unless closed session is
permitted by Iowa Code Section 21.5 or the hearing is otherwise exempted
from the provisions of Iowa Code Section 21. The hearing shall be recorded
either by mechanized means or by certified shorthand reporters. Oral
proceedings or any part thereof shall be transcribed at the request of any
party with the expense of the transcription charged to the requesting party.
G. Findings of Fact. Findings of fact shall be based solely on the evidence in the
record and on matters officially noticed in the record.
H. Final Determination. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall allow
the parties to submit written briefs and proposed decisions. Upon receipt, if
any, of these briefs and decisions, the Council shall make written findings of
fact and conclusions of law establishing the basis for its final determination.
Any party claiming to be aggrieved by a final determination made by City
Council pursuant to this Chapter may challenge whether the Council exceeded
proper jurisdiction or otherwise acted illegally by commencing an action in the
appropriate court within thirty (30) days after the entry of the final
determination.
1-14-5 Supplementation by Resolution. The City Council may supplement these
rules in a case-by-case situation in order to provide due process to all participants in
a hearing.
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Airport Advisory Commission 1
Civil Service Commission 2
Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission 3
Historic Preservation Commission 4
Library Board of Trustees 5
Art Center Board of Trustees 6
Planning and Zoning Commission 7
Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees 8
Zoning Board of Adjustment 9
Ad Hoc Committees and Task Forces 10
Council Appointments to City Administrative Boards 11
Annual Organizational Meeting for Appointments 12
Convention and Visitors Board 13
Public Art Advisory Commission 14
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 1 – Airport Advisory Commission
SECTIONS:
2-1-1 Creation
2-1-2 Number of Members
2-1-3 Appointment
2-1-4 Ex-officio Members
2-1-5 Officers
2-1-6 Term Duration and Limits
2-1-7 Removal - Vacancies
2-1-8 Residence Requirements
2-1-9 Responsibilities and Duties
2-1-1 Creation: The Airport Advisory Commission is hereby created.
2-1-2 Number of Members. The Airport Advisory Commission shall consist of five (5) gender
balanced members.
2-1-3 Appointment. The members are to be appointed by City Council.
2-1-4 Ex-officio Members. The City Administrator, or his or her designated representative,
shall serve as an ex-officio member of this board.
2-1-5 Officers. Secretary. The City Administrator, or his or her designated representative,
shall serve as Secretary.
2-1-6 Term Duration and Limits. Duration. The term of office of each member shall
commence with their appointment. Board members are appointed for staggered terms of five
(5) years beginning July first, except to fill vacancies, and shall remain on the Commission
until his or her successors are appointed.
Limits. No individual shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms on the Commission.
2-1-7 Removal - Vacancies. The Council may, at any time, remove any member of the
Airport Advisory Commission after showing due cause, and shall fill the vacancies occurring in
the Commission by removal or otherwise.
2-1-8 Residence Requirements. Each member of the Airport Advisory Commission shall be
a resident of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
2-1-9 Responsibilities and Duties: The Airport Advisory Commission shall confer with and
assist the City Administrator, or his or her designated representative, in preparation of the
airport budget, recommend procedures and policies in connection with the administration of
the airport, pursue matters and investigate means by which the airport can be improved, and
make recommendations for the long range needs of the airport.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 2 – Civil Service Commission
SECTIONS:
2-2-1 Creation
2-2-2 Applicability
2-2-3 Qualifications
2-2-4 Number of Members
2-2-5 Appointment
2-2-6 Term Duration and Limits
2-2-7 Officers
2-2-8 Ex-Officio Members
2-2-9 Vacancies
2-2-10 Responsibilities and Duties
2-2-1 Creation. The Civil Service Commission is hereby created in accordance with Section
400.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Section 400.1)
2-2-2 Applicability. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to full-time police officers,
firefighters, and all appointive permanent full-time employees, unless otherwise excepted
under Iowa Code Section 400.6.
(Code of Iowa, Section 400.6)
2-2-3 Qualifications. Each member of the Civil Service Commission shall be a resident of
the City of Muscatine, a citizen of Iowa, and an eligible elector preceding appointment. Each
member shall serve without compensation, shall not hold or be a candidate for any office of
public trust, and shall not be a party to or have an interest in any contract prohibited by
Section 400.2(2) of the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Section 400.2)
2-2-4 Number of Members. The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three (3) gender
balanced members.
(Code of Iowa, Section 400.1)
2-2-5 Appointment. The members are to be appointed by City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Section 400.1)
2-2-6 Term Duration. The term of office of such members shall commence with their
appointment. Commissioners shall hold office, one until the first Monday in April of the second
year, one until the first Monday in April of the third year, and one until the first Monday in
April of the fourth year after such appointment, whose successors shall be appointed for a
term of four years. All Commissioners shall remain on the Commission until their successors
are appointed.
(Code of Iowa, Section 400.1)
2-2-7 Officers.
A. Chairman. The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members.
(Code of Iowa, Section 400.4)
B. Clerk. The city clerk shall be clerk of the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Section 400.4)
2-2-8 Ex-officio Members. The City Administrator, or his or her designated representative,
shall serve as an ex-officio member of this commission.
2-2-9 Vacancies. The City Council shall fill the vacancies occurring in the Commission for the
unexpired term of the appointment.
2-2-10 Responsibilities and Duties. The Civil Service Commission shall exercise all the
responsibilities and duties in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Iowa for Civil
Service Commissions.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 3 – Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission
SECTIONS:
2-3-1 Creation
2-3-2 Number of Members
2-3-3 Appointment
2-3-4 Term Duration and Limits
2-3-5 Removal - Vacancies
2-3-6 Residence Requirements
2-3-7 Responsibilities and Duties
2-3-8 Department Established
2-3-1 Creation. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission is hereby created.
2-3-2 Number of Members. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission shall consist of
seven (7) gender balanced members.
2-3-3 Appointment. The members are to be appointed by City Council.
2-3-4 Term Duration and Limits.
A. Duration. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission shall consist of seven (7)
members to be appointed by the City Council. The term of office of such members shall
commence with their appointment and shall be for three (3) years, except to fill
vacancies provided, however, that appointments to the first Commission shall be three
(3) members for one (1) year, three (3) members for two (2) years and one (1)
member for three (3) years. Each term shall commence on the first day of July. All
members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission shall remain on the
Commission until their successors are appointed.
B. Limits. No individual shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms on the Parks
and Recreation Advisory Commission.
2-3-5 Removal - Vacancies. The Council may, at any time, remove any member of the
Commission after showing due cause, and shall fill the vacancies occurring on the Commission
by removal or otherwise.
2-3-6 Residence Requirements. Each member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Commission shall be a resident of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
2-3-7 Responsibilities and Duties. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission shall
confer with and assist the City Administrator, or his/her designated representative, in
preparation of the budgets, recommend rules, procedures and policies in connection with the
administration, pursue matters and investigate means by which improvements can be made,
and make recommendations for the long range needs of the cemetery, parks, riverfront, levee
and all land owned by the City along the Mississippi River, municipal golf course and all other
recreation facilities owned and/or operated by the City.
2-3-8 Department Established. The Parks and Recreation Department of the City is
established to enforce all ordinances and regulations relating to all parks and recreational
facilities under the City's jurisdiction.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 4 – Historic Preservation Commission
SECTIONS:
2-4-1 Purpose
2-4-2 Definitions
2-4-3 Muscatine Historic Preservation Commission
2-4-4 Appointment and Terms
2-4-5 Removal/Vacancies
2-4-6 Qualifications
2-4-7 Compensation
2-4-8 Chairperson and Secretary
2-4-9 Meetings and Quorum
2-4-10 Responsibilities and Duties
2-4-1 Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the educational, cultural,
economic, and general welfare of the public through the recognition, enhancement, and
perpetuation of sites and districts of historical and cultural significance; safeguard the City's
historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage by preserving sites and districts of historic and
cultural significance; stabilize and improve property values; foster pride in the legacy of
beauty and achievements of the past; protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists
and visitors and the support and stimulus to business thereby provided; strengthen the
economy of the City; and promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural
significance as places for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the City.
2-4-2 Definitions.
A. "Commission" means the Muscatine Historic Preservation Commission, as established
by this ordinance.
B. "Historic District" means an area which contains a significant portion of
archaeological sites, buildings, structures, objects and/or other improvements which,
considered as a whole, possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, feeling, and association, and 1) embodies the distinctive characteristics
of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represents the work of a master,
or that possesses high artistic values, or that represents a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 2) is
associated with events that have made significant contributions to the broad patterns
of our local, state or national history; or 3) possesses a coherent and distinctive visual
character or integrity based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting,
workmanship, materials, or combinations thereof, which is deemed to add significantly
to the value and attractiveness of properties within such area; or 4) is associated with
the lives of persons significant in our past; or 5) has yielded, or may be likely to yield,
information important in prehistory or history.
C. "Historic Site" means an archaeological or historic site, object, structure or building
which 1) is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or 2) is associated with the lives of persons significant in
our past; or 3) embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represents a work of a master, or that possess high artistic
values, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components
may lack individual distinction; or 4) has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.
2-4-3 Muscatine Historic Preservation Commission. There is hereby created and
organized the Muscatine Historic Preservation Commission to be appointed as hereinafter
provided with duties and responsibilities as set forth in this Chapter.
2-4-4 Appointment and Terms. The Commission shall consist of five (5) gender balanced
members to be appointed by the City Council. The term of office of such members shall
commence with their appointment. Appointments will be staggered, with one member
appointed on July 1 of each year over a five-year period. All terms shall be for five (5) years.
All members of the Commission shall remain on the Commission until their successors are
appointed. No one individual shall serve for more than two (2) full consecutive terms on the
Commission.
2-4-5 Removal/Vacancies. The Council may, at any time, remove any member of the
Commission after showing due cause, and shall fill the vacancies occurring on the Commission
by removal or otherwise.
2-4-6 Qualifications. Members shall demonstrate a positive interest in historic preservation;
should be drawn from professionals in architecture, history, architectural history, planning,
prehistoric and historic archaeology, folklore, cultural anthropology, curation, conservation,
and landscape architecture or related disciplines to the extent that such professions are
available; and may include other persons as have demonstrated special interest, experience,
or knowledge in history, architecture, or related disciplines. All members shall be residents of
the City of Muscatine. Any member who establishes a permanent and primary residence
outside of the City of Muscatine shall no longer be eligible to serve on the Commission.
2-4-7 Compensation. The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
2-4-8 Chairperson and Secretary. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall
preside over all Commission meetings. The City Administrator or his/her designee shall serve
as secretary who shall be responsible for maintaining written records of the Commission's
proceedings.
2-4-9 Meetings and Quorum. The Commission shall meet at least three (3) times a year
and a simple majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
2-4-10 Responsibilities and Duties. The Commission may do the following:
A. Conduct studies for the identification and designation of historic districts and sites
meeting the definitions established by this Ordinance, proceed at its own initiative or
upon a petition from any person, group, or association, and shall maintain records of
all studies and inventories for public use.
B. Make a recommendation to Council to recommend to the State Historic Preservation
Officer for the listing of a historic district or site in the National Register of Historic
Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon.
C. Investigate and recommend to the Council the adoption of ordinances designating
historic sites and historic districts if they qualify as defined herein.
D. Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and personal property, including
money, for the purpose of historic preservation.
E. Acquire, with approval of Council, by purchase, bequest, or donation, fee and lesser
interests in historic properties, including properties adjacent to or associated with
historic properties.
F. Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties, under the ownership or
control of the Commission.
G. Contract, with the approval of the Council, with the state or the federal government or
other organizations.
H. Cooperate with the federal, state and local governments in the pursuance of the
objectives of historic preservation.
I. Provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the Council.
J. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic properties
within its jurisdiction.
K. Review and recommend properties for tax abatement programs as they may apply to
preservation or restoration efforts.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 5 – Library Board of Trustees
SECTIONS:
2-5-1 Creation
2-5-2 Appointment
2-5-3 Terms
2-5-4 Removal - Vacancies
2-5-5 Residence Requirements
2-5-6 Powers and Duties
2-5-7 Power to Contract with Others for the Use of the Library
2-5-8 Termination of Contracts
2-5-9 Library Account
2-5-10 Report
2-5-11 Injury to Books or Property
2-5-12 Theft
2-5-13 Notice; Failure to Return and Detention
2-5-14 Violation
2-5-1 Creation. There is hereby created and organized a Library Board of Trustees, to be
appointed as hereinafter provided, with the duties and responsibilities as set forth in this
Chapter. Further, it is the purpose of this Chapter to retain all applicable Ordinances and to
adopt as Ordinances all applicable State statutes to assure the continued functioning of the
Board of Library Trustees in the Musser Public Library pursuant to Section 196, Chapter 1088
of the Laws of the 64th G.A. Second Session.
(Code of Iowa, Section 392.5)
2-5-2 Appointment. The Board of Library Trustees shall consist of nine (9) members to be
appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council.
2-5-3 Terms. The terms of office of such members shall be appointed for a term of six (6)
years and appointments made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total number, as
near as possible, to stagger the terms. Each term shall commence on the first day of July. All
members of the Board of Library Trustees shall remain on the Board until their successors are
appointed. No individual is to serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms on the Board.
2-5-4 Removal - Vacancies. The Council may, at any time, remove any member of the
Board of Library Trustees after showing due cause, and the Mayor, with the consent of the
Council, shall fill the vacancies occurring on the Board by removal or otherwise. A trustee
absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in a case of sickness or
temporary absence from the City, shall render the office of such absent trustee vacant.
2-5-5 Residence Requirements. Eight (8) of the members of the Board shall be residents of
the City of Muscatine and shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. The Board shall
consist of one (1) County resident who is not a resident of the City of Muscatine, and who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Muscatine County Board of
Supervisors.
2-5-6 Powers and Duties.
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers:
A. To meet and organize by the election of one of their number as President of the Board,
and by the election of a Secretary and such other officers as the Board may deem
necessary.
B. To have charge, control, and supervision of the Public Library, its appurtenances and
fixtures, and rooms containing the same, and directing and controlling all the affairs of
such Library.
C. To employ a Library Director for the proper management of said Library and to fix his
or her compensation; but, prior to such employment, the compensation of such Library
Director shall be fixed in accordance with the Pay Plan of the City.
D. To remove such Library Director by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of such Board for
conviction of a criminal act, incompetency, or inattention to the duties of such
employment.
E. To select or oversee a designee to select or purchase books, pamphlets, magazines,
periodicals, papers, maps, journals, furniture, fixtures, stationery, supplies for such
Library, and such other Library materials deemed appropriate.
F. To authorize the use of such Library by non-residents of the City and to fix charges
therefore.
G. To make, adopt, amend, modify, or repeal by-laws, rules, and regulations, not
inconsistent with law, for the care, use, government, and management of such Library
and the business of said Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for the violation thereof.
H. To authorize the expenditures of all monies allocated for Library purposes by the
Council; and of the expenditure of all monies available by gift or otherwise for the
erection of Library buildings.
I. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed property and devises and
bequests, including trust funds; to take title to said property in the name of said
Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to
expend the funds received by them from such gifts for the improvement of said
Library.
J. All budget and accounting procedures, personnel policies, purchasing procedures, and
public improvement procedures established by the City Council shall be adhered to by
the Board.
K. Said Board shall keep a record of its proceedings.
2-5-7 Power to Contract with Others for the Use of the Library. Contracts may be made
between the Board and other boards of trustees of free public libraries; any city, school
corporation, township, or county; or with the trustees of any county library district for use of
the Musser Public Library by their respective residents. Such use shall be accomplished by one
or more of the following methods, in whole or in part:
A. By lending the books of the Library to such residents on the same terms and conditions
as to residents of the City.
B. By the establishment of depositories of books of the Library to be loaned to such
residents at stated times and places.
C. By the transportation of books of the Library by mobile or other conveyance for lending
the same to such residents at stated times and places.
D. By the establishment of branch libraries for lending books to such residents.
(Code of Iowa, Section 392.5 & Chapter 28E)
2-5-8 Termination of Contracts. The contracts authorized in this Chapter may, by mutual
consent of the contracting parties, be terminated at any time. They may also be terminated by
a majority of the electors, represented by either of the contracting parties, voting on a
proposition to terminate which shall be submitted by the governing body upon a written
petition of electors in a number not less than five percent (5%) of those who voted in the area
for governor at the last general election.
The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which covers the area of
that seeking to terminate the contract. The petition shall be presented to the governing body
not less than forty (40) days before the election at which the question is to be submitted.
2-5-9 Library Account. All money appropriated by the Council from the General Fund for the
operation and maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library.
Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and
Secretary, or their designated representatives. The warrant writing officer is the City Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Section 384.20)
2-5-10 Report. The Board of Trustees shall, after the close of each Municipal fiscal year,
make to the Council a report containing a statement of the condition of the Library, the
number of books and other Library material added thereto, the number circulated, the number
not returned or lost, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the
maintenance thereof during such year, together with such further information as required by
the Council.
2-5-11 Injury to Books or Property. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally damage,
deface, alter, or destroy any property, belonging to the Library
(Code of Iowa, Section 716.1)
2-5-12 Theft. It is unlawful for any person to take possession or control of any library
property with the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Section 714.1)
2-5-13 Notice; Failure to Return; Detention.
A. Notice. There shall be notices posted in clear public view stating the following:
1. Failure to Return. Failure to return library materials for two months or more after
the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or failure to return
Library equipment for one month or more after the date the person agreed to
return the library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive the owner, provided a
reasonable attempt, including any mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that
such material or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been
made to reclaim the materials or equipment.
(Code of Iowa Section 714.5)
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing library materials may be detained and
searched by a peace officer or Library employee.
(Code of Iowa, Section 808.12
2-5-14 Violation. All persons who violate this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a penalty as set out in Section 1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 6 – Art Center Board of Trustees
SECTIONS:
2-6-1 Creation
2-6-2 Number of Members
2-6-3 Appointment
2-6-4 Ex-officio Member
2-6-5 Term Duration and Limits
2-6-6 Removal - Vacancies
2-6-7 Residence Requirements
2-6-8 Responsibilities and Duties
2-6-9 Establishment of Art Center
2-6-1 Creation. There is hereby created and organized an Art Center Board of Trustees, to
be appointed as hereinafter provided, with the duties and responsibilities as set forth in this
Chapter.
2-6-2 Number of Members. The Art Center Board of Trustees shall consist of nine (9)
gender balanced members.
2-6-3 Appointment. The Trustees are to be appointed by the City Council.
2-6-4 Ex-officio Members. The City Administrator, or his or her designated representative,
shall serve as an ex-officio member of this board.
2-6-5 Term Duration and Limits.
A. Duration. The terms of office commence upon appointment. The duration of the
appointments shall be 3 years, except to fill vacancies. One-third (1/3) of the members
are to be appointed each year so as to stagger the terms. Each term shall commence
on the first day of July. The trustees shall remain on the Board until their successors
are appointed.
B. Limits. No individual shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms on the
Board.
2-6-6 Removal - Vacancies. The Council may, at any time, remove any member of the Art
Center Board of Trustees after showing due cause, and shall fill the vacancies occurring in the
Commission by removal or otherwise. A trustee absent for three (3) consecutive regular
meetings of the Board, except in a case of sickness or temporary absence from the City, shall
render the office of such absent trustee vacant.
2-6-7 Residence Requirements. Each member of the Art Center Board of Trustees shall be
a resident of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
2-6-8 Responsibilities and Duties.
A. To meet and organize by the election of one of their number as president of the Board,
and by the election of a secretary and such other officers and committees as the Board
may deem necessary.
B. To have charge, control, and supervision of the art center, its work of art,
appurtenances, fixtures, and buildings or rooms containing the same, directing and
controlling all the affairs of such Art Center.
C. To employ a Director for the management of said Art Center and fix his or her
compensation; but, prior to such employment, the compensation of such director shall
be fixed in accordance with the Pay Plan of the City.
D. To remove such Director by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of such board for misdemeanor,
incompetency, or inattention to the duties of such employment.
E. To accept, on behalf of the City, gifts or works of art; to select and make purchases of
pictures, portraits, paintings, statuary, relics, and other objects of art, in the original
and in replicas or copies, books, periodicals, papers, and journals on the subject of art,
furniture, fixtures, stationery, and supplies for such Art Center.
F. To receive, hold, and dispose of all gifts, donations, devises, and bequests that may be
made to the City for the purpose of establishing, increasing, or improving such Art
Center; but when any such gift, donation, devise, or bequest shall be conditioned upon
any act of the City, the City Council must first determine whether such condition can or
shall be complied with.
G. To make, adopt, amend, modify, or repeal by-laws, rules, and regulations, not
inconsistent with law, for the care, use, government, and management of such Art
Center and the business of said board, fixing and enforcing penalties for the violation
thereof.
H. To authorize the expenditures of all monies allocated by the Council for the purposes,
as provided by law, and of the expenditure of all monies available by gift, or otherwise,
for the erection of art buildings or for the promotion of such art centers and of all other
money belonging to the art center fund, provided however all budget and accounting
procedures, personnel policies, purchasing procedures, and public improvements
procedures established by the City Council shall be adhered to by the Board.
2-6-9 Establishment of Art Center. The City of Muscatine, Iowa, hereby establishes the
Muscatine Art Center and that the original dwelling and building located on the real estate of
the Muscatine Art Center be named and maintained hereafter as the Laura Musser Museum
and that the center erected upon the real estate donated by C. Maxwell Stanley and Elizabeth
Stanley to the City of Muscatine, Iowa, be designated the Stanley Gallery, said Art Center,
Museum, and Gallery to be maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 7 – Planning and Zoning Commission
SECTIONS:
2-7-1 Creation
2-7-2 Qualifications
2-7-3 Number of Members
2-7-4 Appointment
2-7-5 Term Duration and Limits
2-7-6 Removal and Vacancies
2-7-7 Compensation
2-7-8 Relation to Community Development Director
2-7-9 Responsibilities and Duties
2-7-1 Creation. Under and by virtue of the authority conferred by the Code of Iowa, a City
Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby created and established.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)
2-7-2 Qualifications. Members appointed to the Commission should be, by knowledge or
experience, qualified to act reasonably in matters pertaining to the growth management
policies of the City, development and refinement of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning matters,
and City real estate vacation requests. Members appointed to the Commission shall not hold
any elective office in the municipal government and shall be residents of the City of
Muscatine.
2-7-3 Number of Members. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven (7)
gender balanced members.
2-7-4 Appointment. The members are to be appointed by the City Council.
2-7-5 Term Duration and Limits.
A. Duration. The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five (5) years
each, except to fill vacancies, and shall commence upon appointment. Any member
who does not maintain a reasonable record of attendance may be recommended for
removal. Each term shall commence on the first day of July. All members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall remain on the Commission until their
successors are appointed.
B. Term Limits. No individual shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms on
the Commission.
2-7-6 Removal - Vacancies. The Council may, at any time, remove any member of the
Commission after showing due cause, and shall fill the vacancies occurring on the Commission
by removal or otherwise.
2-7-7 Compensation of Members. All members of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall serve without compensation.
2-7-8 Relation to Community Development Director. The Community Development
Director, appointed by the City Administrator, shall report to the Planning and Zoning
Commission on activities of his or her office concerning land use planning, the formulation of
growth management policy, and those other activities corresponding with the public health,
safety, and welfare of the community. The Community Development Director shall also advise
the Commission of his or her considered judgment concerning matters before the
Commission, or on matters which he or she feels should come before the Commission.
2-7-9 Responsibilities and Duties. Duties, powers and guidelines of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, in accordance with the provisions of applicable law, are hereby
established for the conduct of Commission activities.
A. Meetings. The Commission shall conduct regular meetings to review land use proposals
and formulate positions or policies related to the activities the Commission has under
consideration.
B. Chairman. The Commission shall choose annually at its first regular meeting one of its
members to act as Chairman.
C. Making of Plans, Surveys, Maps, and Other Appropriate Material. The City Planning and
Zoning Commission shall have full power and authority to make, or cause to be made,
such surveys, studies, maps, plans, or charts of the whole or any portion of the City or
any land outside thereof, which in the opinion of the Commission bears relation to a
comprehensive plan, and shall bring the same to the attention of the Council. The
Commission may publish its studies and recommendations.
D. Approval of Designs and Locations of Proposed Structures. No statuary, memorial, or
work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixture, or
public structure or appurtenances shall be located or erected, or a site therefore
obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the City government for
the erection or location for the erection or location thereof until and unless the design
and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained.
E. Recommendation Concerning Plans, Plats, etc. All plans, plats, or replats of
subdivisions or resubdivisions of land embraced in the City, or within two (2) miles of
the City corporate limits thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or
other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public shall first be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and its recommendations obtained
before approval by the Council.
F. Approval of Plans. No plan for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic way,
riverfront, or other public improvement affecting the City shall be finally approved by
the City, or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall
first have been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
G. Purpose of Comprehensive Plan. For the purpose of making a Comprehensive Plan for
the physical development of the City, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make
careful and comprehensive studies of present conditions and future growth with due
regard to its relations to neighboring territory. The Plan shall be made with the general
purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious
development of the City and its environs which will, in accordance with the present
and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity,
and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
H. Procedure for Adoption of Comprehensive Plan. Before adopting a Comprehensive Plan,
or any part of it or any substantial amendment thereof, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time of which
shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not
less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing.
I. Adopt a Comprehensive Plan for the City of Muscatine by successive resolutions
adopting successive elements of the Plan, said elements corresponding with, but not
limited to land use, transportation, community facilities, parks, recreation and open
space, neighborhoods, schools, economic development, central business district,
utilities, and administrative procedures. Such Comprehensive Plan and each element
thereof shall be a public record and aid the Planning and Zoning Commission in the
performance of its duties. The adoption of the Comprehensive Plan and each element
thereof shall be by resolution and be carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a
majority of all the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission. An attested copy
thereof shall be certified to the City Council, and the Council may approve the same,
and when such Plan or any modification or amendment thereof shall receive the
approval of the Council, the Plan shall constitute the official Comprehensive Plan of
Muscatine.
J. Amendment or Modification of Comprehensive Plan. When such Comprehensive Plan
has been adopted, no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall be made
without such proposed change first being referred to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its recommendation. If the Commission disapproves the proposed
change, it may be adopted by the Council only by the affirmative vote of at least
three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the Council.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 8 – Board of Water, Electric and Communications Trustees
SECTIONS:
2-8-1 Creation
2-8-2 Number of Members
2-8-3 Appointment
2-8-4 Term Duration and Limits
2-8-5 Compensation
2-8-6 Removal - Vacancies
2-8-7 Trustee Requirements
2-8-8 Responsibilities and Duties
2-8-1 Creation. The City of Muscatine, Iowa, is the owner of a City water utility, a City
electric utility and a City communication utility. The management, control and operation of the
three utilities, is vested in the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees is referred to as the
Board of Water, Electric and Communications Trustees of the City of Muscatine, Iowa. The
Board is vested with the powers and duties conferred in Chapter 388, Iowa Code.
2-8-2 Number of Members. The Board of Water, Electric and Communications Trustees
shall consist of five (5) gender balanced members.
2-8-3 Appointment. The members are to be appointed by the City Council.
2-8-4 Term Duration and Limits.
A. Duration. The terms of office of the members shall be for six (6) years and shall
commence with their appointment. One (1) member shall be appointed each year to
stagger the terms. Terms commence on the first day of July. All members of the Board
shall remain on the Board until their successors are appointed.
B. Term Limits. No individual shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms on
the Board.
2-8-5 Compensation. The salary of each Trustee appointed to and serving on the Board of
Water, Electric and Communications Trustees shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per
month.
2-8-6 Removal - Vacancies. Members of the Board of Water, Electric and Communications
Trustees may be removed in accordance with the Chapter 372.15 of the Iowa Code. The
Council shall fill the vacancies occurring on the Board by removal or otherwise.
(Iowa Code, Section 372.15)
2-8-7 Trustee Requirements. A public officer or a salaried employee of the City may not
serve on the Board. The Board may consist of one member who is not a resident of the City
of Muscatine if that person is in the service area of the city utilities. All other members must
be residents of the City of Muscatine.
2-8-8 Responsibilities and Duties. The Board of Water, Electric and Communications
Trustees shall have such powers and responsibilities as are prescribed by the Code of Iowa.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 9 – Zoning Board of Adjustment
SECTIONS:
2-9-1 Creation
2-9-2 Number of Members
2-9-3 Appointment
2-9-4 Composition
2-9-5 Term Duration and Limits
2-9-6 Removal - Vacancies
2-9-7 Residence Requirements
2-9-8 Responsibilities and Duties
2-9-1 Creation. There is hereby created and organized a Zoning Board of
Adjustment, to be appointed as hereinafter provided, with the duties and
responsibilities as set forth in this Chapter.
2-9-2 Number of Members. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five
(5) gender balanced members.
2-9-3 Appointment. The members are to be appointed by the City Council.
2-9-4 Composition. One (1) member of the Board shall be a member of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
2-9-5 Term Duration and Limits.
A. Duration: The terms of office of such members shall commence with their
appointment and shall be for terms of five (5) years, except to fill vacancies.
Each term shall commence on the first day of July. All members of the Board
shall remain on the Board until their successors are appointed.
B. Term Limits: No individual shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive
terms on the Board.
2-9-6 Removal - Vacancies. The Council may, at any time, remove any member of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment after showing due cause, and shall fill the vacancies
occurring on the Board by removal or otherwise.
2-9-7 Residence Requirements. Each member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be a resident of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
2-9-8 Responsibilities and Duties. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have
such responsibilities and duties as are prescribed by the Iowa Code and by Title 10,
Chapter 22.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 10 – Ad Hoc Committees and Task Forces
SECTIONS:
2-10-1 Authority to Form Ad Hoc Committees and Task Forces
2-10-2 Appointment
2-10-3 Council to Establish Duties
2-10-4 Governing Rules and Procedures
2-10-5 Authority to Refer
2-10-6 Recommendations to Council
2-10-7 Authority of Council; Generally
2-10-1 Authority to Form Ad Hoc Committees and Task Forces. The Council
shall have the authority to form, by resolution, ad hoc committees or task forces as
needed.
2-10-2 Appointment. The Council shall appoint the membership of such
committees or task forces. Members of regular Boards and Commissions may be
appointed to ad hoc committees and task forces.
2-10-3 Council to Establish Duties. The Council shall set out the duties and, when
necessary, the rules of procedure of the ad hoc committee or task force in the
resolution establishing such ad hoc committee or task force.
2-10-4 Governing Rules and Procedures. Ad hoc committees or task forces shall
abide by rules and procedures as prescribed by the resolution establishing such ad
hoc committees or task forces. To the extent that a procedural matter is not covered
by Iowa law or the resolution establishing such ad hoc committees or task forces, the
most recent edition of Robert’s Rules shall govern.
2-10-5 Authority to Refer. City Council may refer matters within the charge of an
existing ad hoc committee or task force to that committee or task force charged with
such matters.
2-10-6 Recommendations to Council. Ad hoc committees or task forces shall
make recommendations by way of a formal report to the City Council.
2-10-7 Authority of Council; Generally. The Council has the authority to follow
the recommendations, change the recommendations, take no action, remand the
matter back to the ad hoc body or take any other action it sees fit. The Council by
majority vote may remove a member of an ad-hoc committee or task force at any
time, with or without cause. The City Council by majority vote may amend or
dissolve an ad hoc committee or task force.
TITLE 2 – Boards and Commissions
CHAPTER 11- Council Appointments to City Administrative Boards
SECTIONS:
2-11-1 Scope
2-11-2 Appointment of Members
2-11-1 Scope. The City Council is represented on a number of boards,
commissions, committees, and groups. These include ad hoc committees, policy
committees, intergovernmental bodies, and various organizations in the community.
Such representation is distinct from formal appointments to Boards and Commissions
as provided in Title 2, Chapters 1-10 of this Code of Ordinances. As such, this section
is intended to address City representation on these various boards, commissions,
committees, and groups, and not representation on Boards and Commissions as set
forth in Title 2, Chapters 1-10. For purposes of this Chapter, these boards,
commissions, committees, and groups - where the City has a City Representative -
will be collectively referred to as City Administrative Boards.
2-11-2 Appointment of Members. Except as otherwise specifically provided by
state statute or as determined by the by laws of the outside agency, all members of
the Administrative Boards shall be appointed and approved by the City Council. The
City Clerk shall notify the City Council of the expiration of terms of office of any
member of any Administrative Board as provided in section 2-12-1 of this Code.
When a vacancy occurs by resignation, death, or other termination of service, the
City Clerk shall provide the notice to the City Council as soon as the City Clerk is
made aware of the vacancy, and City Council shall fill said vacancy as soon as
practicable.
TITLE 2 – Boards and Commissions
CHAPTER 12 - Annual Organizational Meeting for Appointments
SECTIONS:
2-12-1 City Clerk to Maintain Listing
2-12-2 Organizational Meeting
2-12-1 Clerk to Maintain Listing. An alphabetical listing of all Boards,
Commissions, and Committees, including Ad-Hoc Committees as defined by Title 2,
Chapter 10, and City Administrative Boards as defined by Title 2, Chapter 11, shall
be compiled and maintained by the City Clerk. Such listing shall include the number
and identity of members comprising each Board, Commission, or Committee, as the
case may be, and the date each term of office expires. No later than 90 days before
the end of each calendar year, the City Clerk shall prepare, from the alphabetical
listing of all Boards, Commissions, or Committees, including Ad-Hoc Committees as
defined by Title 2, Chapter 10, and City Administrative Boards as defined by Title 2,
Chapter 11, a roster of all terms of office expiring within the next calendar year.
2-12-2 Organizational Meeting. The City Council shall hold an organizational
meeting at the first regular meeting in January wherein the City Council shall review
upcoming vacancies on Boards, Commissions, and Committees, including Ad-Hoc
Committees as defined by Title 2, Chapter 10, and City Administrative Boards as
defined by Title 2, Chapter 11. At the Council’s choosing, the Council may elect to
continue the Organizational meeting to a later date, or may schedule additional
meetings as needed. If the meeting is continued or other meetings are held on an as
needed basis, the Council shall refer the list of vacancies to be considered at the
later meeting to the Nominating Committee in a timely manner in order that the
Committee may prepare a slate of candidate(s) in advance of the full Council’s
meeting. If the Nominating Committee has already presented a slate of candidates
for a particular vacancy, it may affirm its previous slate or may present a new slate
for the full Council’s consideration. All vacancies shall be filled as provided by the
rules governing appointments to the respective Boards, Commissions, and
Committees, including Ad-Hoc Committees as defined by Title 2, Chapter 10, and
City Administrative Boards as defined by Title 2, Chapter 11.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 13 – Convention and Visitors Board
SECTIONS:
2-13-1 Creation
2-13-2 Number of Members
2-13-3 Appointment
2-13-4 Term Duration and Limits
2-13-5 Removal – Vacancies
2-13-6 Residency Requirements
2-13-7 Responsibilities and Duties of Board
2-13-8 Appropriation of Funds for the Convention and Visitors Division
2-13-1 Creation. The Convention and Visitors Board is hereby created.
2-13-2 Number of Members. The Convention and Visitors Board shall consist of
seven (7) gender balanced members. Members shall not hold elected positions on
the Muscatine City Council or the Muscatine County Board of Supervisors.
2-13-3 Appointment.
A. The Council shall appoint the board members.
B. Members shall include the following: five (5) at-large members; one (1)
member representing the Greater Muscatine Chamber of Commerce and
Industry; and one (1) member representing travel and tourism in Muscatine
County. The at-large members may include individuals representing
attractions or events; lodging; businesses in the restaurant or retail sector; or
those with an interest in promoting travel and tourism.
2-13-4 Term Duration and Limits.
A. Duration. The Convention and Visitors Board shall consist of seven (7)
members. The term of office of such members shall commence with their
appointment and shall be for three (3) years, except to fill vacancies
provided, however, that appointments to the first Board shall be three (3)
members for one (1) year, three (3) members for two (2) years and one (1)
member for three (3) years. Each term shall commence on the first day of
July. All members of the Convention and Visitors Board shall remain on the
Board until their successors are appointed.
B. Limits. No individual shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms on
the Convention and Visitors Board.
2-13-5 Removal – Vacancies. The Council may, at any time, remove any member
of the Board after showing due cause, and shall fill the vacancies occurring on the
Board by removal or otherwise.
2-13-6 Residency Requirements. Each at-large member of the Convention and
Visitors Board shall be a resident of the City of Muscatine. The member representing
travel and tourism in Muscatine County shall be a resident of Muscatine County.
2-13-7 Responsibilities and Duties of Board. The Convention and Visitors Board
shall have the following responsibilities and duties:
A. To adopt rules governing the Board’s organization and procedures as may be
deemed necessary. All rules shall be consistent with federal, state, and city
statutes and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
B. To develop and provide visitor and tourism information and programs for
visitors to the City of Muscatine and Muscatine County based on the level of
financial support provided by the City Council and other entities.
C. To enhance the economic development of the City of Muscatine and Muscatine
County by promoting the City and County as visitor destinations and as a
viable setting to hold meetings, conventions, special events, and community
attractions.
D. To interview with the City Administrator, candidates for the position of
Convention and Visitors Director and participate in the evaluation and
selection of the candidate to be appointed to this position.
E. To provide input to the City Administrator to evaluate the performance of the
Convention and Visitors Director.
F. To provide input for and review the annual budget request for the Convention
and Visitors division.
G. To serve as the City’s review agency and coordinator for all outside agency
and special group requests for financial support for use of hotel/motel tax
proceeds to support visitor and tourism services.
H. To appoint committees as needed.
I. At the conclusion of each fiscal year make a report to the City Council. This
report shall include narrative information on the progress of visitor and
tourism programs during the past year and also include measurements or
metrics including but not limited to: hotel/motel tax receipts; website visitors;
visitor guides distributed; requests for mailings; annual advertising
expenditures; ratio of advertising dollars spent to documented leads; number
of tour groups and associated statistics; the number of events, meetings, and
associated statistics; and any other information related to the promotion of
visitor and tourism events and programs.
2-13-8 Appropriation of Funds for the Convention and Visitors Division. The
City Council may annually appropriate a sum of money from the City’s share of the
hotel/motel tax to fund the operating budget of the Convention and Tourism division
of the City Administrator’s office. At the time of adoption of this ordinance, the
hotel/motel allocation was 25% of the hotel/motel taxes received for the prior fiscal
year.
Title 2 – Boards and Commissions
Chapter 14 – Public Art Advisory Commission
SECTIONS:
2-14-1 Creation
2-14-2 Number of Members
2-14-3 Appointment
2-14-4 Term Duration and Limits
2-14-5 Removal – Vacancies
2-14-6 Residency Requirements
2-14-7 Responsibilities and Duties of Board
2-14-8 Chairperson and Secretary
2-14-9 Meeting and Quorum
2-14-10 Compensation
2-14-11 Definition-Public Art
2-14-1 Creation. The Public Art Advisory Commission is hereby created.
2-14-2 Number of Members. The Public Art Advisory Commission shall consist of
five (5) gender balanced members, and one (1) member representing or having an
interest in public art from Muscatine County and Ex Officio members from the Art
Center and Parks and Recreation Departments.
2-14-3 Appointment. The Council shall appoint the members.
2-14-4 Term Duration and Limits
A. Duration. The Public Art Advisory Commission shall consist of (5)
members to be appointed by the City Council. The term of office of such
members shall commence with their appointments and shall be for three
(3) years, except to fill vacancies provided, however, that appointments to
the first Commission shall be two (2) members for three (3) years, two
(2) members for two (2) years, and one (1) member for one (1) year.
Each term shall commence on the first day of July. All members of the
Public Art Advisory Commission shall remain on the Commission until their
successors are appointed.
B. Limits. No individual shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms
on the Public Art Advisory Commission.
2-14-5 Removal – Vacancies. The Council may, at any time, remove any member
of the Commission after showing due cause, and shall fill the vacancies occurring on
the Commission by removal or otherwise.
2-14-6 Residency Requirements. Each member of the Public Art Advisory
Commission shall be a resident of the City of Muscatine, Iowa, with the exception of
the one member from Muscatine County.
2-14-7 Responsibilities and Duties of Board. The Public Art Advisory
Commission shall promote and encourage programs to further public awareness of,
accessibility to, participation in, and support for the artistic and cultural development
of the City of Muscatine. The Commission shall coordinate with the City
Administrator or the appropriate department on recommendations for the
expenditure of available funds for art and cultural activities The Commission will
evaluate gifts of art to be installed on City of Muscatine property, and advise City
Council on potential sites that can be enhanced by the addition of public art and
recommend various proposals for such sites. The Commission shall work with
partners (individuals, for profit-business, nonprofit organizations, other government
institutions) to develop proposed projects to be implements on public property within
the City of Muscatine.
2-14-8 Chairperson and Secretary. The Public Art Advisory Commission shall
select a Chairperson, who shall preside over all Commission meetings. The City
Administrator or his/her Designee shall serve as Secretary and be responsible for
maintaining written records of the Commissions’ proceedings.
2-14-9 Meetings and Quorum. The Public Art Advisory Commission shall meet at
least four (4) times per fiscal year and a simple majority of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
2-14-10 Compensation. The members of the Public Art Advisory Commission shall
serve without compensation.
2-14-11 Definition – Public Art. Public Art is loosely defined to include both
temporary and permanent installations of murals, sculptures, memorials, integrated
architectural components, community art and digital media place in or on City owned
property.

TITLE 3
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Streets and Sidewalks 1
Use of City Right of Way 2
Parades and Public Assemblies Regulated 3
Public Demonstrations 4
Public Parks 5
City Cemeteries 6
Railroads 7
Levees 8
Trees and Shrubs 9
Title 3 – Public Ways and Property
Chapter 1 – Streets and Sidewalks
SECTIONS:
3-1-1 Definitions
3-1-2 Sidewalk Installation and Repair; Right-of-Way Maintenance
3-1-3 Encroaching Steps
3-1-4 Sidewalk Snow and Ice Removal
3-1-5 Commercial Use of Sidewalk in Commercial Zones
3-1-6 Outdoor Restaurant Seating License
3-1-7 Street Obstructions
3-1-8 Location of Steps, Cellarways, and Spouts
3-1-9 Playing in Streets
3-1-10 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
3-1-11 Removal of Barricades
3-1-1 Definition(s)
A. “Property owner” means the contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise the
record holder of legal title as listed on the property records maintained by the
Muscatine County Recorder’s Office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[1])
3-1-2 Sidewalk Installation and Repair; Right-of-Way Maintenance.
A. Permit Required. No person or entity shall construct or repair any sidewalk upon the
streets of the City, unless such person shall first have obtained a permit therefore in
accordance with the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to
this Code of Ordinances.
B. Specifications. All sidewalks must be installed and repaired according to all applicable
specifications established by the City Engineer.
C. New Sidewalks. In areas of the City where there are no sidewalks, they shall be
installed as follows:
1. New Construction. New sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with Title 11 of
this Code.
2. Other Areas. The City Council shall determine the necessity of installing sidewalks
in the areas of the City where none exist after holding a public hearing in
accordance with the special assessment provisions of the Code of Iowa.
3. Cost of Installation. If, as provided elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances, it is
determined that a sidewalk should be installed, the abutting property owners shall
share the cost of installing new sidewalks with the City of Muscatine in accordance
with the special assessment rules and regulations for sidewalks as adopted by the
City Council. If no such determination is made, abutting property owners may
install a sidewalk at their own expense, as along as the sidewalk conforms to the
specifications set by the City Engineer and the permit required has been obtained.
E. Duty of Owner to Repair and Maintain. The abutting property owner shall maintain
all public right-of-way located between the edge of the street or curb line and the
property line, and shall keep such area in a safe condition free from defects, debris,
nuisances, obstructions or any other hazard. The abutting property owner may be
liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the public right-of-way located
between the edge of the street or curb line and the property line. The abutting
property owner shall maintain the sidewalk in a safe condition, in a state of good
repair, and free from defects. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages
caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk. Notwithstanding the obligations imposed
hereunder, the property owner shall in no event remove diseased trees or dead wood
or plant, trim, remove or treat any tree or plant material on public right-of-way without
first obtaining permission from the City. Maintenance includes, among other things,
timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs and picking up litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
F. Notice. The City may serve notice on the abutting property owner, by certified mail to
the property owner as shown by the records of the county auditor, requiring the
abutting property owner to repair, replace, or reconstruct sidewalks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d])
G. Costs. If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required within a
reasonable time, the City may perform the required action and assess the costs against
the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
3-1-3 Encroaching Steps. No steps from the sidewalk to the first floor above the ground of
any building shall hereafter be erected upon any part of the sidewalk.
3-1-4 Snow and Ice Removal. The abutting property owner is responsible for the removal
of the natural accumulations of snow and ice from the sidewalks within twenty-four (24) hours
of the termination of the last snowfall and may be liable for damages caused by the failure to
use reasonable care in the removal of the snow or ice. If a property owner fails to remove
snow, ice, or accumulations within a reasonable time after snowfall, the City, after attempting
to notify the adjoining property owner, may cause the snow to be removed and may assess
the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
3-1-5 Commercial Use of Sidewalk in Commercial Zone
A. Permits for Commercial Use:
1. Sidewalk sales. The City Administrator is authorized to issue permits to businesses
or business organizations for the temporary use of sidewalks for commercial sales
in commercially zoned districts. Such permits shall be limited to the temporary use
of sidewalks abutting said business or business organization, and shall be limited to
no more than two days for any one permit. All other commercial use of public rightof-
way shall be prohibited unless such use is authorized by the City Council, by
resolution.
2. It shall be unlawful for any business or business organization to use the public
sidewalks in commercially zoned districts for commercial sales promotions without
first having obtained a permit from the City Administrator, as provided in this
Chapter.
B. Permit Procedure and Standards for Issuance. The permit application and
issuance procedures set forth in Chapter 3 of this Title, shall govern the permit
requirements of Section 3-1-5 of the City Code.
C. Permit Provisions Shall not Apply to Peddlers or Solicitors. The permit provisions
of this Chapter shall not apply to peddlers or solicitors, as defined in Title 5 Chapter 10
of the City Code of the City of Muscatine.
3-1-6 Outdoor Restaurant Seating License. No person or entity shall operate a restaurant
which provides outdoor seating on public property for the purpose of serving food or
beverages, without a valid outdoor restaurant seating license.
A. Sidewalk or Street Café Easement Agreements
1. Sidewalk or Street Café is defined as a permitted area within the public right-ofway
consisting of tables and chairs where patrons may be served food and/or
beverages from an adjacent café or restaurant.
2. No person shall operate a sidewalk or street café without an approved easement
agreement.
3. The agreement shall be between the City and the café owner with the approval of
the building owner, if different than the café owner.
4. The agreement shall provide that no property right is conferred and that it may be
terminated if the City determines that the right-of-way is needed.
5. The agreement shall include provisions for insurance, indemnification, fencing,
maintenance, including vegetation and the subsurface if applicable, and any other
reasonable provision as determined by the City Administrator, or designee.
6. The agreement shall include a site plan that meets all the requirements of Section
3-1-6 (B)(5)
7. The easement agreement, at a minimum, shall require the café operator to provide
a certificate of insurance satisfactory to the City as set out in the Schedule of
Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances, and
shall agree to hold the City harmless against any and all liability arising from or
relating to the operation of the sidewalk or street café or the location of the café on
the public right- of-way including, but not limited to, all claims arising from
occurrences or accidents within the sidewalk or street café including the walkway
through a café.
8. Easement agreements shall expire on December 31st of the year in which they are
issued.
9. Termination of easement agreements
a. After execution of an easement agreement, the City Administrator, or designee,
shall retain the right to terminate the easement agreement but only after
written notice of violation has been given and the time to cure the violation has
expired. Grounds for termination of the easement agreement shall include, but
not be limited to:
i. Violations of state and liquor control laws,
ii. Violations of the easement agreement,
iii. Creating a safety hazard, health hazard, and/or public nuisance under state
or local law.
b. The City Administrator, or designee, retains the right to terminate the easement
agreement and direct removal of sidewalk or street café operations if there is a
substantial and reasonable need for use of the public right-of-way for a valid
public purpose.
c. The café owner has the right to appeal a decision to terminate the agreement to
the City Council.
B. Approval of Easement Agreements
1. Easement Agreements shall be approved by a resolution of City Council.
2. The City is not obligated to approve an easement agreement, even if it meets all
criteria contained within this Chapter, and approval will be based on City Council
making a determination that the proposed easement agreement is beneficial to the
community.
3. City Council may attach any conditions to the approval of an easement agreement
that it deems necessary.
4. Application for an easement agreement shall be made upon a form approved and
provided by the City of Muscatine, and shall be accompanied by an application fee,
as set by resolution of City Council and as set out in the Schedule of Permit and
Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
5. Site Plan - A dimensioned site plan drawing showing the general layout of the
sidewalk or street area and building frontage, including all of the following items if
applicable:
a. The general layout of the sidewalk or street area and building frontage.
b. Street, curb, sidewalk, property lines and all existing/proposed improvements in
the sidewalk or street area.
c. Boundaries of the sidewalk or street café.
d. The distance between the sidewalk or street café and the entrance to any
adjacent commercial business.
e. The distance between the railing of the sidewalk or street café and the curb.
f. The distance between any obstruction (parking meters, lights, signs, mail
boxes, trees, tree grates, etc.) in the sidewalk or street area to the railing of the
sidewalk or street café.
g. Plans must reflect that the direction and extent of swing of gates or other
objects placed within the sidewalk or street café area do not project beyond the
delineated perimeter of the sidewalk or street café.
h. Type of sidewalk or street café enclosure used, such as railings or planters.
i. Height of enclosure.
6. Prior to City Council rendering a decision on an easement agreement, the City of
Muscatine shall mail all property owners and first floor occupants located on the
same block a notice that an application for an easement agreement has been filed.
The notice shall contain the Site Plan submitted by the applicant, state whether or
not the business is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages that may be served and
consumed at the sidewalk or street café if the permit is granted, and state that all
comments concerning the proposed sidewalk or street café must be received by the
City of Muscatine within 15 calendar days from the date of mailing the notice. The
applicant shall also be required to post a copy of the public notice in a readily
visible location on the frontage of the applying business establishment for 15
calendar days.
C. General Provisions
1. Sidewalk or street cafés are only allowed in the area bounded by Pine Street, 6th
Street, Mulberry Avenue, and Mississippi Drive.
2. A sidewalk or street café must be arranged in a manner that leaves an
unobstructed and continuous walkway of at least five feet (5’) on the existing
public sidewalk. For a distance of no more than two feet (2’), the width of the
required walkway may be reduced to three feet (3’), if this reduction in width is
caused by a permanent publicly owned installation such as a utility/light pole,
sign pole, parking meter, fire hydrant, or street tree.
3. The outdoor café owner is responsible for trash removal and shall maintain the
area and surrounding five feet (5’) in a clean and litter free manner during all
hours of operation.
4. The easement agreement holder shall be responsible for any damages to the
public right-of-way caused by the placement of any anchored fencing.
5. Sidewalk or street cafés are subject to annual inspections and may be inspected
at any other time at the City’s discretion.
6. All kitchen equipment and refuse containers used to service the sidewalk or
street cafés must be located inside the principal building.
7. No extension cords are allowed across sidewalks.
8. Any feature, measure, or structure deemed necessary by the City of Muscatine,
as necessary for the safe operation of the sidewalk or street café.
9. Vertical Clear Zone. The clear zone is the area between a height of three feet
(3’) and seven feet (7’). The vertical clear zone is the area above the sidewalk
in which obstructions shall be minimized to provide a clear view.
a. Obstruction Prohibited. The vertical clear zone shall be free of obstructions,
including but not limited to fences, walls, landscaping, signs, structures, tree
canopies or parked vehicles.
b. Exemption of Certain Point Obstructions. Certain objects are considered
point obstructions and are permitted because a driver can move slightly and
be able to see around them. The following objects are permitted within the
vertical clear zone:
i. Poles with a diameter of less than 1 foot (1’).
ii. Tables and chairs.
iii. Fencing that is not more than 25% opaque.
iv. Official traffic control devices.
v. Utility equipment, such as but not limited to poles, transformers,
distribution equipment, etc.
vi. Trees that are devoid of branches between three feet (3’) and seven feet
(7’) from the ground and that are spaced in manner that minimizes
visual obstruction.
vii. Any obstruction that was permitted by City Code on the date that it was
installed.
10. Sidewalk cafés may be located on a platform on top of a public sidewalk if the
City Administrator or designee determines there is excessive slope in the
sidewalk and approves the design and if suitable access is provided for persons
with disabilities.
11. Outdoor cafes located on public streets shall meet the following criteria:
a. The portion of the café located on the street shall be on a platform. The
design features of the platform shall be submitted with the application. The
platform shall not impede drainage in the street gutter.
b. For safety reasons there shall be a minimum four foot (4’) buffer on either
end of the café and any on-street parking space.
c. The platform shall include a physical barrier of at least three feet (3’) in
height on all sides that are adjacent to the street.
d. The City of Muscatine may require any feature, measure, or structure
deemed necessary by the City of Muscatine, as necessary for safe
operations.
12.Cafés located on public streets cannot be set up before April 1 and shall be
removed no later than October 15.
Easement holders may request authorization to operate before April 1 or after
October 15 subject to approval by the City Administrator or his or her designee.
Approval of the requested alternate dates are subject to the determination that
operation of the sidewalk or street café will not endanger the public or interfere
with city operations.
3-1-7 Street Obstructions.
A. Unlawful Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person or entity to in any way obstruct
or cause to be obstructed, any street or alley by placing therein or thereon any stone,
lumber, brick, wood or other thing or by making or causing to be made any excavation
therein or thereon without having first secured written permission from the City to do
so.
B. Unlawful Deposits. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or
alley any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, or any other debris or substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
C. It is unlawful for any person to deface, alter, or destroy any street or alley in any
manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec.716.1)
D. Dumping of Snow. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, push or place or
cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property,
sidewalks or driveways onto the traveled way of streets so as to obstruct gutters
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or to create a hazardous
condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the
business district, if it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the streets
temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours by
the property owner or his agent, and only after first making arrangements for such
prompt removal at the owner’s cost of the accumulation within a reasonable short time,
but no later than 48 hours following the event.
3-1-8 Location of Steps, Cellarways, Spouts. If any person shall erect or cause to be
erected in any street or public alley, any step, cellar door, or cellarway more than four
feet (4’) from the line of the street into the sidewalk or street, or more than three feet (3’)
from the line in any alley into the same, and if any person shall erect any porch, bulk, jut
window, or other encumbrance, or shall so place or cause to be placed any spouts or gutters
whereby the passage of any street or alley shall be obstructed, he shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor or subject to civil penalty and shall immediately cause such step, cellar door,
cellarway, porch, bulk, jut window, or other encumbrances, spouts, and gutters to be
removed. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to authorize the use of any part of any
street, sidewalk, or alley for the erection of stairs, steps, or other modes of access to the
second stories to buildings, or to authorize the enclosure by rail or otherwise of any portion of
any sidewalk, street, or alley, or the erection of any railing upon any sidewalk, street, or alley
as a means of obtaining access or a passageway to the cellar or basement by occupying part
of the sidewalk for that purpose. Such railings already existing, while not hereby legalized,
shall not be abated, unless upon the special direction of the Council.
3-1-9 Playing in Streets. It is unlawful for any person to sled or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
3-1-10 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley. It is unlawful for any person to travel or
operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or
flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer or
member of the Fire Department without having first obtained prior approval from the City.
3-1-11 Removal of Barricades and Warning Lights. It is unlawful for a person to willfully
move, remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp,
obstruction, guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or
placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said
street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
Title 3 – Public Ways and Property
Chapter 2 – Use of City Right of Way
SECTIONS:
3-2-1 Excavation Compliance
3-2-2 Permit Required
3-2-3 Public Convenience
3-2-4 Barricades, Fencing and Lighting
3-2-5 Bond Required
3-2-6 Insurance
3-2-7 Pre-Construction Conference
3-2-8 Commencement Period
3-2-9 Steel Tracks; Cleated Equipment
3-2-10 Tunneling Under Street
3-2-11 Compliance
3-2-12 Excavation Material
3-2-13 Protect Adjoining Property
3-2-14 Restoration of Public Property
3-2-15 Inspection
3-2-16 Backfill
3-2-17 Supervision of Connections and Repairs to Sewers
3-2-18 Completion by the City
3-2-19 Responsibility for Costs
3-2-20 Notification
3-2-21 Permit Fee
3-2-22 Permit Issued
3-2-23 Permits May be Examined
3-2-24 Save Harmless
3-2-25 Payment Failure after Excavation Repair
3-2-26 Emergency Excavations
3-2-27 Emergency Detours or Closings
3-2-28 Curb Cuts
3-2-29 Penalty
3-2-1 Excavation Compliance. No person or entity shall dig, excavate, or in any manner
disturb any street, parking or alley except in accordance with the following provisions of this
Chapter.
3-2-2 Permit Required. No excavation, including curb cuts, shall be commenced without
first obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances. A written application for such permit
shall be filed with the Community Development Department and shall contain the following:
A. The name and residence of the applicant.
B. The purpose for which the excavation is to be made.
C. The name and address of the person for whom the excavation is to be made.
D. The location of the proposed excavation.
E. When traffic control devices are used as part of the excavation, the name and
telephone number of a person who can be reached twenty-four (24) hours a day,
seven (7) days a week.
Exempt. City of Muscatine Public Works employees excavating in the course of employment
for the City of Muscatine, or its contractors working under the direct supervision of the City,
are exempt from the permit requirements set out in this Section.
3-2-3 Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner which will
cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water
along the gutter on the street.
3-2-4 Barricades, Fencing and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing and warning lights
meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to protect the public from
hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or maintaining adequate barricades,
fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the City by the permit holder/property owner.
3-2-5 Bond Required. The bond required by this Section shall be set by resolution of Council
and is listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements contained in Appendix B to
this Code of Ordinances. The bond shall be issued by a surety company authorized to issue
such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage
done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the
course of administration of this Section.
3-2-6 Insurance. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering
the City as additional insured and applicant and all its agents and employees for the amounts
set by resolution of Council and specified in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements contained in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
3-2-7 Pre-Construction Conference. The City may require a pre-construction conference
before the issuance of a permit. The conference may involve representatives of the Public
Works Department, Police and Fire Departments, City Engineer, utility companies, and the
construction agency representative.
3-2-8 Commencement Period. The applicant shall begin the excavation within twenty-four
(24) hours of the granting of the permit. Failure to begin excavating within twenty-four (24)
hours will cause the permit to become null and void.
3-2-9 Steel Tracks; Cleated Equipment. Under no circumstances shall steel tracked or
steel cleated equipment or machinery be permitted on any street, alley, sidewalk, or way
unless authorized in writing by the City.
3-2-10 Tunneling Under Street. No person shall tunnel under any street, alley, sidewalk,
road, pavement, or way or public place unless authorized in writing by the City Engineer.
3-2-11 Compliance. The applicant shall comply with all excavation and backfill requirements
as shall be set forth by the Director of Public Works.
3-2-12 Excavation Material. The person making the excavation shall haul away all excess
excavated material. The City may require material to be imported for backfill of any
excavation whenever it is evident that backfill is of such nature that it is unsuitable for use.
Backfill may be deemed unsuitable by the City if, among other reasons, it is frozen or contains
excess moisture or excess debris. Failure of a person making an excavation to backfill the
excavation as directed by the City shall be a violation of this Chapter.
3-2-13 Protect Adjoining Property. Any person making an excavation shall at all times and
at his own expense preserve and protect from damage or injury all adjoining property of any
nature by providing proper foundations, sheeting, bracing, shoring, and drainage, as well as
such other protective measures as may be required. The person making the excavation shall
be responsible for all damages to public or private property resulting from or occasioned by
the excavation.
3-2-14 Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the condition of the property prior to
the commencement of the work, or in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the
permit holder/property owner.
3-2-15 Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
3-2-16 Backfill. Upon completion of the work performed under the excavation permit, the
applicant shall cause the excavation to be back-filled within twenty-four (24) hours. Backfill
shall not be deemed completed, nor resurfacing of any improved street or alley surface begun,
until such backfill is inspected and approved by the City. The permit holder/property owner
shall provide the City with notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when
inspection of backfill is desired.
3-2-17 Supervision of Connections and Repairs to Sewers.
A. All excavations entailing connections, extensions, replacement, or repairs to public
sewers in any public place, as well as the connections, extensions, replacement, or
repairs themselves, shall be made according to the standards as established by the
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee.
B. All excavations for installation of new sewers shall be made only in conformity with a
set of plans which shall have been approved by the Director of Public Works.
C. Plans are to be submitted to the Director of Public Works by the person, or his agent,
who shall desire to have the new sewer constructed, whenever such sewer shall then
or thereafter be located in, under, within, or upon any public place.
D. No person shall hereafter install, lay, bury, place, or replace in or upon any ditch,
trench, drainage ditch, driveway, field entrance, or public place any pipe, sewer, drain,
water main, culvert, or conduit unless it shall be approved. All sewer pipe materials,
fittings, and connections, including sewer service laterals and connections on public
property shall be according to standards established by the Director of Public Works or
otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.
3-2-18 Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City has the right
to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses therefor to the permit
holder/property owner.
3-2-19 Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the excavation shall be
borne by the property owner/permit holder. The property owner/permit holder shall indemnify
the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such
excavation.
3-2-20 Notification. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the person performing the
excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and provide the center with the
information required under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa.

3-2-21 Permit Fee. The permit fee required by this Section shall be set by resolution of the
City Council, and is listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements contained in
Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
3-2-22 Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance
certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit shall be issued.
3-3-23 Permits May be Examined. All permits and written authorizations issued by the City
shall at all times be kept by an individual at the excavation site and shall be surrendered for
examination upon the demand of any officer of the City.
3-2-24 Save Harmless. The applicant shall agree to hold and save harmless the City, its
Agents, Officers, and Employees from any liability or responsibility for damage to any person
or property injured by the performance of any excavation work performed by an applicant or
by the negligence of the applicant, his employees, or agents in carrying out the excavation
permitted under this Chapter.
3-2-25 Pavement Failure after Excavation Repair. If the repaired street surface cracks or
subsides more than 1 inch across the excavation within 4 years of the surface replacements,
the applicant shall remove the pavement, compact or replace the backfill as required and
replace the pavement at no cost to the City.
3-2-26 Emergency Excavations. Emergency excavations are excavations for the repair of
such vital utilities as gas, water, sewer, and electricity, which by their nature necessitate
immediate action.
3-2-27 Emergency Detours and Closings.
A. If the emergency occurs during normal office hours, eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. weekdays, the agency doing the work shall first notify the City and
obtain approval of said work. The applicant shall obtain the permit in person at the
permit office before the close of the next work day.
B. During normal working hours, emergency detour routes may be requested by
telephoning the Department of Public Works.
C. If the emergency occurs during other than normal working hours, the applicant shall
call the Public Safety dispatcher and give the dispatcher the location and nature of the
emergency before starting the work. The applicant is then required to get said permit
before noon of the next work day.
D. On other than normal working hours, emergency street closing and detours shall be
reported by notifying the dispatcher at the Public Safety Building.
3-2-28 Curb Cuts. No person shall make or cause to be made any curb cut for driveways or
any other purpose without first obtaining a curb cut permit from the City and pay a fee in the
amount set by resolution of Council and specified in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements contained in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
A. Curb cuts shall be made in conformance with the specifications as established by the
City.
B. Curb cut locations shall be established with the assistance of the Director of Public
Works to maximize traffic safety.
C. Curb cuts in the Central Business District (C-2 zoning districts) shall require the
approval of the City Council after review and recommendations by the City staff.
D. Curb cut permits along designated State highways shall be processed through the Iowa
Department of Transportation.
3-2-29 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter, or failing or neglecting to
comply with any requirement, shall be deemed guilty of a separate misdemeanor or civil
penalty for each and every day during any part of which such violation or noncompliance
occurs. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter may further be refused any
permits until he shall have complied with the provisions of this Chapter. Any incidence of
violation of this Chapter shall be cause for the City to immediately revoke or suspend an
excavation permit without prejudice to other action on the violation.
Title 3 – Public Ways and Property
Chapter 3 – Parades and Public Assemblies Regulated
SECTIONS:
3-3-1 Parades and Public Assemblies Regulated
3-3-2 Definitions
3-3-3 Permit Required
3-3-4 Permit Application
3-3-5 Standards for Issuance
3-3-6 Hours
3-3-7 Permit Fees and Insurance Requirements
3-3-8 Parade/ Public Assembly Not a Street Obstruction
3-3-9 Control by Police and Firemen
3-3-10 Notice and Appeals
3-3-11 Alternative Permit
3-3-12 Revocation
3-3-1 Parades and Public Assemblies Regulated. No person shall conduct or cause any
parade or public assembly as defined herein on any street or public way except as provided
below.
3-3-2 Definitions.
A. "Parade" means any march or procession of twenty-five (25) persons, animals, vehicles
or things, or a combination thereof, organized for marching or moving on the streets,
sidewalks or other public ways in an organized fashion, or any march or procession of
persons, animals, vehicles or things, or a combination thereof, represented or
advertised to the public as a parade.
B. “Public Assembly” means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of
more than twenty five (25) persons on the public right-of-way or one hundred (100)
persons in a park for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes
with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the public rightof-
way or in a park or occupies any area in the public right-of-way or in a park.
3-3-3 Permit Required. No parade or public assembly shall be conducted without first
obtaining a written permit from the City Administrator.
3-3-4 Permit Application.
A. A person seeking a parade or assembly permit shall file an application under oath with
the City Clerk's office on a form provided by the City Clerk.
B. Single, Non-Recurring Parades: For single, nonrecurring parades or assemblies, an
application for a permit shall be filed at least three days and not more than one year
before the parade or assembly is proposed to commence. For good cause shown, the
City Administrator may waive the three days limit. Good cause shall be shown when
the application can be processed in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter in
sufficient time to allow the parade or assembly to proceed as scheduled and without
hazard to the public safety given due consideration of the date, time, place, anticipated
number of participants, and the city services required in connection with the parade or
assembly.
C. Recurring Parades: For parades or assemblies held on a regular or recurring basis on
a substantially similar route or location, an application for a permit shall be filed at
least 60 days and not more than one year before the parade is proposed to commence.
For good cause shown, the City Administrator may waive the 60 days limit. Good cause
shall be shown when the application can be processed in compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter in sufficient time to allow the parade or assembly to proceed
as scheduled and without hazard to the public safety given due consideration of the
date, time, place, anticipated number of participants, and the city services required in
connection with the parade or assembly.
D. Application Contents:
1. The date and time for the parade or assembly;
2. The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble;
3. The name, address and telephone number of applicant;
4. The route of the parade or location of assembly; and
5. The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles in the parade or
assembly.
3-3-5 Standards for Issuance. The City shall issue the applicant a permit unless:
A. The City Administrator determines that the time, route or size of the parade or
assembly will disrupt the use of any street or sidewalk which is ordinarily subject to
significant congestion or traffic;
B. Another parade or assembly permit has already been issued for that day;
C. Another parade or assembly permit application for the same time but not location is
already granted or has been received and will be granted, and the police resources
required for that prior parade or assembly are so great that in combination with the
subsequent proposed application, the resulting deployment of police services would
have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and
property;
D. The concentration of persons, animals and/or vehicles caused by the parade or
assembly will interfere unduly with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance
service to areas contiguous to the parade or assembly or other areas of the city;
E. The proposed parade or assembly will interfere with previously scheduled maintenance
or repair work to be carried out on the streets or public ways to be used;
F. Another event is scheduled elsewhere in the city where the police resources required
for that event are so great that the deployment of police services for the proposed
parade or assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and
safety of persons and property;
G. The proposed parade or assembly violates any other governing law or ordinance.
3-3-6 Hours. No permit shall be granted for a parade through a residential district, except
during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
3-3-7 Permit Fees and Insurance Requirements. Fees and insurance requirements for the
parade or assembly permit shall be in the amount established by Council and set out in the
Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances. The
fees under this Section shall not apply to parades or assemblies conducted for the primary
purpose of public issue speech protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
3-3-8 Parade/Public Assembly Not A Street Obstruction. Any parade or public assembly
for which a permit shall have been issued as herein required and the persons lawfully
participating therein shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the
provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
3-3-9 Control by Police and Firemen. Persons participating in any parade or public
assembly shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance of
their duties of the members of the police and fire departments.
3-3-10 Notice and Appeals.
A. The City Administrator will either issue the parade or assembly permit or deny it within
30 days after the application is filed. In the case of applications filed less than 30 days
prior to the proposed parade or assembly the City Administrator will act on the
application as soon as reasonably practicable but not less than 48 hours prior to the
proposed start time of the parade or assembly unless extenuating circumstances
prevent notice to be made in that time frame. If denied the notice shall state the
reasons for denial. The notice of issuance or denial shall be served by personal
delivery, regular or certified mail or in any other fashion reasonably calculated to
provide notice to the applicants.
B. The decision of the City Administrator may be appealed to the City Council by making a
request to the City Clerk in writing that the issue of the parade permit’s issuance or
denial be placed upon the next council meeting agenda. If the Council is not scheduled
to meet prior to the proposed parade, then a special council meeting may be called to
hear the appeal.
C. The decision of the City Council shall be based upon the standards contained in Section
3-3-5 and shall be a final determination subject to review in District Court of Muscatine
County as may be provided by law. Any party aggrieved by the decision may seek
review thereof but in no event later than 30 days after the date of the final
determination.
3-3-11 Alternative Permit. The City Administrator, in denying an application for a parade
permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade at a date, time, location, or route different
from that named by the applicant in consideration of the standards in Section 3-3-5. An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the
action of the City Administrator, file a written notice of acceptance with the City Administrator.
An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of,
a parade permit issued under this Chapter.
3-3-12 Revocation.
A. The City Administrator or designee, or the City Council, if issued following an appeal,
may revoke a parade/public assembly permit if:
1. It is determined that the permittee has misstated any material fact in the
application;
2. There is a substantial and material variance between the information in the
application and the actual facts or those facts which appear reasonably to have
occurred;
3. When it is determined by the chief of police or the fire chief that, by reason of
disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the public safety requires such
revocation;
4. The permittee's insurance, if any was required, has been canceled; or
5. The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit or
local, state, or federal law.
A permit holder may appeal the revocation in the same manner as appealing the issuance or
denial of a permit.
Title 3 – Public Ways and Property
Chapter 4 – Public Demonstrations
SECTIONS:
3-4-1 Definitions
3-4-2 Use of Sidewalks for Picketing
3-4-3 Interference with Business or Public Facility
3-4-4 Focused Residential Picketing Prohibited
3-4-6 Duty to Disperse as Directed by Police
3-4-7 Criminal Trespass for Obstruction of Public Ways, Buildings or Property
3-4-1 Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
A. Picketer: A person who engages in picketing with or without signs or placards.
B. Picketing: The practice of standing, marching, congregating, protesting, demonstrating,
or patrolling by one or more persons for the purpose of persuading, discussing,
educating, advocating, or informing another person or persons or for the purpose of
protesting some action, attitude, policy, or belief. It does not include social, random, or
other everyday communication.
C. Private Residence: A single-family, duplex, or multi-family dwelling.
D. Public Way: Any public street, alley, roadway, walkway, right-of-way, or any other
public way or property designed for vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian travel or
congregation, and dedicated to public use.
3-4-2 Picketing on Streets Prohibited Except by Permit. No picketing shall be conducted
on that portion of the streets used primarily for vehicular traffic, except as authorized by a
permit issued under Chapter 3 of this Title.
3-4-3 Interference with Business or Public Facility. Picketers shall not block or obstruct
free passage of any pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or interfere with ingress or egress to any
business or public facility.
3-4-4 Focused Residential Picketing Prohibited.
A. No person or persons shall engage in picketing before or about a residence or dwelling
where the picket focuses solely on the residence or dwelling of a particular, identifiable
individual.
B. Nothing herein shall prohibit: 1) the residential picketing of a residence which is used
as the occupant's sole place of business; 2) the residential picketing of a private
residence used as a public meeting place; 3) a person or group of persons from
marching without stopping at a particular private residence; or 4) a person or group of
persons from marching on a defined route without stopping at any particular private
residence.
C. Before a person may be cited for violation of this provision, the person must have been
ordered to move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation by either a police officer
or a person with authority to control the use of the private residence which is the focus
or target of the residential picketing.
3-4-5 Duty to Disperse as Directed by Police.
A. Police officers are authorized to disperse persons who are picketing whenever such
picketing is in violation of this Title or poses a threat to public health, safety or the
orderly flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to disperse or move on when so directed
by a police officer, as herein provided.
3-4-6 Criminal Trespass for Obstruction of Public Ways, Buildings or Property.
Whenever the free passage of any street, sidewalk, public way, public building or property in
the City of Muscatine is obstructed by picketers and such obstruction continues after a police
officer has requested dispersal and removal, such obstruction shall constitute the public
offense of criminal trespass.
(Code of Iowa, Section 716.7)
Title 3 – Public Ways and Property
Chapter 5 – Public Parks
SECTIONS:
3-5-1 Scope
3-5-2 Enforcement
3-5-3 Hours of Operation
3-5-4 Regulate Activities
3-5-5 Amusements
3-5-6 Assemblies
3-5-7 Permits
3-5-8 Traffic
3-5-9 Animals
3-5-10 Other Regulations
3-5-1 Scope. This Chapter applies to all City parks, greenbelts, and recreational facilities for
efficient regulation of conduct in City parks. For the purpose of this Chapter, "Park" includes,
but is not limited to, all public parks, trails, greenbelts, and recreational facilities owned by the
City of Muscatine, except that the riverfront from Mad Creek to Orange Street extended and
from Cedar Street extended to Linn Street extended between Mississippi Drive and the
Mississippi River and the roadway known and identified as O’Brien Parkway between Orange
and Cedar Streets extended is hereby designated as Riverfront Recreation and Tourism Area.
The riverfront from Orange Street extended to Cedar Street extended between the
southeasterly edge of the roadway known and identified as O’Brien Parkway and the
Mississippi River is designated as Riverside Park.
3-5-2 Enforcement. The Police Department shall assist the Parks and Recreation Department
in enforcing all ordinances and regulations relating to all parks and recreational facilities under
the City's jurisdiction.
3-5-3 Hours of Operation. The parks, exclusive of the Aquatic Center, and that portion of
the Riverfront Recreation and Tourism Area between Mad Creek and Cedar Street extended
shall be open daily to the public between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. of any one day. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in said parks and
that portion of the Riverfront Recreation and Tourism Area herein designated during any hours
in which the parks are not open to the public, except with permission of the Parks and
Recreation Department. The Council may by resolution change the hours indicated above.
3-5-4 Regulate Activities. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in
such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the
comfort and convenience of all.
3-5-5 Amusements. No amusement or other events for gain or for which a charge is made
shall be conducted in a park without obtaining a permit in accordance with City policy.
3-5-6 Assemblies. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or organize any
assembly or group of people or make any speeches, or conduct any musical program or
festival, in any park unless a permit has been obtained in accordance with City policy.
3-5-7 Permits. Applications for park permits shall be filed with the Parks and Recreation
Department on the form provided. The City of Muscatine may require the posting of a bond
by the permittee in such amount as is necessary to protect the City of Muscatine against
loss of and damage to public property and to indemnify against public liability. The permit
fee and bond amounts, if any, required by this Section shall be set by resolution of the City
Council and listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements contained in
Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
3-5-8 Traffic. No person in a park shall:
A. Ride or drive an automobile, motorcycle, moped, mini-bike, go-cart, snowmobile, or
other vehicle, except upon the established roads and ways.
B. Exceed a speed limit of fifteen (15) miles per hour at any time or such lower speed
limits as posted in designated areas of the parks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
C. Fail to obey all posted traffic signs.
D. Leave a motor vehicle unattended in any park after closing. Any motor vehicle left
unattended in any park after closing shall be deemed abandoned and the City of
Muscatine shall cause the same to be towed from the Park and the same shall not be
redeemed by the owner or the person responsible therefore until reasonable towing
and storage charges are paid.
E. Parking of trucks that are wider than eighty inches (80"), self-propelled motor
homes, buses, mobile homes, or any motor vehicle with trailer attached are
prohibited in Weed Park from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Friday to eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. on Sunday.
F. Operate or park semi-tractors and/or semi-trailers at any time, except when
engaged in delivery, pick-up, loading, or unloading equipment and goods as
approved by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
3-5-9 Animals. It shall be unlawful to:
A. Kill, trap, tease, annoy, disturb, or interfere with any animal, bird or other fowl, or
fish kept in any Park except as permitted by the City of Muscatine.
B. Disturb the nest of any bird or any other fowl.
C. Bring any dangerous animal into any Park.
D. Permit any dog to be in a park unless such dog is on a leash not more than six feet
(6') long, except for in areas designated for off leash use by; and in accordance with
all regulations adopted by; the Parks and Recreation Department.
E. Permit a horse to be in a park, except in designated areas.
F. Any unattended animal, or animal not in the designated areas, shall be impounded
and its owner may redeem the same upon paying the reasonable costs of such
impoundment.
3-5-10 Other Regulations. It shall be unlawful to:
A. Operate radio controlled equipment in the Parks, except as authorized by the Parks
and Recreation Department.
B. Move benches, seats, and tables from their places, except on picnic grounds within
designated areas.
C. Loiter in any Park workshop or interfere with any Park employee performing his or
her duties.
D. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace, or remove any
building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving material, waterline
or other public utility or part thereof, sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or
permanent, monument, stake, post, or other boundary marker, or other structure or
equipment, facility, park property, or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or
personal.
E. Throw discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any
fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park, any
substance, matter of thing, liquid, or solid which will or may result in the pollution of
said waters.
F. Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash
shall be left anywhere on the grounds, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles
where these are provided; where receptacles are not provided, such rubbish or waste
shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
G. Pick or cut, break, or in any way injure or deface any tree, shrub, or plant; remove
any wildflower, flower, tree, shrub, plant, or any soil or material of any kind; dig in
or otherwise disturb grass areas; or in any other way injure or impair the natural
beauty or usefulness of any park area.
H. Light or make use of any fire in the parks, except such portions thereof as may be
designated by the Parks and Recreation Department for such purpose.
I. Post, paste, fasten, paint, or affix any placard, bill, notice, or sign upon any
structure, tree, stone, fence, or enclosure, unless approved by the Parks and
Recreation Department and provided such is not in violation of the City's sign
ordinance.
J. Distribute, cast, throw, or place any handbill, pamphlet, circular, advertisement, or
notice of any kind for commercial purposes without approval.
K. Sell or offer for sale any article or service without a permit as required by the City of
Muscatine.
L. Beg or solicit alms.
M. Carry any firearms, air or pellet guns, bows and arrows, rockets, weapons,
firecrackers, fireworks, or other explosives, except as permitted by the City of
Muscatine.
N. Carry, possess, drink alcoholic beverages, including beer, except at the Municipal
Golf Course and special events at the riverfront from Mad Creek to Broadway Street
extended between Mississippi Drive and the Mississippi River, when a permit has
been issued by the City Council pursuant to Title 5, Chapter 1 of the City Code.
O. Possess, use, or transfer any controlled substance.
P. Disturb the peace.
Q. Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
R. Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except
in such waters and at such places as are provided therefore and in compliance with
such regulations as are permitted by the City of Muscatine.
S. Fish in the lagoon, unless such person is age fourteen (14) or under.
Title 3 - Public Ways and Property
Chapter 6 - City Cemeteries
SECTIONS:
3-6-1 Scope
3-6-2 Trusteeship
3-6-3 Records
3-6-4 Sale of Interment Rights
3-6-5 Rules and Regulations
3-6-6 Perpetual Care
3-6-1 Scope. This Chapter applies to all City owned Cemeteries to provide for the efficient
regulations and operations of the City Cemeteries.
3-6-2 Trusteeship. Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City Council
hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual
maintenance of the cemetery property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.502)
3-6-3 Records. It is the duty of the Clerk to make and keep complete records identifying
the owners of all interment rights sold by the cemetery and historical information regarding
any transfers of ownership. The records shall include all of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.311)
A. Sales or Transfers of Interment Rights.
1. The name and last known address of each owner or previous owner of interment
rights.
2. The date of each purchase or transfer of interment rights.
3. A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the location of each
interment space sold by the cemetery.
B. Interments.
1. The date the remains are interred.
2. The name, date of birth and date of death of the decedent interred, if those facts
can be conveniently obtained.
3. A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the location of each
interment space where the remains are interred.
3-6-4 Sale of Interment Rights. The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery
shall be evidenced by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the
conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price. The
agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information required by Chapter 523I of the
Code of Iowa. The payment of all fees and charges shall be made at the City Cemetery’s
office where receipts will be issued for all amounts paid. Said fees and charges shall be
based upon the charges as established by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.310)
3-6-5 Rules and Regulations. The rules and regulations for the cemetery shall be
adopted, and may be amended from time to time, by resolution of the Council and shall
cover the hours of opening and closing, the use of roads within the cemetery, the hours for
burials, the decorating of graves, the fees for services rendered in connection with
interments or the placing of markers and the cost of lots or payments for perpetual care as
deemed necessary. The rules shall specify the cemetery’s obligations in the event that
interment spaces, memorials or memorializations are damaged or defaced by acts of
vandalism.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.304)
3-6-6 Perpetual Care. The Council shall accept, receive and expend all moneys and
property donated or left to them by bequest for perpetual care, and that portion of
interment space sales or permanent charges made against interment spaces which has been
set aside in a perpetual care fund. The assets of the perpetual care fund shall be invested in
accordance with State law. The Council shall provide for the payment of interest annually to
the appropriate fund to be used in caring for or maintaining the individual property of the
donor in the cemetery, or interment spaces which have been sold with provisions for
perpetual care, all in accordance with the terms of the donation or bequest, or the terms of
the sale or purchase of an interment space and Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.503, 523I.507 & 523I.508)
Title 3- Public Ways and Property
Chapter 7- Railroads
SECTIONS:
3-7-1 Definitions
3-7-2 Warning Signals
3-7-3 Obstructing Streets
3-7-4 Crossing Maintenance
3-7-1 Definitions. For use in this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
A. “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other association which
owns, operates, drives, or controls a railroad train.
B. “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars coupled thereto,
operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
3-7-2 Warning Signals. Operators shall sound a horn at least 1,000 feet before a street
crossing is reached and after sounding the horn, shall ring the bell continuously until the
crossing is passed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.13)
3-7-3 Obstructing Streets. Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to
prevent vehicular use of any highway, street, or alley for a period of time in excess of ten
(10) minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
A. Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of
the movement of trains.
B. Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the track.
C. Disabled. When the train is disabled.
D. Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety regulations
including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed regulations.
E. In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching operations.
F. No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing.
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this Section if the employee’s action was
necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a railroad corporation or its
supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad corporation.
3-7-4 Crossing Maintenance. Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient, and
safe crossings over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
Title 3 - Public Ways and Property
Chapter 8 - Levees
SECTIONS:
3-8-1 Permit Required
3-8-2 Application
3-8-3 Fees
3-8-4 Approval of Use
3-8-5 New Permit
3-8-6 Injuring or Diverting - Damages
3-8-7 Anchoring, Mooring or Tying-up Along Riverbank
3-8-8 Penalty
3-8-1 Permit Required. No person shall build upon, alter, deface, destroy, move, injure,
or obstruct by fastening vessels thereto or otherwise or in any manner whatsoever use or
occupy the Mississippi or Mad Creek levees lying within the city limits, without having first
received a permit from the City in accordance with the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements contained in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
3-8-2 Application. Application for a permit to use or occupy the Mississippi or Mad Creek
levees shall be in writing and shall describe in detail the use to which the levee is to be put,
type of structure to be placed thereon, and the time the applicant intends to occupy or use
such levee.
3-8-3 Fees. A permit to use or otherwise occupy the Mississippi or Mad Creek levees and
the riverfront may be granted by the City Council to any person upon the payment of such
sum as set by resolution of Council and is listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements contained in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
3-8-4 Approval of Use. A permit to use or occupy the Mississippi or Mad Creek levees
shall only be issued after the City Council has been satisfied that the use of such levee by
the applicant will not in any way impair the levee and will not interfere with the general
public use of the levee.
3-8-5 New Permit. No person who has secured a permit to use or occupy the Mississippi
or Mad Creek levees shall change or alter his occupancy or use of the levee without having
first secured a new permit showing the alteration intended by him, which permit shall be
granted by the City Council after it is satisfied that the use or occupancy of the levee will not
be impaired, upon the payment of such sum as may be deemed proper.
3-8-6 Injuring or Diverting - Damages. Any person who shall willfully break down or
through or injure any levee or bank of a settling basin, or who shall dam up, divert,
obstruct, or willfully injure any ditch, drain, or other drainage improvement authorized by
law shall be liable to the person or persons owning or possessing the lands for which such
improvements were constructed in double the amount of damages sustained by such owner
or person in possession; and in case of a subsequent offense by the same person, he shall
be liable in treble the amount of such damages.
3-8-7 Anchoring, Mooring or Tying-up Along Riverbank. No person shall anchor, moor
or tie-up along the right bank of the Mississippi River between Mad Creek and Pine Street,
both extended to the right edge of the channel of the river, any towboat, barge, excursion
boat, commercial boat, or any other boat or vessel without the permission of the City acting
through the City Administrator or designee of the City Administrator.
3-8-8 Penalty. Any person who violates any Section of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a municipal infraction and subject to a civil penalty as provided in Title 1 Chapter 3 of this
Code of Ordinances.
Title 3 – Public Ways and Property
Chapter 9 – Trees and Shrubs
SECTIONS:
3-9-1 Removal and Trimming of Dangerous Tree; Compliance
3-9-2 Abutting Property Owners
3-9-3 Notice to Trim; Failure to Comply
3-9-4 Trimming by City; Recovery of Cost
3-9-5 Liability Insurance; Tree Removal
3-9-6 Obstructing Streets; Barricades
3-9-7 Removal of Debris
3-9-8 Street Trees (Existing)
3-9-9 Street Trees (New)
3-9-10 New Street Trees (City Program)
3-9-11 Injuring; Defacing; Removing
3-9-12 Reserved
3-9-1 Removal and Trimming of Dangerous Tree; Compliance.
A. If the City deems any shade, ornamental, or other tree situated on private property
in the City to be diseased or dead, it shall cause to be served a notice upon the
owner, in accordance with the most recently enacted Code of Iowa, if known within
the City, or if not, then upon the occupant of the lot, to cut down such tree and
remove the same and all debris therefrom. Said tree and debris shall be hauled to an
area designated or approved by the City and/or the Iowa Department of Water, Air,
and Waste Management.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.12[2][c])
B. If such notice is not complied with within ten (10) days, the City shall cause such
tree to be cut down or removed and the cost of cutting down and removing it shall
be certified to the County Treasurer and be assessed against the real estate in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.12[2][e])
C. All diseased trees shall be sprayed, if required by the City, at the site of their cutting
down or removal before being hauled or transported through the City to an approved
disposal site.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.12[2][c])
D. The General Manager of any utility shall have the authority to trim any tree which
interferes with utility property and equipment, after notification and approval by the
City.
E. The City shall have authority to trim any tree, located on private property, which
interferes with the proper distribution of light from street lights or signs following
notification to the property owner in accordance with Sections 3-9-3 and 3-9-4 of
this Chapter.
3-9-2 Abutting Property Owners. Any person owning any real estate within the City with
trees located upon said real estate or located in the street right-of-way (including parking)
adjacent to said real estate, shall trim such trees in such manner that no overhanging
branches thereof shall in any way obstruct any such street or sidewalk below the height of
ten feet (10') above the surface of the sidewalk and fourteen feet (14') from the surface of
the street.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.12[2][c])
3-9-3 Notice to Trim; Failure to Comply. Any person or owner of property as described
in this Chapter who shall have been served by the City with a notice by Certified Mail, and
shall not comply with the notice within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in the Schedule of Penalties in
Appendix A to this Code of Ordinances.
3-9-4 Trimming by City; Recovery of Cost. When the owner or occupant of real property
in the City having trees upon or in front of the same, the branches of which overhang the
street or any part thereof, and having had notice to trim the same and fails or refuses to
comply therewith for more than ten (10) days after service of notice, then it shall be lawful
for the City to trim such trees to the height provided in Section 3-9-2 of this Chapter and
certify the cost of the same to the County Treasurer to be assessed against the real estate
in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.12[2][e])
3-9-5 Liability Insurance; Tree Removal. All persons and/or corporations engaged in
removal of trees within the City right-of-way shall obtain a license therefor. The licensee
must pay the fee and present a copy of an insurance policy for liability insurance in the
amounts set by resolution of the City Council and listed in the Schedule of Permit and
Licensing Requirements contained in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
3-9-6 Obstructing Streets; Barricades.
A. Before any street or thoroughfare can be shut off or blocked in any way for tree
removal, permission must be granted by the City.
B. Streets when barricaded or shut off must be barricaded by proper barricades
appropriately marked and readily seen by all.
C. All persons, and/or corporations barricading any street or thoroughfare for the
purpose of trimming or removing any tree shall first notify the City of Muscatine
Police and Fire Departments stating the location and time period that such street or
thoroughfare will be closed.
D. No street or thoroughfare shall be closed for the purpose of removing any tree unless
the required permit is secured as provided in this Chapter.
3-9-7 Removal of Debris. Removal of debris, stumps, logs, etc. shall be made upon or in
trucks and no hauling shall be allowed hanging from outside by booms or dragging from
such vehicle.
3-9-8 Street Trees (Existing).
A. All existing trees located within the public right-of-way as of the effective date of this
Section shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner.
a. Exception. Any street tree which is diseased, dead, or otherwise poses an
immediate threat to the public health and welfare shall be the responsibility of
the City.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.12[2][c])
B. It shall be the duty and right of the adjacent property owner to trim, remove, treat,
or otherwise maintain all existing street trees in a manner that promotes the public
health, safety, and welfare and in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.12[2][c])
C. Any person or corporation removing any existing street tree shall obtain a permit to
do so from the City in accordance with the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements contained in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances for the purpose of
maintaining a citywide inventory. The Tree Removal Permit shall be provided at no
charge to the applicant.
D. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed so as to prevent the immediate
removal and/or trimming by officers of the City of any tree from the streets, when in
the judgment of the City, such removal or trimming is necessary for the purpose of
making street improvements or to eliminate obstructions of public signs which, by
design, promote safety of persons or property.
3-9-9 Street Trees (New).
A. As of the effective date of this Section, all proposals to plant trees in the public rightof-
way shall require a permit from the City in accordance the Schedule of Permit and
Licensing Requirements contained in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
B. The permit application provided by the City shall state the applicant's name, address,
type of tree to be planted, exact location, and any additional information that may be
needed by the City to determine whether the application should or should not be
approved.
C. The application shall be recommended for approval or disapproval by the City prior to
issuance. Failure to secure a positive recommendation by the City shall constitute a
denial of the application.
D. Permit Requirements:
1. The permit shall state that the applicant agrees to plant the street tree(s) in
accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
2. The permit shall state that the applicant will plant a specific type of tree which
shall be an approved species for street trees; a list of which shall be provided to
the applicant upon request.
3. The permit shall state that once the street tree is planted, it becomes the
property of the City of Muscatine and the applicant agrees to relinquish all
interest in said tree. The permit shall state that the owner agrees to donate the
tree to the City, at the applicant's expense, and that the applicant agrees to
adhere to the provisions of Title 3, Chapter 9, Section 8 of this Code.
4. The permit shall include a provision which indemnifies the City from any and all
claims for damage to private and public property as a result of the permit to plant
a street tree.
3-9-10 New Street Trees (City Program).
A. The City may, at its discretion and with the approval of the City Council, initiate a
program for the purpose of planting, maintaining, trimming, and removal of new
street trees.
B. It shall be the policy of the City to notify abutting property owners before planting
any street tree in front of any residential structure in the City.
C. The owner of the abutting property shall be required to sign a permit in accordance
with Chapter 9, except the tree will be planted by the City at no expense to the
abutting residential property owner.
3-9-11 Injuring; Defacing; Removing. Any person who shall willfully, maliciously, or
negligently, in any manner, injure, deface, remove, or destroy any street tree or boxing
placed around the same, or any shrub upon any public grounds and right of ways shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall reimburse the City for any costs incurred by
such action if directed to do so by the Iowa District Court for Muscatine County.
TITLE 4
REVENUE AND TAXATION
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Hotel-Motel Tax 1
Value Added Exemption; Industrial Property 2
Urban Renewal Tax Increment Areas 3
Urban Revitalization Areas 4
Muscatine Riverview Reinvestment District 5
Title 4 - Revenue and Taxation
Chapter 1 – Hotel-Motel Tax
SECTIONS:
4-1-1 Definitions
4-1-2 Imposition of Tax
4-1-3 Exemptions
4-1-1 Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires:
A. “Lodging” means rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in a hotel, motel,
inn, public lodging house, rooming house, or manufactured or mobile home
which is tangible personal property, or in a tourist court, or in any place where
sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether
with or without meals. Lodging does not include rooms that are not used for
sleeping accommodations.
B. “Renting” or “rent” means a transfer of possession or control of lodging for a
fixed or indeterminate term for consideration and includes any kind of direct
or indirect charge for such lodging or its use.
C. “Sales price” means the consideration for renting of lodging.
(Code of Iowa, Section 423A.2)
4-1-2 Imposition of Tax. There is hereby imposed a hotel and motel tax of seven
percent (7%) upon sales price from the renting of lodging.
(Code of Iowa, Section 423A.4)
4-1-3 Exemptions. There are exempted from the provisions of this Chapter and from
the computation of any amount of tax imposed by Section 4-1-2 the following:
A. The sales price from the renting of lodging which is rented by the same person
for a period of more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days.
B. The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a religious institution if the
property is exempt under Section 427.1, Subsection 8, and the purpose of
renting is to provide a place for a religious retreat or function and not a place
for transient guests generally.
(Code of Iowa, Section 423A.5)
Title 4 - Revenue and Taxation
Chapter 2 - Value Added Exemption; Industrial Property
SECTIONS:
4-2-1 Partial Exemption
4-2-2 Definitions
4-2-3 Amount Eligible for Partial Exemption
4-2-4 Duration of Partial Exemption
4-2-5 Assessment Restriction
4-2-6 Application
4-2-7 Repeal
4-2-8 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
4-2-1 Partial Exemption. This article does hereby provide for a partial exemption
pursuant to Chapter 427B of the Code of Iowa from property taxation of the actual
value added to the industrial real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.1[1])
4-2-2 Definitions:
A. New Construction. New construction as referred to herein means new buildings
and structures and includes new buildings and structures which are constructed
as additions to existing buildings and structures.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.1[1])
B. Reconstruction. New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing
building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an
existing building or structure, unless the reconstruction of an existing building
or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction
is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing
and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the
owner of the building or structure to continue to competitively manufacture or
process those products which determination shall receive prior approval from
the City Council of the City upon the recommendation of the Iowa Development
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.1[1])
C. Actual Value Added. Actual Value Added, as used in this Chapter, means the
actual value added as of the first year for which the exemption is received,
except that actual value added by improvements to machinery and equipment
means the actual value as determined by the assessor as of January 1 of each
year for which the exemption is received.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.3[1])
4-2-3 Amount Eligible for Partial Exemption. The amount of actual value added
which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
A. For the first year, seventy-five percent.
B. For the second year, sixty percent.
C. For the third year, forty-five percent.
D. For the fourth year, thirty percent.
E. For the fifth year, fifteen percent.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.3[3a])
4-2-4 Duration of Partial Exemption. The actual value added to industrial real
estate for the reasons specified in Section 427B.1 is eligible to receive a partial
exemption from taxation for a period of five years. However, if property ceases to be
classified as industrial real estate or ceases to be used as a warehouse or distribution
center, the partial exemption for the value added shall not be allowed for subsequent
assessment years.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.3[2])
4-2-5 Assessment Restriction: The granting of the exemption under this Section
for new construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or
structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being
reduced below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the
new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.3[4])
4-2-6 Application. An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual
value added for which an exemption is claimed. The application for exemption shall be
filed by the owner of the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the
assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation. Applications
for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the director of revenue and shall
contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other
information deemed necessary by the director of revenue.
A person may submit a proposal to the City Council of the City to receive prior approval
for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. The City Council, by ordinance,
may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new
construction is in conformance with the zoning plans for the City. The prior approval
shall also be subject to the hearing requirements of Section 427B.1.
Prior approval does not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new
construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate. However, if the
tax exemption for new construction is not approved, the person may submit an
amended proposal to the City Council to approve or reject.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.4)
4-2-7 Repeal. When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption
granted in this Article ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may repeal
this Ordinance, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.5)
4-2-8 Dual Exemptions Prohibited. A property tax exemption under this Chapter
shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received
any other property tax exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Section 427B.6)
Title 4 – REVENUE AND TAXATION
Chapter 3 – Urban Renewal Tax Increment Areas
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal,
have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Tax Increment Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
Ord. 85596 August 29, 1994 Downtown and
Industrial Connector
Urban Renewal Area
Ord. 86359-1196 as
amended by Ord. 94493-
0111 and Ord. 92035-
0512
November 7, 1996;
January 6, 2011; May
17, 2012
Highway 38 Northeast
Urban Renewal Area
Ord. 88960-0104 January 15, 2004 Northeast Urban
Renewal Area (Cedar
Development)
Ord. 88962-1206 December 7, 2006 Muscatine Mall Urban
Renewal Area
Ord. 91144-0310 March 4, 2010 2010 Industrial Urban
Renewal Area
Ord. 91998-0412 April 19, 2012 2012 Addition to Urban
Renewal Area
(Fridley’s)
Title 4 – Revenue and Taxation
Chapter 4 – Urban Revitalization Areas
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal,
have been adopted establishing Urban Revitalization Areas in the City and remain in
full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
Ord. 88554-1102 November 21, 2002 Downtown Area
Ord. 92403-0513 May 16, 2013 2013 Muscatine
Housing Urban
Revitalization Area
Ord. 93672-1216 December 1, 2016 Muscatine Grandview
Avenue Urban
Revitalization Area
Ord. 93673-1216 December 1, 2016 Muscatine Park Avenue
Urban Revitalization
Area
Title 4 - Revenue and Taxation
Chapter 5 – Muscatine Riverview Reinvestment District
SECTIONS:
4-5-1 Establishment of Muscatine Riverview Reinvestment District
4-5-2 Commencement Date
4-5-3 Manner of Financing Projects
4-5-4 Repealer
4-5-5 Saving Clause
4-5-1 Establishment of Muscatine Riverview Reinvestment District. In
accordance with the Iowa Reinvestment Act and in consideration of the recitations
set out in the preamble hereof, the Property is hereby established as a reinvestment
district under the Iowa Reinvestment Act, which shall be known as the Muscatine
Riverview Reinvestment District.
4-5-2 Commencement Date. The Commencement Date of the Reinvestment
District as established by the Board of IEDA shall be July 1, 2017.
4-5-3 Manner of Financing Projects. It is the intention of the City to finance the
Project with (1) funds received from private investors (55%); (2) tax increment
financing (15%); (3) loans from private lenders (5.66%); and from the proceeds (the
“Reinvestment District Proceeds”) received from the State of Iowa in connection with
the establishment of the Reinvestment District (24.34%).
The Reinvestment District Proceeds will be used to pay the debt service requirements
of credit facilities issued by the City to pay the costs of the Parking Ramp and Sky
Bridges Project and the acquisition of furniture, fixtures and equipment for the Project.
It is anticipated that the Funding Uses and Funding Source for the Project are as
follows:
Funding Uses Fund Sources
Site Preparation Loans ($350,000)
Building
Acquisition
Loans
($1,250,000)
Building
Construction
(hotel)
Investors
($21,501,811)
Building
Remodeling
(conference
center)
Investors
($5,214,056)
Parking Ramp Loans
($5,573,225)
Fixtures (FF&E) Loans
($1,809,891)
Sky Bridges Loans ($2,387,000
All Design and
Engineering
Services
Loans
($3,000,0000
The City has entered into a Development Agreement with Riverview Hotel
Development (the “Company”) pursuant to which the Company has agreed to
construct a hotel and conference center in the Reinvestment District and the City has
agreed to make twenty (20) annual economic development tax increment payments
(the “Payments”) to the Company in the maximum amount of $6,000,000. The
Payments are subject to annual appropriation by the City Council.
4-5-4 Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
4-5-5 Saving Clause. If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of
the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid
or unconstitutional.
Title 5- Business Regulations
Chapter 1- Business Licenses Generally
SECTIONS:
5-1-1 License Required
5-1-2 Application Fees, Bonds, and Insurance Requirements
5-1-3 Application for License
5-1-4 Issuance of License
5-1-5 Record of Licenses
5-1-6 Transferability; Changes In Location
5-1-7 License Suspension or Revocation
5-1-8 Hearing
5-1-1 License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any
business for which a license or permit is required by this Chapter or any other
provision of this Code without first procuring a license or permit therefor.
5-1-2: Application Fees, Bonds, and Insurance Requirements. No license or
permit shall be issued to any person under this Code until such person has paid to the
City Clerk or other officer specified in this Code the fee required, and until such person
shall have filed with the City Clerk the bond therefor and evidence of insurance, if any
be required. The fee, bond, and insurance requirements for the issuance of a license
or permit issued shall be set by resolution of the City Council and are listed in the
Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of
Ordinances.
5-1-3 Application for License. All persons who are required under any ordinance
of the City to procure a license for the purpose of engaging in any business shall
first make application to the City Clerk on the forms required by the City Clerk for
such license, except as otherwise provided.
5-1-4 Issuance of License. Except where some other method is prescribed by law
or ordinance, all licenses required for engaging in a business shall be issued by the
City Clerk in the exercise of the City Clerk’s discretion; provided, however, that the
Clerk may refuse a license in any case where the applicant is not of good moral
character, free from disease, or trustworthy in such applicant's business dealings or
for any other reason that satisfies the Clerk that the interests of the public would
be best protected by withholding a license from the applicant.
5-1-5 Record of Licenses. All licenses required shall be signed by and filed with
the City Clerk.
5-1-6 Transferability; Changes In Location. Licenses issued under this Title or
other ordinances for engaging in a business shall not be transferable and shall cease
whenever the licensee ceases to operate thereunder. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent a licensee from operating under such licensee's license, at a place other
than that described in the license, provided information regarding such change in
location is furnished to the City Clerk.
5-1-7 License Suspension or Revocation.
A. Authority to Suspend or Revoke: The City Clerk may, upon good cause,
suspend or revoke for a period not to exceed one year any license issued
under this Chapter.
B. License Issuance Prohibited During Period of Suspension or
Revocation: No new license shall be issued to any applicant, the spouse or
relative within the first degree of consanguinity as defined by the Iowa Code
of any licensee so suspended or revoked during said period of suspension or
revocation.
C. Issuance of Notice of License Suspension or Revocation: The City Clerk
shall cause to be issued a notice that said license is suspended or revoked
and therein set forth the reason(s) therefor. Said notice shall be sent by first
class United States mail to the registered business address on file with the
City Clerk.
5-1-8 Hearing. Unless otherwise provided, any person aggrieved by the action of
any city official or the City Clerk in denying or revoking a license shall have the right
to a hearing before the City Council on any such action, provided a written request
therefor is filed with the City Clerk within 10 days after receipt of the notice of such
denial, suspension, or revocation. The City Council may grant the license or confirm
any suspension or revocation of the license, or reinstate the license. The action
taken by the City Council after a hearing shall be final.
Title 5-Business Regulations
Chapter 2- Alcohol Control
SECTIONS:
ARTICLE A: LIQUOR, WINE, AND BEER PERMITS AND LICENSES
5-2-1 Application, License, and Permit Requirement
5-2-2 General Prohibition
5-2-3 Investigation
5-2-4 Action by Council
5-2-5 Prohibited Sales and Acts of License or Permit Holder
ARTICLE B: PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY
5-2-6 Amateur Fighting and Boxing
5-2-7 Consumption in Public Places; Possession of Open Containers; Intoxication
5-2-8 Persons Under Legal Age
5-2-9 Persons Under the Legal Age in Licensed or Permitted Establishments
5-2-10 Dancing Permitted; License
5-2-11 Removal from Licensed or Permitted Premises Prohibited
ARTICLE C: PENALTIES
5-2-12 Penalties
ARTICLE A: LIQUOR, WINE, AND BEER PERMITS AND LICENSES
5-2-1 Application, License, and Permit Requirement. No person shall
manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or
beer without first applying for and securing a liquor control license, wine permit, or
beer permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.31, 123.32, 123.122 & 123.171)
5-2-2 General Prohibition. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep
for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of
Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be
imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
5-2-3 Investigation. Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer
permit, the Clerk shall forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an
investigation as to the truth of the facts averred in the application. The Fire Chief and
Community Development Director shall also inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an application
for a license or permit for any premises which does not conform to the applicable law
and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
5-2-4 Action by Council. The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance
of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval
or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and
bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State
Department of Commerce for such further action as is provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
5-2-5 Prohibited Sales and Acts of License or Permit Holder. A person or club
holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents
or employees shall not do any of the following:
A. Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication,
any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
B. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises covered
by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a
license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine
on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday, and further
provided that a holder of any class of liquor control license or the holder of a
Class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for
consumption on the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and
2:00 a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for
consumption off the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and
2:00 a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New
Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b and 2k] & 123.150)
C. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer to any person on credit, except with a
bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its
members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to retail
sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or events
center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
D. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
E. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or
adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or any other beverage
in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
F. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
G. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered
by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
H. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in any
container except the original package purchased from the Alcoholic Beverages
Division of the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks or
cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
I. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used
originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition
of any substance, the contents, or remaining contents of an original package
of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original package which
has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
J. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees of the
licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic
liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of
such beverages, except as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
K. Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine which is used to vaporize an
alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
L. Permit or allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to enter into or
remain upon a licensed or permitted establishment past 10 p.m., except as
permitted in Section 5-2-9.
M. Allow or permit a public appearance on licensed premises by any person who
is nude or who exposes to public view the human male or female genital or
genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, or perineum of the human male, or female
breasts or breast at or below the aerola thereof with less than a full opaque
covering.
N. Permit signs or other matter advertising any brand of alcoholic liquor, beer, or
wine to be erected or placed upon the outside of any premises occupied by a
licensee or permittee authorized to sell alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine at retail.
This subsection does not prohibit the use of signs or other matter inside a fence
or similar enclosure which wholly or partially surrounds the licensed premises.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
O. Permit or allow any person to carry from a licensed or permitted premises any
open container of beer or alcoholic beverage, including but not limited to
bottles, cans, glasses, mugs, and cups, except when such carryout is related
to and necessary for custodial, maintenance, and other bona fide employment
purposes.
P. Permit or allow an amateur fighting or boxing match to occur on said licensed
or permitted premises. "Amateur fighting and boxing match" means a boxing,
wrestling, mixed martial arts fighting, extreme fighting, ultimate fighting or
shoot fighting match, contest, event or exhibition for which the contestants are
not paid or awarded a prize for their participation.
ARTICLE B: PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY.
5-2-6 AMATEUR FIGHTING AND BOXING.
A. No person shall participate in an amateur fighting or boxing match in an
establishment holding a liquor control license, wine or beer permit, which
authorizes on the premises consumption.
B. No person shall promote, advertise, or organize an amateur fighting or boxing
match in an establishment holding a liquor control license, wine or beer permit,
which authorizes on the premises consumption.
C. "Amateur fighting and boxing match" means a boxing, wrestling, mixed martial
arts fighting, extreme fighting, ultimate fighting or shoot fighting match,
contest, event or exhibition for which the contestants are not paid or awarded
a prize for their participation.
D. Any person who violates this Section shall be deemed guilty of a municipal
infraction and subject to a civil penalty as provided in the Schedule of Penalties
in Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances.
5-2-7 Consumption in Public Places; Possession of Open Containers;
Intoxication. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon
the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in
any public place except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall
not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public school property or
while attending a public or private school-related function. A person shall not be
intoxicated in a public place. A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
A person violating this Subsection is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as
provided in Section 1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances.
Code of Iowa, Section 123.46[2] & [3]
5-2-8 Persons Under Legal Age.
A. A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer
to any person knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that person to be
under legal age.
B. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase,
or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in their possession
or control; except in the case of liquor, wine, or beer given or dispensed to a
person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge,
presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal
purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for
medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may
handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and beer during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under this Chapter.
C. A person who is eighteen, nineteen, or twenty years of age, other than a
licensee or permittee, who violates this Section regarding the purchase of or
attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer, or possessing or having
control of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer, commits a simple misdemeanor
punishable as provided in Iowa Code, Section 123.47.
(Code of Iowa, Section 123.47)
5-2-9 Persons Under the Legal Age in Licensed or Permitted Establishments.
A. Prohibitions.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to enter or remain
upon any premises between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
closing where more than fifty percent (50%) of the business conducted on
such premises is the sale or dispensing of liquor, wine or beer except as set
forth in Subsection B of this Section. The phrase "business conducted on
such premises" shall be defined as the total business revenue generated on
such premises during the previous calendar year.
2. If the establishment otherwise qualifies under the foregoing fifty percent
(50%) criteria and has one or more restaurants in the building, no person
under the legal age shall remain on the premises thirty (30) minutes after
any restaurant on the licensed premises closes.
B. Exceptions. The prohibition of Subsection 1 of this Section shall not apply:
1. To a person under legal age who is an employee of the licensee or
permittee, or performing a contracted service for the licensee or permittee
on the premises.
2. To a person under legal age who is accompanied on the premises at all
times by a parent, guardian or spouse who is not under the age for lawful
purchase and/or possession of alcoholic beverages.
3. To a person under legal age on the premises during a period of time when
the licensee or permittee, in accordance with a written plan given to and
approved by the chief of police, has suspended dispensing alcoholic liquor,
wine or beer on the licensed or permitted premises or in a clearly delineated
area of the licensed or permitted premises. During such period of time, the
licensee or permittee shall not permit any underage person to purchase or
possess alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on the premises. Police officers shall
be admitted to the premises at any time to monitor compliance with all
applicable laws.
C. Persons Under Legal Age. No licensee or permittee or a licensee's or
permittee's agent or employee shall allow any person under the legal age to
enter or remain upon the premises between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and closing where the business conducted includes the sale and dispensing
of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer, except as permitted in Subsections A and B of
this Section. The licensee or permittee of any business that sells alcoholic
liquor, wine or beer for on premises consumption shall be required to post in a
conspicuous place a notice stating:
NOTICE TO PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE FOR BEING ON THESE PREMISES
BETWEEN THE HOURS OF 10:00 P.M. AND CLOSING UNLESS YOU
ARE EMPLOYED BY THE OWNER OR ARE ACCOMPANIED BY A
PARENT, GUARDIAN, OR SPOUSE WHO IS OF LEGAL AGE.
D. Penalties.
1. A person under the legal age who violates the provisions of Subsection A of
this Section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in
Section 1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances.
2. Violation of the provisions of Subsection C of this Section shall be a
municipal infraction and subject to a civil penalty as provided in Title 1
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
5-2-10 Dancing Permitted; License.
A. Dancing Permitted. No dancing shall be permitted in connection with the
operation of a business under any Class “B” beer or wine permit or Class “C”
liquor license unless the floor space used for dancing purposes therein contains
at least two hundred (200) square feet, all of which shall be of the same general
floor level as the place where the wine or beer or liquor is dispensed; said space
to be used for dancing shall be in the same room as, or in a room adjacent to
and opening directly from, the place where beer or liquor is dispensed and with
full view at all times of the major portion thereof from the place where beer or
wine or liquor is being dispensed. Said floor space shall not be obstructed or
crossed in any part or portion by partitions or other obstructions of any kind
except necessary structural posts, pillars, or similar supports and shall be used
only for dancing.
B. Dancing License. No Class “B” beer or wine permit holder or Class “C” liquor
licensee shall permit dancing until a license therefore has been obtained from
the City Clerk’s office. No dancing license shall be issued until a fee has been
paid to the City Clerk’s office in accordance with Title 5, Chapter 1 of the City
Code, and until the premises to be used for dancing has been inspected and
approved by the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Building Inspector. A dancing
license shall not be transferred. However, the City Council may, at its discretion,
summarily revoke any license to dance. Clubs which comply with the
requirements of state law shall not be required to obtain a dancing license.
5-2-11 Removal from Licensed or Permitted Premises Prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to carry from a licensed or permitted premises any open
container of beer or alcoholic beverage, including but not limited to bottles, cans,
glasses, mugs, and cups, except when such carryout is related to and necessary for
custodial, maintenance, and other bona fide employment purposes.
ARTICLE C: PENALTIES
5-2-12 Penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or any provision of Iowa
Code, Section 123.49 shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as
provided in Section 1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Section 123.50)
B. Any violation of Subsection P of Section 5-2-5 shall be subject to a civil penalty
as provided in the Schedule of Penalties in Appendix A to this Code of
Ordinances.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 3 – Cigarette and Tobacco Permits
SECTIONS:
5-3-1 Definitions
5-3-2 Permit Required
5-3-3 Application
5-3-4 Fees
5-3-5 Application; Approval of
5-3-6 Mayor to Sign Permit; Term
5-3-7 Reporting
5-3-8 Refunds
5-3-9 Persons Underage
5-3-10 Permit Revocation
5-3-1 Definitions.
A. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or
any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of
tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated, or mixed with
any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or
any other material. Provided the definition herein shall not be construed to
include cigars.
B. “Person” shall mean and include every individual, firm, association, joint stock
company, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trustee, agency or receiver, or
respective legal representative.
C. “Retailer” shall mean and include every person in this state who shall sell,
distribute, or offer for sale for consumption or possess for the purpose of sale
for consumption, cigarettes irrespective of quantity or amount or the number
of sales.
D. “Tobacco products” means cigars; little cigars as defined in Section 453A.42,
Subsection 5 of the Iowa Code; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated; plug
cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff, snuff flour;
cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos;
shorts; or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco, and
other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable
for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and
smoking; but does not mean cigarettes.
5-3-2 Permit Required.
A. Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a
retail permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or
solicit the sale of any cigarettes within the City without a valid permit for each
place of business. The permit shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the
place of business so as to be easily seen by the public and the persons
authorized to inspect the place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
B. Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
a retailer of tobacco products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a tobacco products retailer for each place of business
owned or operated by the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a tobacco
permit. However, if a retailer only holds a cigarette permit and that permit is
suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall not sell any cigarettes or tobacco
products during such time.
5-3-3 Application. A completed application on forms furnished by the State
Department of Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department
and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk by the deadline
established by the City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
5-3-4 Fees. The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as provided in
Section 453A.13 of the Code of Iowa.
5-3-5 Application; Approval of. At each regular meeting of the Council, the Clerk
shall report to the Council each application for a permit to sell cigarettes and cigarette
papers and wrappers then filed in this office. The Council shall then proceed to the
consideration of such application and if it finds the same proper and sufficient, shall
by motion grant the permit applied for. Thereupon the Clerk shall endorse upon the
application the fact and date of the granting of the permit by the Council.
5-3-6 Mayor to Sign Permit; Term. Whenever the Council shall grant a permit as
authorized in this Chapter, it shall be the duty of the Mayor to sign and issue the same,
but such permit shall by its terms expire June thirtieth (30) following its issuance.
5-3-7 Reporting. Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit, and
any permit issued, to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce
within thirty (30) days of issuance.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
5-3-8 Refunds. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund
from the City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
5-3-9 Persons Underage. No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply any
tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18) years of
age. The provision of this Section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing
cigarettes or tobacco products from a vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a
retailer violates the provisions of this Section, the Council shall, after written notice
and hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the
following:
A. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount
of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered
under this Subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a
period of fourteen (14) days.
B. For a second violation within a period of two (2) years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) or the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty
(30) days. The retailer may select its preference in the penalty to be applied
under this Subsection.
C. For a third violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty
(30) days.
D. For a fourth violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty
(60) days.
E. For a fifth violation with a period of four (4) years, the retailer’s permit shall be
revoked.
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of
the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The
notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at
which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
5-3-10 Permit Revocation. Following a written notice and an opportunity for a
hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued
pursuant to this Chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of
Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not
be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person for the
place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has expired from the
date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council. The
Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the Alcoholic
Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within thirty (30) days of the
revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 4 – Amusements
SECTIONS:
5-4-1 Definitions
5-4-2 License Required
5-4-3 Duration of License
5-4-4 Fire Inspections
5-4-1 Definitions: “Theater” as used in this Section means any place of public
amusement in which plays, moving pictures or other exhibitions are presented, except
that it does not include places in which lectures on scientific, historical, or literary
subjects are given.
5-4-2 License Required. No person shall keep, conduct, carry on, or operate any
roller skating rink, shooting gallery, theatre, arcade, or any machine or apparatus for
amusement or trial of skill or strength, including but not limited to, pin ball machines
and video games, and other electronic mechanical amusement devices not otherwise
provided for in this Section, for a fee, charge, or profit, unless he or she shall first
procure a license and pay a fee therefore in accordance with Title 5, Chapter 1 of the
City Code.
5-4-3 Duration of License. The licenses required under this Chapter shall expire on
the expiration of the day, week, or month for which issued, and in the case of annual
licenses, such license shall expire on the thirty-first (31st) day of December after its
issuance.
5-4-4 Fire and Building Inspections. No license shall be issued for a roller skating
rink (indoor), shooting gallery, theatre, or any other building which requires an
amusement permit before such building has been inspected by the Fire Department
and Building Inspector and has been certified that such building is in compliance with
the fire and building codes.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 5 – Billiards; Bowling
SECTIONS:
5-5-1 License Required
5-5-2 Application
5-5-3 Display of License
5-5-4 Gambling
5-5-5 Exemption
5-5-6 Fire and Building Inspections
5-5-1 License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, without having obtained
a license for that purpose in accordance with Title 5, Chapter 1 of the City Code to
own, operate, or maintain any room in which such person owns, operates, or maintains
any pocket billiard, billiard, or similar table or any bowling alley for hire or profit, or for
the privilege of using which the public or patrons of such room are required to pay,
either directly or indirectly, with money or with any other thing of value. All pocket
billiard, billiard, or similar tables located or kept in any place of amusement or place
of public resort shall be deemed to be so located and kept for the purpose of permitting
persons to play thereon for hire and profit within the meaning of this Chapter.
5-5-2 Application. Every person applying for a license under the terms of this
Chapter shall make and deliver to the Clerk a written application, setting out the place
in which he or she desires to maintain or operate pocket billiard, billiard, or similar
tables or bowling alleys, the number of tables or alleys to be maintained, and who is
the real and true owner of the tables or alleys to be operated.
5-5-3 Display of License. Every person holding a license shall display such license
in a conspicuous place in the room in which the tables or alleys thereby licensed are
maintained and operated.
5-5-4 Gambling. Any person who shall gamble, or permit gambling upon any game
played on any pocket billiard, billiard, or similar table, or bowling alley, except as
provided in Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
the Council, upon hearing, may revoke any license issued under this Chapter to such
person or suspend the same for any period not less than ten (10) days.
5-5-5 Exemption. This Chapter shall not apply to any pocket billiard, billiard, or
similar table or bowling alley privately maintained in a private family or in social,
political, philanthropic, benevolent, educational, or in a secret club or association, when
such club or association maintains or operates such table and alley for the use of its
members exclusively, and when such club or association maintains and operates such
tables and alleys as an incident only to the general purposes of such club or
association, and where such club or association has not been organized for the purpose
of maintaining, operating, or running a pocket billiard, billiard, or bowling club.
5-5-6 Fire and Building Inspections. No license shall be issued for any pocket
billiard, billiard, or similar table or bowling alley, or any other building which requires
a license or permit under this Chapter before such building has been inspected by the
Fire Department and Building Inspector and has been certified that such building is in
compliance with applicable fire and building codes.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 6 – Outdoor Commercial Entertainment Establishment Permit
SECTIONS:
5-6-1 Outdoor Commercial Entertainment Establishment Permit
5-6-2 Hours Restriction
5-6-3 Duration of License
5-6-4 Renewal Application
5-6-1 Outdoor Commercial Entertainment Establishment Permit. No person,
association, firm or corporation shall operate an outdoor commercial entertainment
establishment for profit which engages in the playing or rendition of music or singing
using amplification of sound or amplification of the human voice without first applying
for and acquiring a valid permit issued by the city clerk for such establishment pursuant
to Title 5, Chapter 1.
5-6-2 Hours Restriction. The permit shall allow such operation only between the
hours of 10:00 o'clock a.m. and 1:30 o'clock a.m. on the following morning.
5-6-3 Duration of License. Application for an outdoor commercial entertainment
establishment permit shall be filed with the City Clerk pursuant to Title 5, Chapter 1.
A permit may be applied for and issued through December 31st of the year of issuance.
5-6-4 Renewal Application. An application for a renewal of a permit shall be filed
not later than two weeks prior to the date of expiration of the permit.
Title 5 Business Regulations
Chapter 7-Bill Posting
SECTIONS:
5-7-1 Definitions
5-7-2 Permit Required
5-7-3 Requirements
5-7-4 Merchants Requirements
5-7-5 Billposters, Restrictions
5-7-6 Consent Required
5-7-7 Use of Nails or Tacks
5-7-8 Removal
5-7-1 Definitions. “Bill posters,” within the meaning of this Chapter, includes all
persons who engage in the business or occupation of posting by tacking, posting,
painting or otherwise, or the distribution upon the streets of any advertising matter,
bills, posters, pictures or any other thing, matter or device whatsoever, advertising
the business of any person, whether that of merchant, manufacturer, publisher or
person engaged in any business or industrial pursuit or of any shows, theaters,
circuses or other exhibitions. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to
the painting of store, office or other signs by sign painters or to the posting of legal
notices by public officers or attorneys in the manner and in the places prescribed by
law.
5-7-2 Permit Required. No person shall post or distribute any advertising bills,
posters, or written, printed, or illustrated matter, without having first obtained a permit
therefor from the City in accordance with Title 5 Chapter 1.
5-7-3 Requirements. City of Muscatine resident businessmen may distribute their
own advertising matter without a permit as required in Section 5-7-2, provided that
such distribution shall be made in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or litter
and such advertising or billposting shall not be permitted on public streets or property.
Such businessmen shall conform in all respects with the provisions of this Chapter
except as to the requirement as to the permit.
5-7-4 Merchants Requirements. Merchants may hand bills and advertisements to
persons willing to accept the same, at the entrances, or within their own storerooms,
but shall refrain from scattering the same along the public sidewalks, gutters, streets,
alleys, and property.
5-7-5 Billposters, Restrictions. No licensed billposter or distributor shall scatter any
bills, posters, or written, printed, or illustrated matter or deliver such upon the streets
or alleys of the City, hand the same to persons passing along the streets, or throw the
same into yards of private buildings or the halls of public buildings or elsewhere, except
to persons willing to accept the same.
5-7-6 Consent Required. No person shall post, paste, or attach, or cause to be
posted, pasted, or attached, any bill, placard, poster, announcement, or advertisement
on any house, window, sidewalk, street, building, wall, fence, or tree, or to telephone,
or electric light or power pole or water hydrant without first obtaining the written
consent of the owner or, if City property, of the Council. No such poster or
advertisement shall be attached to any building, structure, tree, or any other object in
conflict with the City's Sign Ordinance.
5-7-7 Use of Nails or Tacks. No person shall use tacks or nails to fasten any such
bill, placard, poster, announcement, or advertisement on any wall or surface along any
street, sidewalk, or alley line where such nails or tacks may loosen and fall or may
reach such street, alley, or sidewalk.
5-7-8 Removal. All bills, placards, posters, announcements, or advertisements as
permitted in this Chapter shall be removed immediately upon the request of the owner
of private property and, if on public property, as directed by the City.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 8 – Circuses; Carnivals
SECTIONS:
5-8-1 Definitions
5-8-2 License Required; Circus
5-8-3 Circus License; Fee
5-8-4 License Required; Carnival
5-8-5 Carnival License; Fee
5-8-6 Right of Entry for Inspection
5-8-7 Public Property
5-8-8 Amusement Rides; State Reports and Permits Required
5-8-1 Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings as used in
this Chapter:
A. "Amusement ride" means any mechanized device or combination of devices
which carries passengers along, around or over a fixed or restricted course for
the purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills or
excitement.
(Code of Iowa, Section 88A.1)
B. "Carnival" means and includes amusement activities; merry-go-rounds, ferris
wheels and similar types of amusement rides; booths for the conduct of games
of skill; food dispensing facilities; and sideshows; which are temporarily
conducted out-of-doors and not within a theater, auditorium, gymnasium or
other permanent building.
C. "Circus" means and includes an event with a variety of shows, including, but
not limited to, animal acts, feats of physical skill and daring and performances
by entertainers such as jugglers or clowns, which is temporarily conducted outof-
doors and not within a theater, auditorium, gymnasium or other permanent
building.
5-8-2 License Required; Circus. No person shall keep, conduct, carry on, or operate
any circus or like exhibition unless he shall first procure a license therefor.
5-8-3 Circus License; Application and Fee. For every circus or like exhibition, there
shall be an application submitted and approved in accordance with Title 5, Chapter 1.
5-8-4 License Required; Carnival. No person shall keep, conduct, carry on, or
operate any carnival, unless he shall first procure a license therefor.
5-8-5 Carnival License; Fee. For every carnival there shall be an application
submitted in accordance with Title 5, Chapter 1.
5-8-6 Right of Entry for Inspection. If the proposed event involves the erection of
a tent for the use of the public, the operator or sponsor of the event shall so state on
the application submitted to the City Clerk on the forms provided, and the applicant
must give consent to members of the Fire, Police, and Health Departments and the
Building Inspector of the City, to enter and inspect the premises and tents, exhibits,
side shows, performances, stands, or racks, without a warrant during business hours
to inspect for violations of Iowa Law and City Ordinances. No such tent may be used
until inspected and approved by inspectors of the department of Community
Development and the Fire Department.
5-8-7 Public Property. No circus or carnival shall be conducted on any public street,
park, or other public property before first having obtained approval of the City Council.
5-8-8 Amusement Rides; State Reports and Permits Required. If the proposed
event involves amusement rides, the operator or sponsor shall attach to the application
copies of current inspection reports or permits as required by Chapter 88A of the Iowa
Code.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 9 – Pawnbrokers
SECTIONS:
5-9-1 License Required
5-9-2 License Fees and Bond Requirements
5-9-3 License; Expiration Date
5-9-4 Transfer of License
5-9-5 Dealing with Minors
5-9-6 Record of Transaction
5-9-7 Police Order to Hold Property
5-9-8 Memorandum Required
5-9-9 Sales by Pawnbrokers
5-9-1 License Required. No person shall carry on business as a pawnbroker, who
shall not have first procured a license therefore in accordance with Title 5, Chapter 1
of the City Code and complied with the requirements of this Chapter.
5-9-2 License Fees and Bond Requirements. The license fee and bond
requirements for the issuance of a license issued under this Chapter shall be set by
resolution of the City Council and are listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements in Appendix B of this Code of Ordinances. Any person aggrieved by the
acts of any pawnbroker may sue upon such bond and recover such damages as he
shows himself entitled to.
5-9-3 License; Expiration Date. The license required by Section 5-9-1 of this Code,
obtained from the City, shall expire on December thirty-first (31st) after its issuance.
5-9-4 Transfer of License. No license as required by Section 5-9-1 of this Code shall
be assignable or transferable.
5-9-5 Dealing with Minors. No pawnbroker shall purchase or receive in pawn any
article or property from a minor without the written consent of his parents or guardian.
5-9-6 Record of Transaction; Duty to Report; Inspection.
A. Record of Transaction. Every pawnbroker, second-hand dealer or junk dealer
shall keep and maintain an accurate account of each and every purchase, pawn,
or exchange. The record of each transaction shall be entered and maintained
using the software required by the Police Department and shall include the date
and time of the transaction, a description of the customer selling, pawning, or
exchanging tangible personal property, which description shall include the
person's name, address, date of birth (month/day/year), sex, social security
number. The record shall also include a complete, detailed, and accurate
description of each article pawned, purchased, or taken in.
B. Transmission. The record of transaction shall be transmitted to the Chief of
Police or his designee by not later than noon of the next day following the
transaction.
C. Inspection of Record. The record of transaction as well as each item of tangible
personal property pawned, pledged, or purchased shall, at all reasonable times,
be open to inspection upon demand by any member of the criminal
investigation department (CID) of the Police Department. Each licensee shall
keep, file and maintain copies of the records of transaction for at least one year
from the date of the transaction.
5-9-7 Police Order to Hold Property. The Police are authorized to seize property,
without warrant, or to require the dealer to hold property which they have probable
cause to believe is stolen property. A receipt will be given to the pawnbroker for all
property seized.
5-9-8 Memorandum Required. Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of each loan or
purchase, deliver to the person pawning any article of goods a memorandum or note
signed by him, containing the substance of the entry required to be made in his
notebook. No charge shall be made for such entry, memorandum, or note.
5-9-9 Sales by Pawnbrokers. No pawnbroker shall sell any pawn or pledge until the
same shall have remained two (2) months in his possession after the payment of the
amount loaned becomes due.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 10 – Peddlers, Solicitor, and Transient Merchants
SECTIONS:
5-10-1 Definitions
5-10-2 License Required
5-10-3 Application for License
5-10-4 License Fees
5-10-5 Bonds Required
5-10-6 Insurance Required
5-10-7 Hardship Exception
5-10-8 License Issued
5-10-9 Display of License
5-10-10 License Not Transferable
5-10-11 Time Restriction
5-10-12 Suspension or Revocation of License
5-10-13 Penalty
5-10-14 Rebates
5-10-15 License Exemptions
5-10-16 Prohibited Activities
5-10-1 Definitions. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
A. “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers
for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house
or upon the public street.
B. “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to
house, business to business, or from street to street for the purpose of
obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for: 1) the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery
whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the
subject of such sale; 2) or for services to be performed in the future whether
or not such individual is collecting advance payment on such sales or not; or 3)
a request, whether vocalized or not, for a donation or contribution other than
in response to an inquiry from another person.
C. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out
of a vehicle which is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
5-10-2 License Required. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the
business of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein
provided is in violation of this Chapter.
5-10-3 Application for License. An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk
for a license under this Chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name,
permanent and local address, and business address if any. The application shall also
set forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature of
the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business and the length of time
sought to be covered by the license. An application fee in an amount fixed by resolution
of the Council and set out in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in
Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances shall be paid at the time of filing such application
to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.
5-10-4 License Fees. The fee required for the issuance of a license issued under this
Chapter shall be set by resolution of the City Council and is listed in the Schedule of
Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B of this Code of Ordinances.
5-10-5 Bonds Required. Before a license under this Chapter is issued to a peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant, an applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that
the applicant has obtained a bond as set out in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
5-10-6 Insurance Required.
A. Before a license under this Chapter is issued to a peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant operating on City-owned property, an applicant shall provide to the
Clerk a certificate of insurance naming the City as an additional named insured.
Said certificate of insurance shall be in a minimum amount of $2,000,000
providing coverage against any and all property damage, injuries, including
injury resulting in death, or wrongful fraudulent or illegal conduct by reason of,
or related to, the licensee’s use of public streets, sidewalks, right of ways or
other public places to engage in activity pursuant to this Ordinance. Said
insurance shall be maintained throughout the duration of the license period and
one (1) year thereafter and failure to do so shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
All certificates of insurance issued pursuant to this Chapter shall contain a
clause that 10 days prior written notice of cancellation or change shall be given
to the City Clerk of the City of Muscatine.
B. An applicant shall also submit an executed agreement to indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Muscatine and its officers, employees, agents and assigns
from any and all claims, actions, injuries and damages of every kind and
description which may accrue to or be suffered by any person by reason of or
related to the vending of merchandise by said applicant or the granting of a
license to do so.
C. Failure to comply with the requirements of this Section shall be cause for denial
or revocation of the license.
5-10-7 Hardship Exception. In the event that an applicant is unable to obtain the
insurance or bond required under this Chapter, said applicant may request a waiver of
such requirement by submitting a written request for exception to the Finance Director.
Such request must be made in conjunction with the initial application, or no later than
seven (7) days following a denial, if said denial resulted due to the applicant’s failure
to comply with 5-10-5 or 5-10-6.
The application for hardship exception shall indicate the reasons the applicant is unable
to obtain the bond or insurance, as the case may be, and include with it supporting
documentation.
5-10-8 License Issued. If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance
with the requirements of this Chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct,
and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
5-10-9 Display of License. Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in
possession at all times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of
prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all
requirements of this Chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such
merchant’s license in the merchant’s place of business.
5-10-10 License Not Transferable. Licenses issued under the provisions of this
Chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person
filing the application.
5-10-11 Time Restriction. All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said
licenses are in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
5-10-12 Suspension or Revocation of License.
A. Grounds; Notice:
1. The City Clerk may suspend any license issued under this Chapter, pending
the outcome of an administrative hearing, for any of the following reasons:
a. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in his/her application for
the license or in the conduct of his/her business.
b. The licensee has violated this Chapter or any other Chapter of this Code
or has otherwise conducted his/her business in an unlawful manner.
c. The licensee has conducted his/her business in such manner as to
endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
d. The City Clerk has received and investigated multiple written complaints
during the licensed period from residents of the City who are dissatisfied
with the manner in which the licensee is conducting business.
2. The City Clerk shall immediately serve notice to the licensee with notice
either in person or by regular mail to the licensee's local address of the
license suspension, the specific reason(s) for such action, and date and time
of hearing with the City Clerk to review the particulars of the suspension.
B. Hearing: A hearing shall be conducted by the City Clerk not more than five (5)
business days after he/she has suspended a license. The licensee and any
complainants may be present to determine the truth of the alleged violation of
this Chapter. Should the licensee or his/her authorized representative fail to
appear without good cause, the City Clerk may proceed with the hearing and
make his/her findings to a conclusion.
C. Revocation: After the City Clerk has reviewed the facts, he/she shall revoke a
license if he/she finds by the preponderance of the evidence that a violation of
this Chapter has occurred. The revocation shall be effective immediately.
D. If the City Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the licensee or the
applicant shall have a right to a hearing as provided in Title 5, Chapter 1 of this
Code of Ordinances.
E. Effect of Renovation: Revocation or denial of any license shall bar the licensee
or applicant from being eligible for any license under this Chapter for a period
of one year from the date of the revocation or denial. There shall be no refund
of any fees for any revocation.
5-10-13 Penalty. Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon
conviction, be subject a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day
that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
5-10-14 Rebates. No licensee shall be entitled to a rebate of part of the fee paid if
the license is surrendered before it expires.
5-10-15 License Exemptions. The following are excluded from the application of
this Chapter.
A. Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling subscriptions to
newspapers.
B. Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl Scout,
4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
C. Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for sale
their own products on their own property.
D. Students. Students representing area schools or school districts conducting
projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
E. Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional
business or make special sales.
F. Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or
institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use.
G. Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating
under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa. All such organizations
seeking to act as a peddler, solicitor and/or transient merchant are required to
submit in writing to the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which
such activities are sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of
the organization, the period during which such activities are to be carried on,
and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor
and the amount thereof. If the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide
charity or nonprofit organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license
containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies
the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal
the decision to the Council, as provided in Section 5-10-14 of this Chapter.
5-10-16 Prohibited Activities. No peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, or other
person engaged in other similar activities shall conduct business in any of the
following manner:
A. Calling attention to his or business, the items to be sold or the donations
being solicited by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell,
crying out, or by any other noise so as to be unreasonably audible within an
enclosed structure.
B. Obstructing the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, on any
street, sidewalk, alleyway, or other public right-of-way.
C. Standing in a street, including any roadway medians, curbs, traffic islands,
shoulders or crosswalks, for the purpose of soliciting contributions,
donations, distributing materials or selling merchandise.
D. Acting in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of any
specific individual or the general public.
E. Failing to provide proof of license, or registration, and identification when
requested.
F. Using the license or registration of another person.
G. Conducting his/her business in such a way as would restrict or interfere with
the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant.
H. Alleging false or misleading statements about the products or services being
sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to that
person.
I. Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave.
J. Otherwise operating their business in any manner that a reasonable person
would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 11– Residential Sales
SECTIONS:
5-11-1 Purpose
5-11-2 Definitions
5-11-3 Signs
5-11-4 Residential Sales Regulations
5-11-5 Enforcement
5-11-1 Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the signage and actual
sale of personal property from residentially zoned property to prevent undue
commercialization of residential neighborhoods.
5-11-2 Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms set forth
have the following meanings:
A. "Residential Sale" shall mean the sale from a lot or parcel of items of personal
property either belonging to the owner or permitted by the owner to be sold on
said parcel or lot. "Residential Sale" shall include the commonly referred terms
"yard sale", "porch sale", “garage sale", "rummage sale", "bazaar", etc.
"Residential Sale" shall not be defined as any sale of new property, property
sold from any zone other than residential, and special events which would
require approval of the City.
B. "Residential Zone" shall be any lot or parcel which is located in an "R" District
as shown on the official Zoning Map for the City.
C. "Substantiated Complaint" shall be a complaint received by the City alleging a
violation of this Chapter which shall require the complaining party to assist the
City in a prosecution; up to and including testimony in a court of law.
D. "Sign" shall mean any temporary sign advertising a residential sale.
5-11-3 Signs. The following regulations shall govern the number, type, location, and
duration for all signs associated with residential sales:
A. A resident shall be limited to not more than one non-illuminated sign, which
shall be wholly maintained on private property, not to exceed four (4) square
feet in area, to advertise the sale. Other signs are prohibited.
B. Residential sale signs shall not be erected until twenty-four (24) hours prior to
the sale and shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours of the expiration
of the same.
C. Signs shall not be placed within any public right-of-way. Signs which are
noticed by any City employee placed in violation of this Section shall be
removed immediately by that employee and disposed of.
5-11-4 Residential Sales Regulations. Persons conducting residential sales shall
comply with the following regulations governing these sales:
A. A residential sale shall be limited to a term not exceeding seventy-two (72)
hours in length.
B. Not more than three (3) residential sales may be conducted from any lot or
parcel during the calendar year.
5-11-5 Enforcement. It shall be the policy of the City to enforce the regulations
under this Chapter by "substantial complaint", except as provided in Section 5-11-3.
See Appendix A for the Schedule of Penalties for violations of Section 5-11-3 of this
Chapter.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 12 – Sales on City Property
SECTIONS:
5-12-1 Selling on City Property
5-12-2 Selling of Merchandise
5-12-3 Soliciting for Worthy Cause
5-12-1 Selling on City Property. No individual, company, corporation, or
organization shall sell any product or service upon any city property without receiving
the proper approval of the City Council and meeting the requirements of Title 5,
Chapter 10 of this Code.
5-12-2 Selling of Merchandise. Local merchants and organizations composed of
local merchants may sell merchandise on City owned property in conjunction with
special promotional events subject to the approval by the City Council. Requests to
close or use streets and sidewalks shall be reviewed by the Police Chief and Fire Chief
before such approval is granted.
5-12-3 Soliciting for Worthy Cause. Local civic, service, educational, health,
welfare, and similarly related organizations may sell merchandise or solicit on City
owned property upon approval by the City Council.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 13 – Massage Establishments and Technicians
SECTIONS:
5-13-1 Definitions
5-13-2 Compliance with Chapter Required
5-13-3 Exemptions
5-13-4 Licenses for Massage Business
5-13-5 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of License
5-13-6 Massage Technician License
5-13-7 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of Massage Technician Licenses
5-13-8 Health Standards
5-13-9 Unlawful Acts
5-13-1 Definitions.
A. "Massage or massage service" means any method of treating the external parts
of the body, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or vibrating;
such treatments being performed by the hand or any other body parts, or by
any mechanical or electrical instrument.
B. "Massage establishment" means any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in or
carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities
mentioned in Section (A) and Section (C) of this Chapter. Any establishment
engaged in or carrying on, or permitting any combination of massage and bath
house shall be deemed a massage establishment.
C. "Public bath house" means any place, including a private club or organization,
wherein any person, firm, association, corporation, or partnership engages in,
conducts or carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on,
the business of giving or furnishing Russian, Finnish, Swedish, hot air, vapor,
electric cabinet, steam, mineral, sweat, sale, Japanese, sauna, fomentation, or
electric baths or baths of any kind whatever, excluding ordinary tub baths
where an attendant is not used or required.
D. "Massage technician" means any person, including a trainee, who engages in
the business of performing massage services on or for other persons by use of
any or all of the treatments, techniques, or methods of treatment referred to
in the definition of massage or massage service.
E. "Massage patron" means any person who receives or pays to receive a massage
or massage services from a massage technician for value.
F. "Applicant" means any person applying for a license to operate or conduct a
massage business and in addition thereto shall include all partners in a
partnership and all stockholders of a corporation where the controlling interest
of the corporation is held by five (5) or less persons of legal entities.
G. "Accredited school" means any school which furnishes a certified statement of
courses offered, including anatomy and physiology, and is accredited by the
American Massage and Therapy Association, which provides for not less than
1,000 hours of instruction and which shall furnish a certificate or diploma of
successful completion of such course of study or learning.
H. "Licensee" means the operator of a massage establishment.
5-13-2 Compliance with Chapter Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall
operate, own, conduct, carry on, or permit to be operated, owned, conducted, or
carried on any massage establishment of any type or kind including, but not limited to
massage parlor, massage service business, or any massage business or service offered
in conjunction with or as part of any health club, health spa, resort, health resort,
gymnasium, athletic club, or other business, without compliance with the provisions of
this Chapter. No person shall perform the services, duties, or work of a massage
technician except in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
5-13-3 Exemptions. The following persons and institutions are excluded from the
operation of this Chapter:
A. Persons licensed by the State of Iowa under the provisions of Chapters 148,
148A,148B, 148C, 148D, 149, 150, 150A, 151, 152, 152A, 152B, 152C, 153,
157, or 158 of the Iowa Code, when performing massage therapy or massage
services as part of the profession or trade for which licensed.
B. Persons performing massage therapy or massage services under the direct
supervision of a person licensed as described in Paragraph (A) hereinabove.
C. Persons performing massage therapy or massage services upon a person
pursuant to the written instruction or order of a licensed physician.
D. Nurses' aides, technicians, and attendants at any hospital or health care facility,
licensed pursuant to Chapters 135B, 135C, or 145A of the Iowa Code, in the
course of their employment and under the supervision of the administrator
thereof or of a person licensed as described in Paragraph (A) hereinabove.
E. An athletic coach or trainer in any accredited public or private school, junior
college, college, or university, or employed by a professional or semiprofessional
athletic team or organization in the course of his employment as
such coach or trainer.
F. Non-profit corporations or associations.
5-13-4 Licenses for Massage Business.
A. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate, own, conduct, carry on, or permit
to be operated, owned, conducted, or carried on any massage business in the
City unless the premises at which such business is located meet the minimum
standards set forth in this Chapter and unless a license to operate a massage
establishment is obtained from the City in compliance with the provisions of
this Chapter and Title 5, Chapter 1 of the City Code.
B. Application Procedures. Any person, firm, or corporation seeking a license to
operate a massage establishment shall make an application for a massage
establishment license and shall refer the application to the Building Inspection
Department, the Fire Department, and the Public Health Department, which
shall inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment
and shall make written recommendations to the City Clerk concerning
compliance with the codes that they administer. The Clerk shall also refer the
application to the Police Department.
C. Application Contents. The application shall contain the following:
1. The full name, address, and social security number of the applicant.
2. The full name of the business and the address of the premises for which the
application is being made.
3. The criminal record of the applicant, if any.
4. Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
5. The type of business entity, such as sole proprietorship, partnership, or
corporation and, in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of
all officers and directors of the corporation.
6. Applicants must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from an
accredited school or other institution of learning wherein the method,
profession, and work of massage is taught, provided; however, that if the
applicant will have no physical contact with his customer or clients, he need
not possess such diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized
school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession, and
work of massage is taught.
7. All information required herein of any applicant shall also be provided for
every person who, directly or indirectly, has any right to participate in the
management or control of the business to be conducted at the premises of
the proposed massage establishment.
8. The name and address of the owner of the building where such massage
business will be located.
9. Certified copies of any lease or rental agreement governing the applicant's
rights in said building.
10. The signature of the applicant or applicants or, if the application is in the
name of a corporation, the signature of each officer of the corporation.
D. License Fees. The fee for the issuance of a license issued under this chapter
shall be set by resolution of the City Council and is listed in the Schedule of
Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B of this Code of Ordinances.
E. Issuance of License. The Building, Fire, Health, and Police departments shall
make written reports of their investigations and shall submit such reports to
the City Clerk within forty-five (45) days of the date of the application. The City
Clerk shall issue a license if all requirements for a massage establishment
described in this Chapter are met and shall issue a license to all persons who
apply to perform massage services unless he finds:
1. That the operator as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not have
complied with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the Building,
City Zoning, Housing, and Fire Codes of the City of Muscatine or regulations
adopted by the Health Department.
2. That the applicant has not fully complied with all of the requirements of this
Subchapter, or that the applicant is not of good moral character, or that the
applicant has falsified his or her application.
In the event that the City Clerk determines that the applicant has not fully
complied with all the requirements of this Chapter, then the City Clerk shall,
after consultation with the Legal Department, advise the City Council of the
basis for questioning the applicant's qualifications, and the procedures for
notice and hearing as set forth in Section 5-13- 5(B) of this Chapter shall apply
before the license shall be issued.
F. Separate License for each Place of Business. Each massage business shall have
a separate license for each place of business, which shall be valid only for the
business conducted at that location.
G. License to be Displayed. Each massage business shall display its license
conspicuously in the lobby or waiting room area where such license may be
readily observed by all persons entering such premise.
H. Sale or Transfer. No massage establishment license shall be sold or transferred.
The purchase or purchases of any massage business or of the majority of the
stock of any corporation operating a massage business shall obtain a new
license before operating such business at the location for which the license has
been issued.
5-13-5 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of License.
A. Grounds. The massage establishment license of any such applicant or licensee
may be denied, suspended, or revoked for violation of the provisions of this
Chapter; for failure to comply with applicable fire regulations, building
regulations, or health ordinances; for permitting massage technicians, who are
either employed by the licensee or who are allowed by the licensee to perform
the services or work of a massage technician upon the premises of the licensee,
to violate the provisions of this Chapter; or if it is found that the applicant has
falsified an application.
B. In the event the City Clerk is appraised of information indicating that grounds
for denial, suspension, or revocation of a massage establishment may exist, he
or she shall cause an investigation of such grounds to be made by the
appropriate city department or departments, and after consultation with the
Legal Department, shall advise the City Council in writing of the results of the
investigation. If the City Council determines that the report reveals the probable
existence of grounds for suspension or revocation, it shall direct written notice
by ordinary mail to the licensee named on the application at the massage
establishment address informing such person of the intention to hold a public
hearing on the question of whether such license should be denied, suspended,
or revoked, the grounds therefore, and the date and time of said hearing. Upon
said hearing, if the City Council shall determine that such cause does exist,
1. If the determination is the first such for that licensee, it may withhold action
on an application for one month from the date of hearing or suspend an
existing license for up to one month, and thereupon such licensee shall
cease massage business at that location or at any other location for the
period of suspension.
2. If the determination is the second such for that licensee or if the City Council
finds against the applicant or licensee on two or more grounds at such
hearing, it may deny an application or revoke an existing license at that
location, and in either event, no massage establishment license shall be
issued nor shall such business be conducted at that location for a period of
one year, nor shall the licensee be permitted to conduct such business in
the City for that period.
5-13-6 Massage Technician License.
A. License Required. No person shall perform the services, duties, or work of a
massage technician without first receiving a massage technician license from
the City Clerk. Such license shall not be required for the owner of a licensed
massage establishment who performs the services, duties, or work of a
massage technician in his or her own establishment, provided such person
provides the information required in Subsections (C) 5 and (C) 7 hereof on the
application for massage establishment license and states that such owner will
be a massage technician at such establishment.
B. Application Procedures. Any person seeking a massage technician license shall
apply to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall cause an investigation of such
applicant by the Police Department to determine if such person has a criminal
record.
C. Application Contents. The application shall contain the following information:
1. The full name, address, age, and social security number of the applicant.
2. The criminal record of the applicant, if any.
3. Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
4. The name of a licensed massage establishment where the applicant will be
employed.
5. The name and address of the accredited school attended, the date attended,
and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded indicating
the applicant has completed not less than 1,000 hours of instruction.
6. A statement that the contents of the application are true.
7. A certificate issued by a licensed physician stating that the applicant is free
from communicable diseases and venereal diseases, such as syphilis and
gonorrhea, executed within one week preceding the date of the application.
D. Issuance of the License. The Police Department shall make a written report of
its investigation to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of the
application. The City Clerk shall, upon presentation of the certificate described
in Subsection (C)7 hereinabove, issue a temporary massage technician permit
to the applicant if the application is otherwise proper and pending receipt of the
written police report. Upon receipt of the police report and the certificate, the
City Clerk shall approve the application if the applicant has fully complied with
all the requirements of this Chapter, and the City Clerk shall thereupon issue a
permanent massage technician license to the applicant. The permanent license
shall expire one year from the date of issuance. In the event that the City Clerk
determines that the applicant for a new or renewal license has not fully
complied with all of the requirements of this Subchapter, or that the applicant
is not of good moral character, or that the applicant has falsified his or her
application, then the City Clerk shall, after consultation with the Legal
Department, advise the City Council of the basis for questioning the applicant's
qualification, and the procedures for notice and hearing as set forth in Section
5-13-7[B] of this Code shall apply before the permanent license is issued.
E. License Valid Only for Establishment Listed on the Application. The massage
technician license, when issued, shall be valid only for the massage
establishment listed on the application. A massage technician changing place of
employment shall have his or her license amended by the permit clerk to show
that the establishment proposing such employment holds a valid massage
establishment license before commencing work for the new employer.
F. License to be Kept at Place of Employment. All massage technicians having
licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall keep said licenses at their place
of employment as massage technicians
G. License Fees. The fee for the issuance of a license issued under this chapter
shall be set by resolution of the City Council and are listed in the Schedule of
Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B of this Code of Ordinances.
5-13-7 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of Massage Technician Licenses.
A. Grounds for Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. A massage technician license
may be denied, suspended, or revoked for any violation of this Chapter,
including but not limited to the failure to comply with new or renewal
procedures, a finding of criminal offenses, or falsification of new or renewal
applications.
B. Denial, Suspension, or Revocation Proceedings. The City Clerk shall, upon
receipt of information alleging that grounds exist to deny, suspend, or revoke
the massage technician license of any applicant or licensee under this
Subchapter and after consultation with the Legal Department, report the
circumstances to the City Council, which in such case shall cause a notice to be
sent by ordinary mail to the applicant or licensee, which notice shall state that
a denial, suspension, or revocation hearing has been set before the City
Council; the grounds for the proposed denial, suspension, or revocation; the
date and time of the hearing; and the place where the hearing will be
conducted. Upon such hearing, if the City Council shall determine that one or
more of such grounds do exist, it may deny an application or suspend or revoke
an existing license. In the event such license is revoked, no massage technician
license shall be issued to that licensee for a period of one year.
5-13-8 Health Standards.
A. No massage establishment shall be established, maintained, or operated in the
City that does not conform or comply with the following standards:
1. Each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on patrons
shall be provided with a minimum of eight foot (8') candles as measured
four feet (4') above the floor.
2. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and cleaning
non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering massage
services. Such materials and instruments shall be cleaned after each use.
3. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.
4. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of all equipment,
supplies, and clean linens. All used disposable materials and soiled linens
and towels shall be kept in covered containers or cabinets, which containers
or cabinets shall be kept separate from clean storage cabinets.
5. Clean linen and towels shall be provided for each massage patron. No
common use of towels or linens shall be permitted.
6. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, sauna baths, steam or bath
areas, and all floors shall have surfaces which may be readily cleaned.
7. Oils, creams, lotions, or other preparations used in administering massages
shall be kept in clean containers or cabinets.
8. Adequate bathing, dressing, locker, and toilet facilities shall be provided for
all patrons served at any given time. In the event male and female patrons
are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing, locker, toilet,
and massage room facilities shall be provided.
9. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, steam
or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be
thoroughly cleaned after each use.
10. Each massage technician shall wash his or her hands in hot running water
using soap or disinfectant before and after administering a massage to each
patron.
11. The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial services,
which sink shall be located in a janitorial room or custodial room separate
from massage service rooms.
12.No person shall consume food or beverages in massage work areas.
13.Animals, except for seeing eye dogs, shall not be permitted in massage
establishments.
14.All massage establishments shall continuously comply with all applicable
building, fire, or health ordinances and regulations.
B. No massage technician shall administer a massage:
1. If said massage technician believes, knows, or should know that he or she
is not free of any contagious or communicable disease or infection.
2. To any massage patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin
inflammation, or skin eruption; provided, however, that a physician duly
licensed to practice in the State of Iowa may certify that such person may
be safely massaged prescribing the condition therefore.
3. To any person who is not free of communicable disease or infection or whom
the massage technician believes or has reason to believe is not free of
communicable disease or infection.
5-13-9 Unlawful Acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place his or
her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in
any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital part of any other person.
B. It shall be unlawful for any massage technician, while in the presence of any
other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque
covering the sexual or genital parts of his or her body.
C. It shall be unlawful for massages to be administered to massage patrons of
different sexes in the same room or enclosure at the same time.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, or managing a massage
establishment knowingly to cause, allow, or permit in or about such massage
establishments any agent, employee, or any other person under his control to
perform such acts prohibited in Subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this Section.
E. For the purposes of this Section, the following words shall have the meaning
assigned below: "Sexual or genital parts" shall include the genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
F. Every person owning, operating, or managing a massage establishment shall
post a copy of this Section in a conspicuous place in the massage establishment
so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 14 – Taxicabs
SECTIONS:
5-14-1 Definition
5-14-2 Exemption
5-14-3 License and Fee Required
5-14-4 Term of License
5-14-5 Insurance Policy
5-14-6 General Liability Exception
5-14-7 Soliciting Passengers
5-14-8 Filing; Posting; Rate Schedule
5-14-1 Definition. Whenever the word "taxicab" is used in this Chapter, it shall mean
any vehicle used for the transportation of people for hire from one place to another
within the City.
5-14-2 Exemptions. This Chapter shall not apply to any transportation company
operating upon designated routes or between fixed terminals under an ordinance duly
passed by the City. Taxis that are operated principally in other cities that use the
streets of the City only temporarily and on isolated occasions need not have a license
under this Chapter.
5-14-3 License and Fee Required. No person shall engage in the business of
maintaining or operating any taxicabs without first procuring from the Council a
license. The fee for the issuance of a license issued under this Chapter shall be set by
resolution of the City Council and is listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements in Appendix B of this Code of Ordinances. Every driver of a licensed taxi
shall also possess a valid Iowa commercial driver’s license, as defined by Section
321.1(11) of the Code of Iowa.
5-14-4 Term of License. Taxi licenses shall be valid for one year after the date of
issue.
5-14-5 Insurance Policy. Any person operating any taxicab shall post and deposit
with the Clerk an insurance policy issued by an authorized company to do business in
the state, and such insurance policy shall be as set by resolution of the City Council
and listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B of this
Code of Ordinances. The insurance policy shall be for each vehicle operated within the
City and shall insure to the benefit of any person who shall suffer bodily injury or
property damage or to his estate should he be killed by reason of negligence or
misconduct on the part of the driver or operator of such vehicle.
5-14-6 General Liability Exception. The general liability requirement as set out in
the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B of this Code of
Ordinances is waived for taxi owners who do not have a fixed place of business.
5-14-7 Soliciting Passengers. It shall be unlawful for any person operating any
taxicab to accost, stop, or approach and solicit any person to become a passenger in
any such taxicab upon any street, alley, or other public place within the City.
5-14-8 Filing; Posting; Rate Schedule. Any person operating a taxicab shall file,
with the application for a license, a schedule of rates to be charged for the use of such
taxicab. A copy of this schedule of rates shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each
taxicab. Any changes to the rate structure during the term of the license shall be
submitted to the City Clerk's Office and filed with the license.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 15 – Salvage, Junk Dealers and Refuse Haulers
SECTIONS:
5-15-1 Purpose
5-15-2 Scope
5-15-3 License Required
5-15-4 Screening
5-15-5 Collection Vehicles License
5-15-6 Disposal
5-15-7 Violation
5-15-1 Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare by regulating junk dealers, refuse and garbage haulers, and salvage
dealers and to assure compliance with all applicable Ordinances of the City of
Muscatine.
5-15-2 Scope. The scope of this Chapter shall encompass all land within the Corporate
Limits of the City of Muscatine and any future land annexed thereto. The regulations
of this Chapter shall apply to all person(s) who actively pursue a livelihood by
collecting, salvaging, distributing, or processing any junk, refuse, or garbage as
defined in Title 10, Chapter 23 and Title 13, Chapter 3 of this Code and applies to all
salvage, refuse, or junk dealers, whether new or existing.
5-15-3 License Required. All junk, salvage, or refuse dealers shall apply for an
annual license to operate their business. Application forms must be signed by the
appropriate City Officials indicating that the salvage or junk yard complies with all
applicable Ordinances and regulations for the City of Muscatine. The completed
application shall then be returned to the City Clerk and an annual license fee as set by
resolution of council and listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances shall be paid. Upon receipt of the completed
application and fee, the City Clerk shall issue the annual license. All annual licenses
shall be renewed prior to January 1st of each calendar year or such license will become
null and void.
5-15-4 Screening. All owners of salvage or junk yards shall screen all parts of their
salvage or junk yards which are visible from any public thoroughfare by plantings,
fencing, or other opaque materials to a height not exceeding eight feet (8'), except
natural plantings may exceed eight feet (8').
5-15-5 Collection Vehicles License. All trucks used for the business of hauling
salvage, junk, refuse, or garbage shall be licensed annually by the City of Muscatine
and shall pay a fee for each vehicle in the amount set by resolution of City Council and
listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code
of Ordinances. Annual licenses shall be renewed prior to January 1st of each calendar
year, and shall be retained at all times in the vehicle for which it is issued.
Prior to the issuance of a license for each vehicle, the owner must certify the following
and provide proof of the same if requested by the City, and the City may inspect the
vehicle if it deems necessary:
A. Vehicle is owned or leased by applicant.
B. Vehicle is properly identified with paint or decal indicating the name of the
company or individual owning or operating such truck.
C. Vehicle has been properly inspected in accordance with the laws of Iowa to
assure such vehicle is safe.
D. Vehicle is properly equipped with a safe and watertight compactor or dump box
which is fully enclosed and adequate and safe to transfer any salvage, refuse,
garbage, or junk without spilling such upon the public streets or endanger the
general safety of the public.
5-15-6 Disposal. All salvage, refuse, garbage, or junk must be disposed of at a local
landfill in accordance with Title 13, Chapter 4 of the City Code.
5-15-7 Violation. Any owner of a salvage or junk yard or refuse or garbage collector
who shall fail to license their businesses or vehicles, renew their license, or operate in
violation of any other City, State, or Federal Law are guilty of a simple misdemeanor
and shall be subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances.
Title 5 – Business Regulations
Chapter 16 - Ambulance Service License
SECTIONS:
5-16-1 Definitions
5-16-2 License and Fee Required
5-16-3 Exemptions
5-16-4 Application for License
5-16-5 Criteria for License
5-16-6 Standards for Ambulance Service
5-16-7 Liability Insurance
5-16-8 Revocation of License
5-16-9 Fees for Assistance
5-16-1 Definitions. The following definitions are used in this Chapter:
A. “Ambulance” refers to any motor vehicle that is specifically designed, modified,
constructed, equipped, staffed, and used regularly to transport patients.
B. “Ambulance Service” means any service program that utilizes ambulances to
provide emergency medical services and emergency or non-emergency ground
transport of patients to or from a health care facility or between health care
facilities.
C. “EMS” means pre-hospital emergency medical services.
D. “Medical Direction” means direction, advice or orders provided by a Medical
Director or a supervising physician or physician designee as defined in 641 Iowa
Administrative Code 132.1.
E. “Patient” or “Patients” means any living individual(s) who is (are) injured, sick
or otherwise incapacitated and in need of emergency medical services or
ground transport to or from health care facilities in an ambulance.
F. “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, corporation
(governmental or private), limited liability company or any other legal entity
including any receiver, trustee, assignee or similar representative.
5-16-2 License and Fee Required. No person shall operate an ambulance service
within the limits of the City unless such a person holds a current and valid license for
such ambulance service pursuant to this Chapter. Every ambulance service retained
by any person to provide prospective or standby service at designated events or
gatherings within the limits of the City shall comply fully with every requirement of
this Chapter. No ambulance service license shall be transferable. In the event of a
change of ownership, the new owner shall be required to obtain a license pursuant to
this Chapter and to comply in all respects with all applicable statues, ordinances, rules,
and regulations relating to the operation of an ambulance service in the City at that
time. Each license issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year
unless earlier suspended, revoked or terminated.
5-16-3 Exemptions. This Chapter does not apply to the following. Vehicles being
used in an emergency when a lack of transporting resources, such as when no
ambulance is available or in a disaster situation, would cause an unnecessary delay in
patient care; Vehicles owned or controlled by the United States government or the
government of the State of Iowa; Vehicles operated only on private property or within
the confines of institutional grounds; Vehicles responding at the request of a licensed
ambulance service pursuant to a mutual aid agreement approved by the City; Medical
aircraft requested by a licensed ambulance or an ambulance service that has a valid
mutual aid agreement with a licensed ambulance service; Persons or vehicles providing
ambulance service for patient transports originating outside the limits of the City, or
nonstop patient transports through the City; First responders who provide EMS care
but are not engaged in the transport of patients; Persons not regularly engaged in the
business of ambulance or medical transportation services who provide incidental
emergency assistance to family members and acquaintances, including transportation
to a medical facility in a private vehicle; Persons or vehicles of the City of Muscatine
Fire Department; Persons or vehicles of the Muscatine County Sheriff’s Office,
Muscatine Police Department, or other law enforcement agencies transporting persons
in custody to or from health care facilities.
5-16-4 Application for License. Applications for licenses shall be made upon forms
as prepared and administered by the City Clerk. The applications shall include: Name
and address of the applicant and the owner of the ambulance service and ambulances;
The trade or other name, if any, under which the applicant does business and proposes
to do business; The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and
care of patients; A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of
manufacture, motor and chassis number, current state license number, the length of
time the ambulance has been in use; the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or
other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate applicant’s ambulance; The
location and descriptions of the place or places from which the applicant intends to
operate; Description of system of providing medical direction; An accompanying
license fee in the amount set by resolution of the City Council and set out in the
Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of
Ordinances.
5-16-5 Criteria for License. In order to be eligible to receive a license to operate an
ambulance service within the limits of the City, an applicant shall meet the following
criteria from the time of application through the end of any approved licensure period:
A. Hold and maintain a valid certificate of ambulance service authorization issued
by the Iowa Department of Public Health pursuant to 641 IAC 132 to operate
at the paramedic/critical care transport level (PM/CCT);
B. Have available for operation within the City at all times an adequate number of
ambulances and qualified personnel to provide twenty-four (24) hour per day,
seven (7) day per week ambulance service, including a minimum of two (2)
advanced life support ambulances properly staffed. The Council shall determine
what constitutes an adequate number of ambulances and qualified personnel;
C. Must have the capability to operate an ambulance dispatch center, which shall
meet or exceed the current level of service provided by Muscatine Joint
Communications (MUSCOM). This requirement includes the proper use and
maintenance of an Emergency Medical Dispatch (EMD) protocol. The dispatch
center shall provide the Muscatine Fire Department with proper EMS
information for their integration as first responders. The dispatch center shall
be capable of communicating on the radio systems of all emergency responders
presently served by MUSCOM, as well as all applicable State and regional
medical and fire frequencies. A joint dispatch arrangement with another
organization that meets the requirements of this section is permitted;
D. Must have and maintain its own multiple-patient response capability to
simultaneously immobilize and treat a minimum of three (3) patients in addition
to the capacity of those ambulances staffed and in service within the system;
Must be able to provide EMS services to outlying areas of Muscatine County
and nearby portions of Illinois at a level at least as great as what is currently
provided.
5-16-6 Standards for Ambulance Service. Once licensed, every ambulance service
shall conform to the standards, requirements, and regulations provided for in this
Chapter, Chapter 147A, Code of Iowa, 641 Administrative Code Chapter 132 and any
other statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the operation of ambulance
services or ambulances; Notify the Council, in writing, of its intent to discontinue
operations at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the intended discontinuance
of ambulance service.
5-16-7 Liability Insurance. No ambulance service license shall be issued or valid,
nor shall any ambulance be operated in the City, unless there is at all times in force
and effect insurance coverage issued by an insurance company licensed to do business
in the State of Iowa for the ambulance service and for each and every ambulance
owned and/or operated by or for the applicant or licensee, and also naming the City
and its officers and employees as additional insureds. The minimum limits of liability
of the insurance policy will be in the amounts set by resolution of Council and listed in
the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of
Ordinances; Certificates evidencing said insurance policies shall be submitted prior to
the issuance of any license.
5-16-8 Revocation. Any violation of this Chapter or of regulations promulgated
hereunder shall be sufficient grounds for revoking any license or permit issued
pursuant to this Chapter. A revoked ambulance service shall not operate within the
City.
5-16-9 Fees for Assistance. Any non-licensed ambulance operating within the limits
of the City may be subject to a fee for service, if such ambulance requests and is given
assistance by a City Department, if that assistance involves the treatment, lifting,
moving or other activities related to patient care and handling.
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Police Department 1
Alarm Regulations 2
General Offenses 3
Graffiti 4
Minors 5
Parental Responsibilities 6
Specified Crime Property 7
Animal Regulations 8
Keeping of Pit Bull Dogs 9
Aggressive Panhandling Prohibited 10
Noise Regulations 11
Title 6 – Police and Public Safety
Chapter 1- Police Department
SECTIONS:
6-1-1 Department Established
6-1-2 Organization
6-1-3 Chain of Command
6-1-4 Sergeant at Arms
6-1-5 Peace Officer Qualifications
6-1-6 Peace Officers Appointed
6-1-7 Required Training
6-1-8 Duties of Chief of Police
6-1-9 Uniforms
6-1-10 Obedience to Superior Officials
6-1-11 Rules
6-1-12 Taking Weapons
6-1-1 Department Established. The Police Department of the City is established to provide
for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the corporate limits
of the City.
6-1-2 Organization. The Department consists of the Police Chief and such other law
enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
6-1-3 Chain of Command. The chain of command in the Police Department shall be as
prescribed in the rules and regulations of the Department.
6-1-4 Sergeant at Arms. The Chief of Police, or his or her designated representative, shall
serve as Sergeant at Arms of the Council, and as such, shall attend its meetings, keep the
Council Chambers in order, and promptly serve or have served all notices or orders required of
him or her by the Mayor or Council.
6-1-5 Peace Officer Qualifications. In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as
a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
6-1-6 Peace Officers Appointed. The City Administrator shall appoint and dismiss the Police
Chief subject to the consent of a majority of the Council. The Police Chief shall select the other
members of the Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
6-1-7 Required Training. All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required
by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment. Peace
officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11 [2]) (IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
6-1-8 Duties of Chief of Police. The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject
to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
A. General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or ordinance.
B. Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all persons
committing any offense before the proper court.
C. Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the Police Chief.
D. Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the State Department
of Transportation.
E. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
F. Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance to detention
facilities as may be required.
G. Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers, boards and
commissions in the execution of their official duties.
H. Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the prosecution of
any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
I. Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by showing whether said
arrests were made under provisions of State law or City ordinance, the offense charged,
who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
J. Reports. Compile and submit to the City Administrator and Council an annual report as
well as such other reports as may be requested by the City Administrator or Council.
K. Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be responsible
for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and materials of the
department.
6-1-9 Uniforms. Each member of the Police Department shall be required to properly wear
suitable uniforms as directed by the Police Chief; the same to be according to the design, color,
and material as prescribed by the Police Chief.
6-1-10 Obedience to Superior Officers. All members of the Police Department shall observe
and obey the orders of their superior officers.
6-1-11 Rules. The Police Chief shall have authority to adopt such departmental rules as he or
she deems necessary for the orderly administration and operation of the Police Department.
6-1-12 Taking Weapons. Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested
all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have within
such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
Title 6 – Police and Public Safety
Chapter 2 – Alarm Regulations
SECTIONS:
I. General Provision
6-2-1 Purpose
6-2-2 Definitions
6-2-3 Automatic Protection Devices
6-2-4 Alarm System Restrictions
II. Licensing Requirements and Procedures
6-2-5 Alarm Business -- License Required
6-2-6 Alarm Agent -- License Required
6-2-7 Alarm System -- Permit Required
6-2-8 Central Station System -- License Required
6-2-9 Modified Central Station -- License Required
6-2-10 Telephone Answering Service -- License Required
6-2-11 License and Permit Applications and Fees
6-2-12 License and Permit Renewal, Modifications
6-2-13 Issuance of License, Permit, or Renewal
6-2-14 Revocation and Suspension of Licenses and Permits
6-2-15 Notice of Decision
6-2-16 Appeal Notice
6-2-17 Appeal Procedure
6-2-18 Business License Tax
6-2-19 Posting of Licenses and Permits
6-2-20 Transfer of License or Permit Prohibited
6-2-21 Failure to Pay Ad Valorem Taxes
6-2-22 Service Available
6-2-23 Responsibility for Alarm Response
III. Enforcement and Administration
6-2-24Generally
6-2-25Testing of Equipment
6-2-26False Fire Alarms
6-2-27False Police Alarms
6-2-28Change of Location
6-2-29Regulation of Charges
6-2-30Liability of the City Limited
6-2-31Conflict of Interest Prohibited
6-2-32Violations and Penalties
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-2-1 Purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to protect the Muscatine Police and Fire
departments and property owners from the erroneous and mistaken use of security and fire
alarms which results in increased false response calls by the Police and Fire departments and is
creating a hazard to the members of the departments and to the general public.
6-2-2 Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall be
construed to have the meaning set forth in this Section unless it is apparent from the context
that a different meaning is intended.
A. "Alarm agent" means any person engaged in or employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following activities: selling,
maintaining, leasing, servicing, inspecting, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or
installing an alarm system on any building, place, or premises.
B. “Alarm business" means the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, inspecting,
servicing, repairing, replacing, altering, moving, or installing an alarm system.
C. "Alarm system" means an assembly of equipment or devices arranged to send a signal
to a remote receiving station to make known the occurrence of a robbery or an attempted
robbery or an unauthorized intrusion requiring urgent attention and to which the police
are expected to respond and includes both automatic and manually operated systems.
Alarm systems shall include automatic holdup alarm systems, burglar alarm systems,
holdup alarm systems, manual holdup alarm systems. This term also includes an
assembly of equipment or devices, or a single device, which monitors temperature,
humidity, or other conditions, arranged to send a signal to a remote receiving station to
make known the occurrence of a fire or fire-related condition requiring urgent attention
and to which the Fire Department is expected to respond and includes both automatic
and manually operated systems. Fire alarms are included in this definition of alarm
systems.
D. "Alarm user" means the person, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, or
other organization of any kind which has an alarm system to protect its premises,
regardless of whether it owns or leases the alarm system. Each premises having a
separate connection to the Police or Fire Department, or to a central station system, a
modified central station, or a telephone answering service shall be considered a separate
alarm system user for purposes of calculating false alarms subject to the following: in
the event a building or group of buildings is connected to or part of a single integrated
alarm system, the entire building or group of buildings shall be considered to have a
single alarm system for purposes of calculating false alarms; but if the building or group
of buildings is not so connected, then each individual alarm system shall be treated as a
separate premises. However, any building or group of buildings which contains multiple
leaseholds or condominium agreements shall be considered to be a single alarm system
as to the common areas of the buildings or group of buildings which are not covered by
leasehold or condominium ownership for other than common usage. All other premises
not specifically mentioned shall, as to each separate ownership, lease, or other interest
owning, maintaining, or using an alarm system, be considered to have a separate alarm
system for purposes of calculating false alarms.
E. "Automatic protection device" means an instrument which automatically sends a prerecorded
voice alarm actuated by a physical force or condition characteristic of a fire,
other casualty, or unauthorized intrusion, over regular telephone lines.
F. "Burglar alarm system" means a method of detecting and signaling the presence, entry,
or attempted entry of an intruder into a protected premises.
G. "Central station system" means a system or group of systems, usually operated for
customers by a person, in which the signals and messages of automatic protection
devices and alarm systems are transmitted to, recorded in, and supervised from a central
location which has trained operators and guards on duty at all times who shall take
appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message including the relaying of messages
to the Police Department.
H. "City" means the City of Muscatine, Iowa, or such officers or employees as may be
designated by this Chapter to have specific duties in relation to this Chapter.
I. "Direct line" means a private line circuit ring down telephone line leading directly to the
communications center of the Police Department that is for use only to report emergency
messages and signals on a person-to-person basis.
J. "False fire alarm" means the activation of a fire alarm system through technical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm
system or of his or her employees or agents. False fire alarm does not include the
activation of an alarm system which is caused by storms, tornadoes, or other violent
weather conditions. False fire alarm does not include alarm system activations or failures
caused by water, gas, electrical, telephone or other transmission devices not under the
control of an alarm user or his or her employees or agents, the willful act of any person
other than the alarm user or his or her agent or employee, and does not include alarm
activations or failures due to conditions clearly beyond the control of the alarm user or
his or her agents or employees.
K. "False police alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through technical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm
system or of his or her employees or agents. False police alarm does not include the
activation of an alarm system which is caused by storms, tornadoes, or other violent
weather conditions. False police alarm also does not include the activation or failure of
an alarm system caused by transmission lines not under the control of an alarm user or
alarm agent, the willful act of any person other than the alarm user or his or her
employees or agents or the alarm agent, and does not include activations or failures due
to conditions clearly beyond the control of the alarm agent or alarm user. False police
alarm does include the activation or use of an alarm system for purposes other than
warning or notification of an unauthorized intrusion, or robbery or attempted robbery, or
other emergency situations.
L. "Fire Chief" means the Chief of the Fire Department of the City, or the Chief's authorized
representative.
M. "Fire Department" means the Fire Department of the City.
N. "Holdup alarm system" means a method of signaling a robbery or attempted robbery or
unauthorized intrusion of a premise in which the signal transmission is initiated by the
direct action of a person.
O. "Indicator" means the instrumentation on a monitor panel at the receiving terminal of a
signal line which produces both visual and audible alarm signals when activated by a
signaling device at an identifiable location or origin.
P. "Key" (to a telephone line) means to use a telephone line for transmitting a message,
either by direct connection or by a mechanism not so connected, that utilizes the
microphone of a standard telephone to do so.
Q. "Modified central station" means a central station operated for the customers of an alarm
business by a person which provides at all times the service of monitoring and relaying
messages for customers to the Police or Fire Department communications center in
connection with automatic protection devices and alarm systems, but which does not
meet the requirements nor provide all the services of a central station. This definition
includes "monitoring stations".
R. "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other
organization, but does not include the City.
S. "Police Chief" means the Chief of the Police Department of the City or the Chief's
authorized representative.
T. "Police Department" means the Police Department of the City.
U. "Protected premises" means that part of a building or real estate to which protection is
afforded by an alarm system.
V. "Primary trunkline" means a telephone line leading directly into the communications
center of the Police or Fire Department that is for the purpose of handling emergency
calls on a person-to-person basis, and which line is identified as a Public Safety Response
line such as "911" or by a specific listing among any Police Department numbers in any
telephone directory issued by any telephone directory publisher serving the City and
surrounding area.
W. "Secondary trunkline" means a telephone line leading into the Police or Fire Department
or City Hall that is identified by a specific listing among the telephone numbers in any
telephone directory issued by any telephone directory publisher serving the City and
surrounding area that is for handling administrative and other non-emergency calls on a
person-to-person basis.
X. "Signaling device" means an instrument that, upon detection of physical force or condition
characteristic of an emergency, will activate a signal line in such a way as to cause both
visual and audible signals to be registered by indicators on a monitor panel at the
receiving terminal of the signal line in a central location.
Y. "Signal line" means a line not connected to any standard telephone equipment which
leads into an indicator panel in the communications center of the Police or Fire
Department, or into such a panel in either a central station system or a modified central
station and which is designated to transmit an alarm signal readily identifiable as to
location or origin.
Z. "Telephone answering service" means a business operating a telephone answering
activity that includes the service whereby trained employees on duty at all times receive
pre-recorded voice messages from automatic protection devices and who have the duty
to relay immediately by live voice any such emergency message to the Police or Fire
Department.
AA."This Chapter" includes any regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-
2-24 and the standards, rules, and regulations established by the Chief.
6-2-3 Automatic Protection Devices.
A. Restrictions on keying.
1. No person shall install, cause to be installed, or permit the installation or operation of
an automatic protection device keyed either to a primary or secondary trunkline on
premises of any kind within the corporate limits of the City.
2. An owner or lessee of an automatic, protection device who has an alarm system
permit may authorize an alarm business licensed by this Chapter to intercept the
signal or message and relay it by direct line to the communications center of the
Police or Fire Department, provided that the device meets the requirements of this
Chapter and, further provided that the operations of such device will not interfere with
the normal functions of the Police or Fire Department.
3. No person, except an alarm business or alarm agent with a license from the City as
required by this Chapter, shall install any automatic protection device within the
corporate limits of the City.
B. Keying to Intermediaries - Any person who has an automatic protection device within the
corporate limits of the City may arrange to have such device keyed to any of the following
intermediaries who are authorized to relay emergency messages to the communications
center of the Police or Fire Department, as appropriate:
1. A licensed central state system;
2. A licensed modified central station;
3. A licensed telephone monitoring
6-2-4 Alarm System Restrictions.
A. No central station system, modified central station, or telephone answering service shall
relay messages from any alarm system to the Police or Fire Department other than
through a direct line.
B. Any audible signal or noise from an alarm system which can be heard directly outside the
perimeter of the protected premises must automatically terminate within fifteen (15)
minutes from the time it was activated.
II. LICENSING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
6-2-5 Alarm Business - License Required. No person shall conduct an alarm business within
the corporate limits of the City unless they possess a currently valid alarm business license
issued pursuant to this Chapter.
6-2-6 Alarm Agent - License Required. No person shall conduct themselves as an alarm
agent within the corporate limits of the City unless they have a currently valid alarm agent
business license issued pursuant this Chapter. A person holding a valid alarm business license
is exempt from the requirement of obtaining an alarm agency license.
6-2-7 Alarm System - Permit Required.
A. No person shall install, cause to be installed, or permit the installation or operation of an
alarm system unless a currently valid alarm system permit has been issued by the Police
or Fire Chief for such alarm system pursuant to the provisions in this Chapter. A separate
alarm system permit shall be obtained for each fire, burglar, or holdup alarm which
transmits a signal or message to a central station system, a modified central station, a
telephone answering service or an on-premises audible and/or visual alarm device which
can be heard or observed outside the perimeter of the protected premises.
B. Those conducting alarm businesses shall be responsible for procuring and processing all
applications, and any renewals, for their subscribers, and for transmitting completed
applications to the Police and Fire Chief and paying the required fees. Those conducting
alarm businesses are further required to report, within thirty (30) days, the discontinued
use of any alarm system serviced by the alarm business to the Police and Fire Chief.
C. Where the alarm system is in operation and is not serviced by an alarm business, the
person owning, or possessing such alarm system shall be responsible for obtaining the
permit and shall make direct application to the Police and Fire Chief. When an alarm
system not serviced by an alarm business is no longer in operation, the person owning
or possessing such alarm system shall report, within thirty (30) days, the discontinued
use of the alarm system to the Police and Fire Chief.
6-2-8 Central Station System - License Required. No person shall operate a central station
system, which relays messages to the Police or Fire Department in the absence of a currently
valid central station system license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
6-2-9 Modified Central Station - License Required. No person shall conduct a modified
central station system which relays messages to the Police or Fire Department in the absence
of a currently valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
6-2-10 Telephone Answering Service - License Required. No person shall conduct a
telephone answering service which includes in such service the receipt and relay of messages to
the Police or Fire Department from automatic protection devices in the absence of a currently
valid telephone answering service license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
6-2-11 License and Permit Applications and Fees.
A. Applications for licenses and permits required by this Chapter shall be filed with the Police
Department on forms provided for that purpose, and shall be reviewed by the Police and
Fire Chief.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee. The fee required by this
Section shall be set by resolution of the City Council and is listed in the Schedule of Permit
and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances.
6-2-12 License and Permit Renewal, Modifications.
A. All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire annually on June 30. All
applications for renewal of such licenses and permits shall be filed with the Police
Department and reviewed by the Police and Fire Chief on forms provided for that purpose.
The fee for the renewal of each license shall be the same as the initial application fee and
shall be paid to the City Clerk prior to the time the license or permit renewal is issued.
B. Alarm system permits need not be renewed.
C. Any modification of, change in ownership of, change in location of, or addition to an alarm
system requires that a new application, new application fee, and new alarm system
permit be issued pursuant to this Chapter.
6-2-13 Review of License, Permit, or Renewal.
A. The Police and Fire Chief shall have a reasonable time to investigate the application for a
license, or for the renewal thereof, and the background of the applicant to the extent
deemed necessary. Thereafter, the license shall be issued unless the Police and Fire Chief
finds that:
1. The applicant has submitted an application that contains a misstatement or omission
of any material fact, or
2. Some matter or activity in the background of the applicant reasonably related to the
activities to be engaged in is such that a reasonable person would conclude that there
would be an undue risk to the public health, safety, or welfare if the license were
granted, or
3. The applicant has been convicted of a felony within the last fifteen (15) years from
the date of the application.
B. The Police and Fire Chief shall have a reasonable time to investigate the application for a
permit, or for the renewal thereof, to the extent deemed necessary. The Police and Fire
Chief may also inspect the alarm system and protected premises to the extent deemed
necessary. Thereafter, the permit shall be issued unless the Police and Fire Chief finds
that:
1. The applicant has submitted an application that contains a misstatement or omission
of any material fact, or
2. The alarm system was, or will be, installed by an unlicensed alarm business or alarm
agent, or
3. The alarm system is not in conformance with this Chapter, or
4. The alarm system has generated an excessive number of false alarms such that it
has interfered with the conduct of the business of the Police Department or Fire
Department.
C. After the Police and Fire Chief review and investigate an application for a license
or permit under this Chapter, the Police and Fire Chief shall confer with one
another within a reasonable time following the conclusion of their investigation
and vote to either approve or deny such application. If one votes in the
affirmative and another in the negative, the Chief of each department shall within a
reasonable time submit to the City Administrator his or her respective decision and any
supporting explanation or documentation. The City Administrator shall then decide
whether the application should be denied or approved within a reasonable time following
receipt of all relevant information and shall provide notice of such decision pursuant to
Subsection 6-2-13[D] or [E].
D. If the license or permit, or renewal thereof, is denied, the reason for the denial shall be
set forth in writing and provided to the applicant or his designee as provided in 6-2-15.
E. Upon approval by the Police and Fire Chief, or by the City Administrator in the event of
disagreement between the Police and Fire Chief, of the application for a license or permit,
or for the renewal thereof, the Chiefs or City Administrator shall endorse his/her approval
thereon and transmit the application together with the receipt for the fee to the office of
the City Clerk who shall be responsible for the issuance of the license, permit, or renewal
thereof.
6-2-14 Revocation and Suspension of Licenses and Permits.
A. Grounds. A license granted under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Police and Fire Chief if together they find that the business operations of the licensee are
being, or have been, conducted in violation of state law or local ordinance, or that there
exists any of the grounds for not issuing an original license, or renewal, pursuant to this
Chapter. For the purpose of this Chapter, the holder of a license shall be responsible for
the conduct of its officers, agents, or employees. A permit may be suspended or revoked
if there exists any of the grounds for not issuing an original permit, or renewal thereof,
pursuant to this Chapter.
B. Notice and Hearing. A license or permit, however, may not be revoked or suspended until
a hearing has been held before the Police and Fire Chief. Written notice of the time and
place for the hearing shall be served upon the licensee or permittee at least seven days
prior to the date set for the hearing if such notice is personally served. Such notice shall
contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking or suspending the
license or permit. Notice shall be given either by personal delivery to the person to be
notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at the address appearing on the application. If
notice is given by mail as provided, it shall be deemed given at the time of the deposit in
the United States mail, but such notice shall be given at least seven days prior to the
date set for such hearing.
C. Decisions. After the Police and Fire Chief have held a pre-revocation or
suspension hearing, the Police and Fire Chief shall confer with one another within
a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing and shall vote either
for or against revocation or suspension. If one votes in the affirmative and
another in the negative, the Chief of each department shall within a reasonable time
submit to the City Administrator his or her respective decision and any supporting
explanation or documentation. The City Administrator shall then decide whether the
application should be denied or approved within a reasonable time following receipt of all
relevant information and shall provide notice of such decision pursuant to Subsection 6-
2-15.
D. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Police and Fire Chief or City Administrator may
appeal to the City Council within the time and manner provided in this Chapter.
6-2-15 Notice of Decision.
A. Within ten (10) days after reaching a determination regarding an application for a license
or permit; or after a hearing concerning the suspension or revocation of a license or
permit, the Police and Fire Chief, or the City Administrator in the case of disagreement
between the Police and Fire Chief, shall cause a written copy of the decision to be served
on the applicant, licensee, or permittee at the address set forth in the application or
renewal, or at an address specified by the applicant, licensee, or permittee. Said decision
shall be deemed served when deposited in the United States mail.
B. The copy of the decision shall apprise the applicant, licensee, or permittee of his right to
appeal and of the time limitation and appeal procedures specified in this Chapter.
6-2-16 Appeal Notice.
A. An applicant, licensee, or permittee aggrieved by the decision of the Police and Fire Chief
or the City Administrator shall have the right to appeal to the City Council.
B. Notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after service of
the decision. The notice of appeal shall briefly state the basis for such appeal.
6-2-17 Appeal Procedure.
A. Hearing. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal together with an appeal fee of fifty dollars
($50.00), the City Clerk shall cause the matter to be placed on the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. The City Clerk shall cause a written
notice of the time and place of meeting to be given to the appealing party. If the appealing
party deems additional time is necessary to prepare a presentation for the hearing, the
appealing party shall notify the City Clerk thereof and upon receipt of such notice the
City Clerk shall continue the hearing to a later date, not to exceed thirty days beyond the
original date set for hearing.
B. Burden of Proof. At the time and place set for hearing upon the appeal, the City Council
shall give the appealing party a reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show just
cause why the determination of the Police and Fire Chief, or the City Administrator, as
the case may be, should not be upheld. In cases where a license or permit has been
denied, the burden of proof to show that the action taken by the Police and Fire Chief or
the City Administrator was arbitrary, capricious, or in excess of their authority shall be
upon the appealing party. In cases where a license or permit has been suspended or
revoked, or a license or permit renewal was denied, the burden of proof shall be upon
the Police and Fire Chief, or the City Administrator if he or she made the final decision,
to establish that appropriate grounds existed for such action.
C. Notice of Decision. The City Council shall reach a decision on the matter within fourteen
(14) days after the hearing and within ten (10) days after reaching a determination with
reference thereto shall cause a written copy of the decision to be mailed to the appellant.
At the same time the City Council shall give to the Police and Fire Chief a copy of such
decision.
6-2-18 Business License Tax. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as a waiver
or exemption from any business license tax otherwise applicable.
6-2-19 Posting of Licenses and Permits. A central station system, modified central station,
telephone answering service, or an alarm business license shall be posted at all times at the
premises from which the licensed activity is conducted. A person acting as an alarm agent shall
carry their alarm agent registration card on their person at all times while so engaged and shall
display said card to any police officer or fire fighter upon demand. An alarm system permit shall
be posted at all times on the protected premises.
6-2-20 Transfer of License or Permit Prohibited. No license or permit issued pursuant to
this Chapter shall be transferable.
6-2-21 Failure to Pay Ad Valorem Taxes. No license or permit shall be issued or renewed
pursuant to this Chapter if any ad valorem taxes upon any real property or personal property
used directly or indirectly in connection with the proposed business or service are delinquent.
Where a license or permit has been issued and ad valorem taxes on such property thereafter
become delinquent, the license or permit shall be subject to cancellation immediately without
notice and without right of appeal.
6-2-22 Service Available. Each alarm business shall have licensed alarm agents and supplies
and equipment so located as to be able to respond to a request for repair or adjustment of any
alarm system that such an alarm business sold, maintained, or inspected within four (4) hours
of the request for such service. They shall respond within four (4) hours of the request; except
that if the request occurs within the hours that the protected premises is open for business or
otherwise substantially occupied, repair or adjustment may be made at any time prior to the
closing of the protected premises.
6-2-23 Responsibility for Alarm Response. Every person who has an alarm system on
premises shall, upon notification that the alarm system is giving a signal, proceed immediately
to the protected premises and render all necessary service. However, the owner or person in
control of the protected premises may enter into an agreement with an alarm business or other
responsible party or service to respond in that person's stead to the site of the alarm. A
responsible person shall respond to every notification, without exception. Such response shall
be made within thirty (30) minutes of notification. Failure to respond to such notification on more
than one occasion will result in the revocation of the alarm permit
III. ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
6-2-24 Generally.
A. Enforcement and administration of this Chapter shall be functions of the Chiefs of the
respective departments (Police or Fire) concerned except where this Chapter specifically
assigns responsibility to other parties.
B. The Chiefs may propose rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the terms of this
Chapter, prescribing minimum equipment standards, facility standards, and operation
standards for the installation, construction, maintenance and operation of alarm systems,
central station systems, modified central stations, telephone answering services, and
requiring inspection and approval of all such systems. Such rules and regulations shall
have the full force and effect of law upon adoption by resolution by the City Council after
a public hearing. No permit or license shall be issued for any device or system which does
not comply with the provisions of this Chapter and said rules and regulations as finally
adopted. Copies of these standards shall be furnished to all licensed alarm businesses,
central station systems, modified central stations, and telephone monitoring services,
and shall be available for inspection in the office of the Chiefs and City Clerk.
6-2-25 Testing of Equipment. No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an
automatic protection device or a signaling device designed to make direct connection with the
Police or Fire departments without first contacting the Public Safety Communications Center
where the equipment to be tested or demonstrated is keyed to an intermediary. Such permission
is not required unless the alarm or signal is to be relayed to the Police or Fire Department.
6-2-26 False Fire Alarms.
A. A report on a form approved by the Fire Chief shall be forwarded, if requested by the
Chief, to the Fire Department within forty-eight (48) hours, Sundays and holidays
excepted, with regard to each and every false alarm transmitted to the Public Safety
Communications Center, and such additional information as may be reasonably required
by the Chief to be supplied with regard thereto. The report shall be made by the alarm
business where the alarm system is serviced by an alarm business. The report shall be
made by the alarm system permittee in all other instances.
B. Defective Equipment. If any false fire alarm occurs as a result of any defect of the fire
alarm system or equipment, including the method of sounding or transmitting the alarm
signal, or from any defect in the installation of the alarm equipment, including the method
of sounding or transmitting the alarm signal, or the faults or neglect of the alarm system
permittee of any of their employees, the report of the false fire alarm shall include a
statement as to the action taken to remedy the false fire alarm cause.
C. Interference with the Department. In addition to the foregoing remedy of suspension or
revocation, when false fire alarms from any premises are so excessive as to interfere
with the normal conduct of the business of the Fire Department, the Fire Chief may
decline to respond to any alarms until the cause of such false fire alarms is corrected.
The Fire Chief shall make reasonable effort to give prompt notice of such action to the
owner or occupant of the protected premises.
6-2-27 False Police Alarms.
A. Reports. A report on a form approved by the Police Chief shall be forwarded, if requested
by the Chief, to the Police Department within forty-eight (48) hours, Sundays and
holidays excepted, with regard to each and every false alarm transmitted to the Public
Safety Communications Center together with such additional information as may be
reasonably required by the Chief. The report shall be made by the alarm business where
the alarm system is serviced by an alarm business. The report shall be made by the alarm
system permittee in all other cases.
B. Defective Equipment. If any false police alarm occurs as a result of any defect of the
alarm equipment, including the method of sounding or transmitting the alarm signal, or
from any defect in installation of the equipment, including the method of sounding or
transmitting the alarm signal or the faults or neglect of the alarm system permittee or
any of their employees, the report of the false alarm shall include a statement as to the
action taken to remedy the false police alarm cause.
C. Interference with the Department. In addition to the foregoing remedy of revocation or
suspension, when false police alarms from any protected premises are interfering with
the normal conduct of the business of the Police Department, the Chief may decline to
respond to any alarms until the cause of such false alarms is corrected. The Chief shall
make a reasonable effort to give prompt notice of such action to the owner or occupant
of the protected premises.
6-2-28 Change of Location. If the location of the communications facilities of the Police
Department should be changed or moved, the cost of moving any alarm system or parts thereof
shall be borne by the permittee.
6-2-29 Regulation of Charges. If alarm reporting equipment located inside the Police
Department is privately owned and the owner makes any charge for the connection to that
equipment, such charge shall be fully borne by the owner of the reporting equipment.
6-2-30 Liability of the City Limited. The City shall take every reasonable precaution to assure
that alarm signals and messages received from central station systems, modified central
stations, and telephone monitoring services regarding alarm signals received by the City are
given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. The City shall not be liable for any
defects in the operation of any alarm devices or signal line systems, for any failure or neglect to
respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm, nor for the failure or neglect of any person with
a license or permit issued pursuant to this Chapter in connection with the installation,
maintenance, or operation of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals and pre-recorded
alarm messages, or the relaying of such signals and messages. In the event that the City finds
it necessary to disconnect a defective automatic protection device or signaling device, the City
shall incur no liability by such action.
6-2-31 Conflict of Interest Prohibited. No employee of the Police or Fire Department, nor a
member of such employee's immediately family, shall have any interest, directly or indirectly, in
any alarm business within the limits of the City. No such employee or family member shall be
employed by an alarm business subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
6-2-32 Violations and Penalties. Violations of this Chapter shall be deemed a municipal
infraction and shall be punishable as provided in the Schedule of Penalties in Appendix
A to this Code of Ordinances.
Title 6 – Police and Public Safety
Chapter 3 – General Offenses
SECTIONS:
6-3-1 Penalty
6-3-2 Firecrackers; Explosives
6-3-3 False Information as to Incendiary Devices
6-3-4 False Reports to or Communications with Public Safety Entities
6-3-5 Threats of Incendiary or Explosive Devises.
6-3-6 Assault
6-3-7 Theft
6-3-8 Criminal Mischief
6-3-9 Defacing Notices
6-3-10 Trespass
6-3-11 Obstructing Public Officials
6-3-12 Drug Paraphernalia
6-3-13 Disorderly Conduct
6-3-14 Permitting Disorderly Conduct
6-3-15 Urinating or Defecating
6-3-16 Unlawful Assembly
6-3-17 Failure to Disperse
6-3-18 Nudity
6-3-19 Police Dogs; Willful Mistreatment- Interference
6-3-20 Weapons
6-3-1 Penalty. Except as otherwise provided, a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter
is a simple misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Section 1-2-14 of this Code of
Ordinances.
6-3-2 Fireworks; Explosives. The sale, use, and exploding of fireworks within the City are
subject to the regulations contained within Title 15 Chapter 8 of the City Code.
6-3-3 False Information as to Incendiary Devices. No person shall, knowing the
information to be false, convey or cause to be conveyed to any person any false information
concerning the placement of any incendiary or explosive device or material or other destructive
substance or device in any place where persons or property would be endangered.
(Code of Iowa, Section 712.7)
6-3-4 False Reports to or Communications with Public Safety Entities. It shall be
unlawful for any person to report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department,
a law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the information is false,
or to report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Section 718.6)
6-3-5 Threats of Incendiary or Explosive Devises. No person shall threaten to place or
attempt to place any incendiary or explosive device or material, or any destructive substance or
device in any place where it will endanger persons or property.
(Code of Iowa, Section 712.8)
6-3-6 Assault. A person commits an assault when, without justification, the person does any
of the following:
A. Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is intended to result in
physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent
ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [1])
B. Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate physical contact which
will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [2])
However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such other person,
are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act
is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an
unreasonable risk or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an assault. Provided,
where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts is employed by a school district or
accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services
to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive
situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff member performing
employment duties in a school building, on school grounds or at an official school function
regardless of the location, the act is not an assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation is between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of
the intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
6-3-7 Theft. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Section 714.1)
6-3-8 Criminal Mischief.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage, deface, alter, or destroy any
tangible property when that person has no right to so act.
(Code of Iowa, Section 716.1)
B. Multiple Acts. Whenever criminal mischief is committed upon more than one item of
property at approximately the same location or time period, so that all of these acts of
mischief can be attributed to a single scheme, plan, or conspiracy, such acts shall be
considered as a single act of criminal mischief.
(Code of Iowa, Section 716.2)
6-3-9 Defacing Notices. It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear
down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of the United
States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place
within the City by authority of the law or by order of any court, during the time for which the
same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Section 716.1)
6-3-10 Trespass. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of
another. As used in this Section, the term “property” includes any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure whether publicly or privately
owned. The term “trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Section 716.7 and 716.8)
A. To enter upon or in property without justification or without the implied or actual
permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit
a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or
therein anything inanimate or animate.
(Code of Iowa, Section 716.7[2a])
B. To enter or remain upon or in property without justification after being notified or
requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner,
lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or
person in lawful possession or by any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose
duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2b])
C. To enter upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with
the lawful use of the property by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2c])
D. To be upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging,
harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the
implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2d])
E. Exception. Trespassing shall not include entering upon the property of another for the
sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that the person
retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the
property to retrieve the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere
with the lawful use of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [3])
6-3-11 Obstructing a Public Official.
A. Interference with Official Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly resist or
obstruct any one known by the person to be a peace officer in the performance of any
act which is in the scope of the officer's lawful duty or authority, or to knowingly resist or
obstruct the service or execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process
or order of any Court.
(Code of Iowa, Section 719.1)
B. Refusing to Assist Officer. Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or
peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as
required. It shall be unlawful for any person to unreasonably and without lawful cause to
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Section 719.2)
C. Harassment of Public Officers and Employees. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing
the officer's or employee's duty.
(Code of Iowa, Section 718.4)
6-3-12 Drug Paraphernalia.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products,
or materials of any kind used or attempted to be used in combination with a controlled
substance, except those items used in combination with the lawful use of a controlled
substance, to knowingly or intentionally and primarily do any of the following:
1. Manufacture a controlled substance.
2. Inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance.
3. Test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
4. Enhance the effect of a controlled substance. "Drug paraphernalia" does not include
hypodermic needles or syringes if manufactured, delivered, sold, or possessed for a
lawful purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Section 124.414[1])
B. Manufacture, Deliver, Sell or Possession. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or
intentionally manufacture, deliver, sell, or possess drug paraphernalia.
(Code of Iowa, Section 124.414[2])
C. Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to place in
any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication of any advertisement, knowing,
or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended
for use as drug paraphernalia.
6-3-13 Disorderly Conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
A. Engages in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful
assembly of persons, provided, that participants in athletic contests may engage in such
conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.
B. Makes loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public building which
causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
C. Directs abusive epithets or makes any threatening gesture which the person knows or
reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
D. Without lawful authority or color of authority, the person disturbs any lawful assembly or
meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
E. By words or action, initiates or circulates a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other
catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
F. Knowingly and publicly uses the flag of the United States in such a manner as to show
disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable
expectation that such use will provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or
assault.
(Iowa Code, Section 723.4)
6-3-14 Permitting Disorderly Conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit
any disorderly conduct prohibited in Section 6-3-13 in any house or upon any premises owned,
occupied, or possessed by him.
6-3-15 Urinating and Defecating. It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto
any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including
but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or window thereof, or onto
any public or private land.
6-3-16 Unlawful Assembly. It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to assemble
together, if any or all of them act in a violent manner, with the intent that any or all of them will
commit a public offense. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to willingly join in or
remain a part of an unlawful assembly knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe that it
is such.
(Code of Iowa, Section 723.2)
6-3-17 Failure to Disperse. A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful
assembly, or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly, to disperse. It
shall be unlawful for any person within hearing distance of such a peace officer to refuse to obey
said command.
(Code of Iowa, Section 723.3)
6-3-18 Nudity. It shall be unlawful and considered disorderly conduct for a man or woman to
display his/her private parts, as defined as person’s genitalia, buttocks or a woman’s breasts, in
public.
6-3-19 Police Dogs, Willful Mistreatment — Interference. It shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, or
kill any dog used by the Police Department in the functions or duties of such department, or to
interfere with or tamper with any such dog while being used by the Police Department.
(Code of Iowa, Section 717B.9)
6-3-20 Weapons.
A. Discharging Firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any missile upon any
street, alley, public place or to discharge any firearm, B.B. gun, pellet gun, bow and
arrow, sling shot, or any other device which discharges a projectile, within the corporate
limits of the City of Muscatine, except on a recognized target range.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.12[2])
Deer Hunting Exception. It shall not be deemed a violation of this Subsection to use a
bow and arrow to hunt deer on parcels of two (2) acres or more, or to discharge a firearm,
other than a centerfire rifle or other offensive weapon as defined by Iowa Code, to hunt
deer on parcels of sixty (60) contiguous acres or more, subject to the following
conditions:
1. The person is the owner of the property or has permission from the owner to allow
for bow or firearm hunting.
2. The person bow hunting must successfully complete a proficiency test as approved
by action of the Muscatine City Council.
3. The person has a license or permit required by the State of Iowa to hunt deer with a
bow or firearm.
4. The person has a permit issued by the Muscatine City Clerk.
5. The bow hunt shall be authorized by action of the Muscatine City Council prior to
October 1 of each year, during the time when such hunting is allowed by the law and
regulations of the State of Iowa.
6. Hunting shall not occur within 50 yards of any residence, church, or occupied
structure.
7. The bow hunt shall be limited to the sex of the deer allowed by the laws or regulations
of the State of Iowa and as allowed by action of the Muscatine City Council.
8. The person hunting must demonstrate compliance with these requirements to any law
enforcement officer upon request.
9. Persons wishing to participate in the bow hunting program are required to attend an
informational meeting held by the City of Muscatine in advance of the designated
season.
10.With the permission of City Council, designated public property may be used during
the designated hunting season.
11. Property owners with adjoining lot lines will be permitted to combine properties to
reach the minimum two (2) acres required for bow hunting and there will be no zoning
restriction on this acreage. However, property owners are not allowed to join property
in order to reach the sixty-acre (60) requirement needed to qualify for the firearm
hunting exception allowed under this Section. The sixty (60) acres must be
contiguous.
B. Carrying of Weapons. It shall be unlawful for any person to go armed with a dangerous
weapon concealed on or about the person, or to, within the limits of the City, go armed
with a pistol or revolver, or any loaded firearm of any kind, whether concealed or not, or
to knowingly carry or transport in a vehicle a pistol or revolver, except as otherwise
provided under Chapter 724.4 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Section 724.4)
C. Peace Officers – Exception. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent peace
officers from using their weapons in the performance of their duties.
Title 6 – Police and Public Safety
Chapter 4 – Graffiti
SECTIONS:
6-4-1 Definitions
6-4-2 Graffiti Prohibited
6-4-3 Graffiti Declared a Nuisance
6-4-4 Implements of Graffiti – Restrictions
6-4-5 Penalties
6-4-1 Definitions.
A. “Graffiti” means any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram,
sketch, picture, or letter placed upon the real or personal property of an owner, excluding
vehicles,, without the owner’s express consent; provided, however, consent of the owner
shall not be an exception where the graffiti is visible from public property or right-of-way
and tends to incite violence or disorderly conduct or is obscene under state law. After a
prima facie showing that an inscription or marking is graffiti, the burden of proving the
owner’s express consent is upon the defendant.
B. “Hearing officer” means the City Administrator or his/her designee.
C. “Implement of graffiti” means a spray paint container, paint, ink, marking
pens containing non-water soluble fluid, brushes, or other materials used for painting,
marking, scratching or etching in a non-temporary way.
D. “Minor” means any person under the age of eighteen years.
6-4-2 Graffiti Prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the real or personal property of
another.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to have graffiti, visible from public property or
right-of-way, upon his real or personal property for more than a reasonable time
period not to exceed ten days.
6-4-3 Graffiti Declared a Nuisance. Graffiti, visible from public property or right-of-way, is
hereby declared a nuisance and must be removed by the property owner within a reasonable
time period not to exceed thirty (30) days after notification by the City. Said notice shall be
delivered personally or telephonically to the property owner followed by written notice through
the regular United States mail. The property owner shall be informed in said notice as to the
deadline by which he or she must act. If the property owner wishes to appeal the notice, he
or she may do so by filing a written notice of appeal with the office of the City Clerk and paying
an appeal fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Said appeal shall be heard by the hearing officer.
Upon hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination if graffiti is present. If graffiti
is found to be present, said hearing officer shall specify a time by which the graffiti shall be
removed. If the graffiti remains after the deadline provided by the initial notice, or in the case
of an appeal the deadline specified by the hearing officer, the City may remove the graffiti and
assess the cost of abatement against the property.
6-4-4 Implements of Graffiti – Restrictions.
A. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint in cans larger than three
fluid ounces to a minor. The sale or transfer of more than 3 cans containing 3 or less
fluid ounces at any one time is prohibited.
B. No minor shall, at the time of purchase of any spray paint container, furnish
fraudulent evidence of majority.
C. No minor shall possess a spray paint container in cans larger than three fluid ounces
on any private property, except with the express permission of the lawful owner or
manager of said private property.
D. No minor shall possess an implement of graffiti upon public property at any time
when not in the company of his/her parent or legal guardian.
E. No person shall, absent express permission of the property owner, possess an implement
of graffiti in any public building, or upon any public property or private property with the
intent to use the same to deface said building or any property thereon.
F. Any person whose business includes the sale of any spray paint container shall have
posted in a conspicuous place a sign which clearly states that: “It is unlawful to
sell spray paint in cans larger than three fluid ounces to any person under the age of
18 years.”
6-4-5 Penalties. A violation of Section 6-4-2(A) or Section 6-4-4(A-E) may constitute either a
simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction. A violation of Sections 6-4-2(B), 6-4-3, 6-4-4(F)
is a municipal infraction. Any simple misdemeanor violation under this Chapter shall be
punished as set out in Section 1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances. A municipal infraction
violation under this Chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set out in Title 1, Chapter 3 of
this Code of Ordinances.
Title 6 – Police and Public Safety
Chapter 5 – Minors
SECTIONS:
6-5-1 Curfew Definitions
6-5-2 Cigarettes and Tobacco
6-5-3 Contributing to Delinquency
6-5-1 CURFEW:
A. Definitions.
1. Minor - An unemancipated person who has not yet reached their 18th birthday.
2. Parent - A person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive parent,
as a legal guardian, as a person who stands in loco parentis, or by virtue of Court
Order.
3. Street - A way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter
of right for vehicular or pedestrian travel, including but not limited to streets, alleys,
sidewalks, irrespective of what the right of way is called.
B. Hours of Curfew. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years
to be or remain, in or upon any of the alleys, streets, or other public places in the City
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) a.m. and five o'clock (5:00) a.m..
C. Exceptions. In the following cases the presence of a minor on a City street or other
public place shall not constitute a violation of this Ordinance:
1. When the minor is accompanied by the minor's parent.
2. When the minor is accompanied by an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age
authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parent's place in accompanying
said minor for a designated period of time and purpose
3. When the minor exercises First Amendment rights, such as free exercise of religion,
freedom of speech, right of assembly, or right to petition the government, and the
use of City streets or other public places is a necessary incident thereto.
4. When the minor is traveling, via direct route, to or from a place of employment, or
such travel necessary in conjunction with employment duties.
5. When the minor is traveling through the City from and to destinations outside the
City, with no point of destination within the City, when such travel is by direct route.
6. When the minor is returning home by a direct route from and within 30 minutes from
the termination of a school or church activity, or government sponsored activity or
event.
7. When the minor is traveling to or from a City, school or church sponsored after prom
event.
D. Responsibility of Adults. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person
charged with the care and custody of any minor to allow or permit such minor to be in
or upon any of the streets, alleys or other public places within the curfew hours set by
Subsection 6-5-1[B], except as otherwise provided in Subsection 6-5-1[C].
E. Enforcement. Any peace officer of this City while on duty is hereby empowered to arrest
any minor who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance. Upon arrest, the minor
shall be returned to the custody of the parent, legal guardian or other person charged
with the care and custody of the minor.
6-5-2 Cigarettes and Tobacco. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of
age to smoke, use, possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products
or cigarettes. Possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by a person under eighteen (18)
years of age shall not constitute a violation of this Section if said person possesses the
cigarettes or tobacco products as part of the person’s employment and said person is employed
by a person who holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa and lawfully
offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
6-5-3 Contributing to Delinquency. It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child
under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
6-5-4 Penalty. A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is a simple misdemeanor
and is punishable as provided in Section 1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances.
Title 6 – Police and Public Safety
Chapter 6 – Parental Responsibilities
SECTIONS:
6-6-1 Title and Purpose
6-6-2 Definitions
6-6-3 Parental Duties
6-6-4 Parental Violation and Penalty
6-6-5 Notification of Parents; Record of Notification
6-6-6 Liability of Parents; Record of Notification
6-6-1. Title and Purpose. This Ordinance is declared necessary to protect and preserve the
rights, privileges, and property of the City of Muscatine, Iowa, or of its residents, and to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its
residents, and is intended to address situations where parents have failed to act responsibly
and reasonably in the supervision of their minor children to the detriment of the general public.
6-6-2. Definitions.
A. Delinquent Acts. Those acts which violate the laws of the United States, or the statutes
of the state or the ordinances of the City or those acts which would cause or tend to
cause the minor to come under the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court but do not include
traffic violations.
B. Minor. For the purpose of this ordinance, Minor shall include persons who are under
eighteen (18) years of age.
C. Parent.A mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the care or custody
of a minor or any person acting in the parent's stead who has custody or control of the
minor.
D. Illegal Drugs. Controlled substances obtained without a legal prescription.
E. Juvenile Delinquent. Those minors whose behavior interferes with the rights of others
or menaces the welfare of the community.
F. Recklessly. Conduct engaged in by a person in conscious disregard of a substantial and
justifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow which constitutes an
offense under this Section and where such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from
the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
6-6-3. Parental Duties.
A. It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise reasonable control to
prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act.
B. Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of reasonable parental control are
the following duties,
1. To keep illegal drugs or illegal weapons out of the home and provide that legal
weapons and/or ammunition are inaccessible to the minor except as provided in
Iowa Code Section 724.22.
2. To know the Curfew Ordinances (Title 6, Chapter 5, City Code) of the City of
Muscatine, and to require the minor to observe the Curfew Ordinance.
3. To require the minor, if sixteen (16) years of age or younger, to attend regular school
sessions and to forbid the minor to be absent from class without parental or school
permission as provided in the Muscatine Community School District attendance
policy unless the parent has filed the Affidavit as provided in Iowa Code Section
299.6.
4. To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must be absent, in
accordance with Iowa Department of Human Services guidelines.
5. To not knowingly allow or permit the minor to maliciously or willfully destroy real,
personal or mixed property which belongs to the City of Muscatine, or is located in
the City of Muscatine.
6. To not knowingly allow or permit the minor to keep stolen property, illegally possess
weapons or illegal drugs, or associate with known juvenile delinquents, or criminal
street gang members and to seek help from appropriate governmental authorities
or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when necessary.
6-6-4. Parental Violation and Penalty.
A. No parent of any minor under the age of 18 shall fail to exercise reasonable care.
C. A violation of this Chapter is a municipal infraction punishable as provided in Section 1-
3-2 of this Code of Ordinances. in addition to the civil penalty provided therein, upon
the second violation of this Chapter the parent or guardian may also be required to
participate in and fully complete a City approved community-based treatment program
(such as parenting skills, family services, employment and training, etc.).
C. “For the city to prove a first, second, or subsequent violation of the ordinance, it must
prove by clear, satisfactory, and convincing evidence that a parent failed to exercise
reasonable parental control of his or her minor, and the [delinquent act] was caused by
the parent's failure to exercise reasonable parental control.”
Hensler v. City of Davenport, 790 N.W.2d 569, 589 (Iowa 2010) & Iowa Code §
364.22(5)(b)
6-6-5. Notification of Parents; Record of Notification.
A. When a minor is apprehended or detained for a delinquent or reckless act, the parent
shall receive a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service with a certificate of personal service returned, from
the police department of the City of Muscatine following said adjudication or nonjudicial
sanction; and
B. A record of such notification shall be maintained by the Records Division of the Muscatine
Police Department.
C. A copy of this notice shall be provided to the minor's school attendance center
6-6-6. Liability of Parents; Record of Notification.
A. Liable for actual damages. The parent of an unemancipated minor who resides with such
parent is liable for actual damages for the willful or malicious acts of such minor which
cause injury to a person or property.
B. Recovery. No recovery under this Section may exceed $2,000.00 actual damages for
any one act or $5,000.00 to the same claimant for two or more acts of such willful or
malicious acts by the minor causing injury, in addition to taxable court costs. In
determining the damages to be allowed in an action under this article for personal injury,
only medical, dental and hospital expenses may be recovered.
C. Other Liability. This article shall not affect the recovery of damages in any other cause
of action where the liability of the parent is predicated on a common law or statutory
basis.
Title 6 – Police and Public Safety
Chapter 7 – Specified Crime Property
SECTIONS
6-7-1 Definitions
6-7-2 Specified Crime Property
6-7-3 Penalties
6-7-4 Procedure for Enforcement
6-7-5 Notice
6-7-6 Service of Notice
6-7-7 Administrative Appeal
6-7-8 Conduct of Hearing
6-7-9 Effect of Notice
6-7-1. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
A. “Bootlegging” means the illegal sale or service of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer
in violation of this Chapter or Iowa Code Chapter 123.
B. “Controlled substance” means a drug, substance or immediate precursor as
defined by Iowa Code Chapters 204A and 204B.
C. “Gambling” means games of skill or chance as defined by Iowa Code Chapter
99B and prohibited by Iowa Code Chapter 725.
D. “Owner” means any person, agent, firm, corporation, association or a
partnership, including a mortgagee in possession, in whom is vested all or part
of the legal title to property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and the
right to present use and enjoyment of the premises.
E. “Person” means any natural person, association, partnership, corporation or
other legal entity capable of owning or using property.
F. “Police Chief” means the person who has the responsibility to supervise and
direct the Police Department, and for the purposes of this Chapter may include
his/her designee.
G. “Prostitution, pimping or pandering” means those acts or activities as defined
by this Chapter or Iowa Code Chapter 725.
H. “Specified crime property” means any structure, including the real property
upon which it is situated, in which activity involving the unauthorized delivery,
possession or manufacture of a controlled substance, illegal gambling,
bootlegging, prostitution, pimping or pandering is occurring.
I. “Structure” means any building, building complex or structure, including but
not limited to edifice, units or any portion thereof, and the real property upon
which such building, building complex or structure is situated.
6-7-2. Specified Crime Property. No person shall use or allow to be used any
structure as specified crime property. When the structure and the property upon which
it is situated are owned by different persons, each person shall not use or allow to be
used such structure and property as specified crime property.
6-7-3. Penalties. Any person who fails to perform an act required by this Chapter or
who commits an act prohibited by this Chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction
punishable by the Civil Penalty as provided by Title 1, Chapter 3 of this Code of
Ordinances.
6-7-4. Procedure for Enforcement.
A. When the Police Chief has a reasonable belief that a structure is being used or
maintained in violation of this Chapter, the Police Chief shall notify the owner
of record in writing that the structure has been declared to be a Specified Crime
Property.
B. A reasonable belief that a structure is being used as a Specified Crime Property
may be found from (but is not limited to) evidence of drug paraphernalia in or
around the structure; an increase in vehicular or pedestrian traffic in or around
the structure; observations of the exchange of money; verified citizen
complaints of bootlegging; unauthorized delivery or manufacture of a controlled
substance; illegal gambling, bootlegging, prostitution, pimping or pandering;
and any other activity which leads a Police Officer to reasonably believe
violations exist.
6-7-5. Notice. The notice required in this Chapter shall notify the owner of record in
writing that a structure owned by him/her has been declared to be a Specified Crime
Property, and such notice shall contain the following information:
A. The street address and a description sufficient for identification of the premises
on which the structure is located; and
B. A statement that the Police Chief has found the structure to be in violation of
this Chapter, with an explanation as to why the structure has been declared a
Specified Crime Property.
6-7-6. Service of Notice.
A. A copy of the notice given pursuant to this Chapter shall be served on the owner
or an agent at least twenty (20) days prior to the commencement of any judicial
action by the City. Service shall be made either personally or by mailing a copy
of the notice by registered or certified mail, postage paid, return receipt
requested, to each person at his/her address as it appears in the records of the
County Auditor. In the event that notice is impossible to be served as set out
above, a copy of the notice may be posted at the property, if ten (10) days
have elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the owner and no
response or reply has been received by the City from the owner during that
period of time.
B. The failure of any owner to receive actual notice of the determination of the
Police Chief shall not preclude future proceedings under this Chapter.
6-7-7. Administrative Appeal.
A. Upon receipt of a notice of Specified Crime Property, as set out in Section 6,
the owner of record may challenge such notice by filing a request for an
administrative hearing. Such request for hearing shall be in writing and filed
with the Clerk within ten (10) days of service of the notice of Specified Crime
Property. A copy of this Chapter is available, upon request, from City Hall for a
copy fee.
B. Failure to request a hearing within such time period or to attend a scheduled
hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such a hearing.
6-7-8. Conduct of Hearing.
A. The hearing held pursuant to this Chapter shall be conducted before the Council
within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed fifteen (15) business days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and City holidays, from the date of a written
demand therefor. Such hearing may be continued for good cause. A notice of
hearing, including the time, date and location of the hearing, shall be made by
mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the owner
of record.
B. The sole issue before the Council shall be whether there exists a reasonable
belief that the structure was being used as Specified Crime Property when the
declaration of Specified Crime Property was made pursuant to Section 1(H).
The Council shall decide only that either (i) there is a reasonable belief that the
structure was used as Specified Crime Property and that the provisions of this
chapter shall apply, or (ii) there is not sufficient reasonable belief that the
structure was being used as Specified Crime Property and that the procedures
of this division shall be permanently stayed. A finding of no reasonable belief,
however, shall not preclude a future independent complaint, investigation and
notice of Specified Crime Property.
C. The decision of the Council shall be issued within four (4) days of the hearing
and the owner of record shall be notified consistent with the notice provisions
of this Chapter.
D. The decision of the Council shall be final.
6-7-9 Effect of Notice.
A. Subsequent to the declaration and notice that there exists a Specified Crime
Property, an owner shall have the opportunity to abate the illegal activity within
ten (10) days. If a landlord/tenant relationship, the owner/landlord may be
deemed to have abated the activity upon demonstration that he/she has taken
legal action as allowed by Iowa Code Chapter 562A, to terminate the rental
agreement and continue in good faith to follow abatement procedures and
provide the Police Chief with copies of all notices served in accordance with
Iowa Code Chapter 562A.
B. If after twenty (20) days the Police Chief determines that a Specified Crime
Property has not been abated, a notice of fine and an order of abatement shall
be filed in compliance with Iowa Code Chapter 364.22 and Title 1 Chapter 3 of
this Code of Ordinances.
Title 6 – Police and Public Safety
Chapter 8 – Animal Regulations
SECTIONS:
6-8-1 Definitions
6-8-2 Vaccination and Identification Required
6-8-3 Registration and License
6-8-4 Commercial Breeders
6-8-5 Actions Constituting a Nuisance
6-8-6 At Large Prohibited
6-8-7 Impoundment, Notice, Disposition
6-8-8 Animal Care
6-8-9 Rabies Suspects and Animal Bites
6-8-10 Vicious Animals; Guard or Attack Dogs
6-8-11 Dogs in Heat
6-8-12 Keeping of Dangerous Animals
6-8-13 Seizure, Impoundment, and Disposition of Dangerous or Vicious Animals
6-8-14 Penalties
6-8-15 Exemption for Police Service Dogs (K9s).
6-8-1 Definitions. For use in this Ordinance, the following terms are defined:
A. "Dogs" means both male and female animals of the canine species whether
altered or not.
B. "Animal" means dogs, cats, all domestic animals, and any other animal owned
by a person.
C. "At large" means any animal found off the premises of his owner and not under
the control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, housed in
a veterinary hospital or kennel, on a leash, or "at heel" beside a competent
person and obedient to that person's command.
D. "Owner" means any person or persons, firm, association, or corporation
owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an animal.
E. "Vicious animal" means any animal that bites or attacks human beings or other
animals or in a vicious and terrorizing manner attacks, or approaches in
apparent attitude of attack, a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any other
public ground or place or any private property other than the premises of the
owner, possessor, or keeper of such animal, or a dog that runs after and bites
or barks at horses, bicycles, or any vehicle being ridden or driven upon the
streets, sidewalks, or any public ground or place within the City.
F. "Dangerous animals" means:
1. Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle; which is of a wild nature
or disposition; and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious injury upon,
or causing disease among human beings or domestic animals and having
known tendencies as a species to do so.
2. Any animal declared to be dangerous by the City Council.
3. The following animals which shall be deemed to be dangerous animals per
se:
a. Lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynxes, cheetahs, and bobcats;
b. Wolves, coyotes, and foxes;
c. Badgers, wolverines, weasels, and skunks;
d. Raccoons;
e. Bears;
f. Monkeys and chimpanzees;
g. Alligators and crocodiles;
h. Scorpions;
i. Snakes that are venomous or constrictors;
j. Gila monsters; and
k. Any crossbreed of such animals which have similar characteristics to the
animals specified above.
G. "Altered" means a neutered male dog or cat which has been rendered sterile
by a surgical procedure (orchiectomy), or a spayed female dog or cat which has
been rendered sterile by a surgical procedure (ovariohysterectomy).
H. "Unaltered" means a dog or cat that has not been altered as defined in this
Section.
I. "Commercial Breeder" means an owner, engaged in the business of breeding
dogs or cats, who sells, exchanges, or leases dogs or cats in return for
consideration, or who offers to do so, whether or not the animals are raised,
trained, groomed, or boarded by the owner. An owner who owns or harbors
three or less breeding males or females is not a commercial breeder.
6-8-2 Vaccination and Identification Required.
A. All dogs and cats six (6) months or older shall be vaccinated against rabies.
The owner of any dog or cat shall cause to be placed upon the neck of such dog
or cat so owned, kept, or harbored, a collar made of durable material having
attached thereto a durable tag showing that the dog or cat has a current rabies
vaccination and a durable tag indicating the name of the animal, if any, the
owner's name, current address and telephone number, if any, and the license
tag as provided in Section 6-8-3 of the City Code of Muscatine. The collar with
the attached tag shall be kept on such dog or cat at all times.
B. All licensed veterinarians shall monthly furnish to the City Department of
Finance a list of those dogs and cats receiving rabies vaccinations or
inoculations listing the name, address and telephone number of the owner
securing the rabies vaccination or inoculation.
6-8-3 Registration and License.
A. All dogs or cats six (6) months of age or older shall be registered by an owner
who is 18 years of age or older and the owner, except owners of seeing-eye
dogs or owners who are confined to a wheelchair who are exempt from paying
the annual fee but shall register their dogs or cats, shall pay the annual fee to
the City in the office of the Department of Finance and Records. The fee required
by this Section shall be set by resolution of the City Council and is listed in the
Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of
Ordinances. The license will be in full force and effect until the anniversary date
of the rabies vaccination or inoculation of the animal and thereafter shall be
renewable annually.
B. It is the responsibility of the owner to furnish written proof that the dog or cat
being registered is altered. Persons making a license renewal application
received after thirty (30) calendar days of license expiration date shall pay as
a penalty an additional sum of $5.00.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to dogs or cats in the custody of
a veterinarian or animal shelter or animal rescuer or Animal Control Officer or
Police Officer or whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the City for
a period not exceeding thirty (30) calendar days.
D. It shall be a violation of this Section for any person to knowingly issue a check
for which funds are insufficient or to stop payment on any check written in
payment of fees contained in this Section. Any license(s) or penalties paid for
with such checks are, in the case of the license, invalid, and in the case of the
penalty, still outstanding.
E. No dog or cat shall be registered or licensed under this Section unless a
certificate of a licensed veterinarian certifying to the fact and date of rabies
inoculation of such dog or cat shall have been filed with or exhibited to the
authorized agent of the City in the Department of Finance and Records, showing
vaccination or inoculation as required by Section 6-8-2 of the City Code.
F. Upon payment of the fee as provided in this Section and upon producing a
certificate of inoculation or vaccination, the agent of the City in the Department
of Finance shall furnish to the person paying such fee a numbered license tag
and memorandum of registry for each dog or cat for which such fee has been
paid. It shall be a violation of this Section for any person to sell or transfer
ownership of any dog or cat over six (6) months of age without a dog or cat
license.
G. The Department of Finance and Records shall keep a complete registry of all
licensed dogs and cats, their breed, color and sex, and shall also enter therein
the name and address of the owner as given and the number of the license tag.
6-8-4 Commercial Breeders. An owner who is a commercial breeder and who holds
a commercial breeders license or certificate, if federally licensed, issued by the State
of Iowa, and a State of Iowa Sales Tax Certificate, is exempt from the provisions of
this Chapter with regard to licensing, however, such owner shall register with and pay
an annual Commercial Breeders fee to the City in the office of the Department of
Finance and Records and shall have proof of valid rabies vaccination as required by
this Chapter. The fee required by this Section shall be set by resolution of the City
Council and is listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix
B to this Code of Ordinances.
6-8-5 Actions Constituting a Nuisance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who possesses, harbors, or is in charge of
any dog or other domestic animal not to immediately remove excrement
deposited by said animal upon a common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, play
area, park, or upon any other public property, or upon any private property
when permission of the owner or tenant of said property has not been obtained,
and such is hereby deemed to be a public nuisance and prohibited. All
excrements removed shall be placed in an airtight container until it is removed
pursuant to refuse collection procedures or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary
manner.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to allow or permit such animal
to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or
interference with, the premises.
C. It shall be unlawful for an owner of any animal to allow or permit such animal
to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent
and habitual howling, yelping, barking, meowing, or otherwise; or by running
after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles.
6-8-6 At Large Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having the
care, custody, or control of any animal to allow such animal to run at large within the
City.
6-8-7 Impoundment, Notice, Disposition.
A. Any animal found running at large shall be taken by the Animal Control Officer
or any Police Officer and impounded in the local animal shelter and there
confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than seven (7) days, and
thereafter disposed of in a humane manner as authorized.
B. When animals are found running at large and their ownership is known to the
Animal Control Officer or Police Officer, such animal need not be impounded,
but such officer may cite the owners of such animal to appear in court to answer
charges of the violation of this Chapter.
C. Immediately upon impounding animals, the Animal Control Officer or Police
Officer shall make every possible reasonable effort to notify the owners of such
animal so impounded and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they
may regain custody of such animal.
6-8-8 Animal Care.
A. No owner shall fail to provide his or her animals with sufficient good and
wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and
treatment.
B. No person shall beat, cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise
abuse an animal.
C. No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
D. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal
shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall
immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the
owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report
the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane
society.
E. No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with
food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by a domestic animal,
provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property
common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substance.
F. Owners of animals shall notify the U.S. Postal Service and utility companies
when an "invisible fence" is in place to advise them of animals being kept on
the premises of such owners and shall post a sign on the premises visible to
the public indicating the presence of an "invisible fence". Proof of notification
to the U.S. Postal Service and utility companies shall be filed with the City Clerk.
6-8-9 Rabies Suspects and Animal Bites. Any dog or cat which is suspected of
having rabies, or which has bitten a person or other animal, shall be impounded and
confined, either at the residence of the owner of said animal, or under the supervision
of a licensed veterinarian, for observation. All fees for such impoundment and
observation shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of such animal. Owners
choosing to impound or confine animals at their residence shall complete a "Voluntary
Animal Confinement Form" which shall be provided to them by the Animal Control
Officer. At the completion of the fourteen (14) day confinement period, the owner shall
present the confined animal along with the Animal Confinement Form to a licensed
veterinarian. The veterinarian shall then examine the animal and complete the
appropriate section of the Voluntary Animal Confinement Form. The owner of the
animal shall then return this form to the Animal Control Officer.
A. Any dog or cat impounded under the provisions of this Section shall be placed
in a suitable facility and quarantined for a period of not less than fourteen (14)
days at the sole expense of the owner.
B. Any such animal impounded under the provisions of this Section shall be
destroyed upon determination that such animal is infected with rabies.
C. It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal which has
bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or
attack to report this act to the Animal Control Officer. It shall be the duty of
physicians and veterinarians to report to the Animal Control Officer the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
6-8-10 Vicious Animals; Guard or Attack Dogs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a fierce or vicious animal,
except in an authorized zoo or zoological park.
B. If satisfied that an animal is accustomed to seizing and biting people or is
vicious and has actually bitten one or more persons or animals, the Chief of
Police, or his or her designated representative, may, if he finds such animal at
large, kill the same without previous notice to the owner.
C. Dogs maintained as guard dogs or placed in an enclosed area for the protection
of persons or property shall not be included under this Section as long as they
remain in this enclosed area and are completely confined in a kennel, yard, or
other space when not being used as a guard dog.
D. The owner, or other person in control if not the owner, of all premises upon
which attack and guard dogs are maintained shall post signs on, over, or next
to all exterior doors stating that such dogs are on the premises. At least one
(1) such sign shall be posted at each driveway or entrance way to said
premises.
6-8-11 Dogs in Heat. Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog cannot come into contact with
another animal except for planned breeding.
6-8-12 Keeping of Dangerous Animals. No person shall keep or permit to be kept
any dangerous animal as a pet nor for display or for exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee, except that this prohibition shall not apply to the keeping of
dangerous animals in a public zoo, public aquarium, bona fide educational or medical
institution, humane society, or museum where they are kept as live specimens for the
public to view or for the purpose of instruction, research, or study; or for exhibition to
the public by a bona fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit, or show licensed to perform
in the City; or in a bona fide licensed veterinary hospital for treatment. It shall be the
duty of the persons permitted to keep dangerous animals under this Section to
immediately report to the Police Department when any dangerous animal is found
missing.
6-8-13 Seizure, Impoundment, and Disposition of Dangerous or Vicious
Animals.
A. In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large and unattended upon
public property, park property, public right-of-way, public waterway, lagoon,
public sewer system, or the property of someone other than its owner, thereby
creating a hazard to person or property, such animal may, in the discretion of
the Police Chief, or his or her designee, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or
captured. The City shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture
of a dangerous animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the
owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
B. Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping, sheltering, or
harboring a dangerous animal on premises in the City in violation of this Chapter
or who keeps a dangerous animal which has demonstrated a propensity to
attack or bite without provocation, the Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall
cause the matter to be investigated, and if after investigation, the facts indicate
that the person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering, or harboring a
dangerous animal in the City, the Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall order
the person named in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the City,
permanently place the animal with an organization or group allowed under
Section 6-8-12 of this Code to possess dangerous animals, or destroy the
animal within three (3) days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be
contained in a notice to remove the dangerous animal, which notice shall be
given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering, or harboring the dangerous
animal, and shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and
notice to remove the dangerous animal shall not be required where such
dangerous animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any
person, in which case the Police Chief, or his or her designee shall cause the
animal to be immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure and
impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death
to any person.
C. The order to remove a dangerous animal issued by the Police Chief, or his or
her designee, may be appealed to the City Council. In order to appeal such
order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within three (3)
days after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous
animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of
right to appeal the order.
D. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be
delivered personally or by certified mail to the City Clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled for the next regular Council meeting after receipt of
notice of appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such
hearing, the City Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Police Chief, or
his or her designee. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision
and shall be filed with the City Clerk within three (3) days after the hearing or
any continued session thereof.
E. If the City Council affirms the action of the Police Chief, or his or her designee,
the City Council shall order in its written decision that the individual or entity
owning, sheltering, harboring, or keeping such dangerous animal remove such
animal from the City; permanently place such animal with an organization or
group allowed under Section 6-8-12 to possess dangerous animals; or destroy
it. The decision and order shall immediately be served upon the person or entity
against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal. If the
original order of the Police Chief, or his or her designee, is not appealed or is
not complied with within three (3) days of the order of the City Council after
appeal has been served, the Police Chief, or his or her designee, is authorized
to seize and impound such dangerous animal. An animal so seized shall be
impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If, at the end of the impoundment
period, the person against whom the decision and order of the Police Chief, or
his or her designee, or City Council was issued has not petitioned the Muscatine
County District Court for a review of said order, the Police Chief, or his or her
designee, shall cause the animal to be disposed of by sale, permanently placing
such animal with an organization or group allowed under Section 6-8-12 to
possess dangerous animals, or destroy such animal in a humane manner. All
impoundment fees shall be at the expense of the owner of the dangerous
animal, which said fee shall be the actual cost of the feeding and care of the
animal.
6-8-14 Penalties.
A. Any person or owner of property who violates the provisions of this Chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a penalty as set out in Section
1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances.
B. Any owner or person charged with a first or second violation of this Chapter
may present such summons at the Public Safety Building in the City of
Muscatine and pay such fine without appearance in court, and upon payment
of the fine, shall be deemed to have pleaded guilty to the offense charged.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit any person charged with
a violation of this Chapter from contesting such charge. The provisions of this
Subsection shall not be applicable upon the filing of a complaint and summons
for the third or subsequent violations of this Chapter.
6-8-15 Exemption for Police Service Dogs (K9s). This Chapter shall not apply to
police service dogs (K9s) used by a law enforcement agency that is acting in the
performance of its duties.
Title 6 – Police and Public Safety
Chapter 9 – Keeping of Pit Bull Dogs
SECTIONS:
6-9-1 Purpose
6-9-2 Keeping of Pit Bull Dogs Prohibited
6-9-3 Definition
6-9-4 Spayed or Neutered
6-9-5 Leash Requirement
6-9-6 Confinement
6-9-7 Confinement Indoors
6-9-8 Signs
6-9-9 Financial Responsibility
6-9-10 Identification Photographs and Microchips
6-9-11 Reporting Requirements
6-9-12 Sale or Transfer of Ownership Prohibited
6-9-13 Irrebuttable Presumptions
6-9-14 Failure to Comply
6-9-15 Violation - Penalty
6-9-1 Purpose. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and
citizens of the city, the provisions of this Chapter are enacted by the City Council.
6-9-2 Keeping of Pit Bull Dogs Prohibited. It is unlawful to keep, harbor, own or
in any way possess within the corporate limits of the City, any pit bull dogs; provided
that pit bull dogs licensed with the City within thirty (30) days of the effective date of
this Chapter, August 1, 2003, may be kept within the City subject to the standards
and requirements set forth in this Chapter.
6-9-3 Definition. "Pit bull dog" is defined to mean the following:
A. Staffordshire terrier breed of dog;
B. The American pit bull terrier breed of dog;
C. The American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog;
D. Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being predominantly
of the breeds of Staffordshire terrier, American pit bull terrier, or American
Staffordshire terrier.
6-9-4 Spayed or Neutered. All pit bull dogs shall be spayed or neutered within sixty
(60) days of the effective date of this Chapter or by six months of age and a certificate
that such dog has been spayed or neutered shall be filed with the City Clerk.
6-9-5 Leash Requirement. No person shall permit a licensed pit bull dog to go
outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely muzzled and leashed with a leash
no longer than six feet in length. No person shall permit a pit bull dog to be kept on a
chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical
control of the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees,
posts, dog houses or buildings.
6-9-6 Confinement. All licensed pit bull dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in
a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed as above provided.
Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to
the sides. All structures used to confine licensed pit bull dogs must be locked with a
key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure
must have a secure bottom or floor of solid construction (such as concrete) to prevent
escape and to allow for proper cleaning, odor control and health of the dog, attached
to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be imbedded in the ground no less
than two feet. All structures erected to house pit bull dogs must comply with all zoning
and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately ventilated
and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
6-9-7 Confinement Indoors. No pit bull dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in a
part of the house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own
volition. In addition, no pit bull dog may be kept in a house or structure when the
windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle
preventing the dog from exiting the structure.
6-9-8 Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of licensed pit bull dogs within the City
shall within ten days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall
display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public
using the words "Beware of Dog, Pit Bull on Premises". In addition, a similar sign is
required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal.
6-9-9 Financial Responsibility. All owners, keepers or harborers of licensed pit bull
dogs must within ten days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter
provide proof to the City Clerk of financial responsibility. The financial responsibility
requirements for the issuance of a license issued under this Chapter shall be set by
resolution of the City Council and are listed in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing
Requirements in Appendix B of this Code of Ordinances. The financial responsibility
requirement of this Section may be met by a homeowner's or tenant's insurance policy
if such policy clearly and specifically provides coverage in the amounts required. Such
insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of that policy will be made unless
ten days written notice is first given to the City Clerk of the City.
6-9-10 Identification Photographs and Microchips. All owners, keepers or
harborers of licensed pit bull dogs must within ten days of the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this Chapter provide to the City Clerk proof that an identification
microchip has been implanted between the shoulder blades of the pit bull dog and shall
affix a tag to the collar on the dog indicating that a microchip has been implanted
between the shoulder blades of the pit bull dog.
6-9-11 Reporting Requirements. All owners, keepers or harborers of licensed pit
bull dogs must within ten days of the incident, report the removal from the City or
death of a licensed pit bull dog or the new address of a licensed pit bull dog owner
should the owner move within the corporate limits of the City in writing to the City
Clerk.
6-9-12 Sale or Transfer of Ownership Prohibited. No person shall sell, barter or
in any other way dispose of a pit bull dog licensed with the City to any person within
the City unless the recipient person resides permanently in the same household and
on the same premises as the licensed owner of such dog; provided, that the licensed
owner of a pit bull dog may sell or otherwise dispose of a licensed pit bull dog to
persons who do not reside within the City.
6-9-13 Irrebuttable Presumptions. There shall be an irrebuttable presumption that
any dog listed or registered with any kennel, association or public authority as a pit
bull dog as defined in this Chapter is in fact a dog subject to the requirements of this
Chapter.
6-9-14 Failure to Comply. It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of
a pit bull dog licensed with the City to fail to comply with the requirements and
conditions set forth in this Chapter. Any pit bull dog found to be the subject of a
violation of this Chapter shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In
addition, failure to comply shall result in the revocation of the license of such animal
resulting in the immediate removal of the animal from the City.
6-9-15 Violation – Penalty. Any person violating or permitting the violation of any
provision of this Chapter commits a municipal infraction and shall be subject to the
civil penalty as provided in Section 1-3 of this Code of Ordinances. In addition, the
court shall order the license of the subject pit bull dog revoked and the dog removed
from the City. Should the violator refuse to remove the dog from the City, the court
shall find the violator in contempt and order the immediate confiscation and
impoundment of the dog. Each day that a violation of this Chapter continues shall be
deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who
violates this Chapter shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling,
veterinary care, and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this Chapter.
Title 6- Police and Public Safety
Chapter 10-Aggressive Panhandling Prohibited
SECTIONS:
6-10-1 Purpose
6-10-2 Definitions
6-10-3 Prohibited Acts
6-10-4 Penalty
6-10-1 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this Section is to ensure unimpeded pedestrian traffic flow, to
maintain and protect the physical safety and well-being of pedestrians, and to
otherwise foster a safe and harassment free climate in public places in the City.
B. This Section is not intended to limit any person from exercising such person's
constitutional right to solicit funds, picket, protest, or engage in other
constitutionally protected activity.
6-10-2 Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
A. “Aggressive Panhandling” is panhandling which demonstrates a specific intent
to induce, solicit, or procure from another goods or money which includes one
or more of the following actions:
1. The touching of the solicited person without the solicited person's consent;
2. Blocking the path of travel of the person being solicited;
3. Blocking the entry or exit of a person being solicited to any vehicle or
building;
4. Continuing to solicit or request a donation from a person after that person
has refused an earlier request verbally or has ignored the request;
5. Following or remaining alongside a person who, after being solicited, walks
away from the person panhandling and doing the same in a manner that
would cause a reasonably prudent person to feel threatened, intimidated,
or fearful;
6. Making any statement, gesture, or other communication that would cause
a reasonably prudent person to feel threatened, intimidated, or fearful;
7. Soliciting a person who is in a situation in which it would be obvious to a
reasonably prudent person that the person being solicited would not feel
free to immediately walk away, and shall include, but is not limited to,
soliciting the person at any bus stop, in any public transportation vehicle,
in a line waiting for service or admission, or dining at an outdoor service
area;
8. Soliciting a person within fifty feet (50') of an automatic teller machine or
an entrance to a bank or similar institution.
9. Behavior which would deter a reasonably prudent person from passing
through or remaining in or near any thoroughfare, or public place because
of fear, concern, or apprehension caused by such behavior.
B. “Automated Teller Machine” is a device, linked to a financial institution's
account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not
limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and
mortgage and loan payments.
C. “Intimidation” is conduct which repeatedly interferes with the free passage of
other persons in or into public places or which demonstrates an attempt to
discourage the free passage of other persons in or into public places.
D. “Panhandling” is any request for or solicitation of an immediate donation of
money, and includes a request or solicitation to purchase an item for an amount
far exceeding its value and circumstances where a reasonably prudent person
would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation. Panhandling
shall not include the act of passively standing, sitting, or engaging in a musical
performance or other street performance with a sign or other indication that
donations are being sought without any verbal request for a donation other
than in response to an inquiry by another person.
E. “Public Place” is any area generally visible to public view and includes streets,
rights of way, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
communication facilities, transportation facilities, and buildings open to the
general public including those which serve food or drink or provide
entertainment, and the doorways, entrances, or other openings in buildings or
dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
F. “Threats” are statements, gestures, or other forms of communication which a
reasonably prudent person would perceive as intending to result in the
procurement of money or goods by intimidation or coercion.
6-10-3 Prohibited Acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, either individually or as part of a group, to
engage in aggressive panhandling in any public place.
B. It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to intentionally work in concert
to commit acts that would constitute aggressive panhandling if those acts were
performed by a single individual.
C. To constitute a violation of this Section, the violator's conduct must be such as
to demonstrate a specific intent to induce, solicit, or procure from another
goods or money.
6-10-4 Penalty. A violation of this Section may be prosecuted as a criminal or civil
matter, and, upon conviction, an individual is subject to a penalty and other relief in
accordance with Section 1-2-14 or 1-3-2 of this Code.
Title 6- Police and Public Safety
Chapter 11 – Noise Regulations
SECTIONS:
6-11-1 Definitions
6-11-2 Disturbing the Peace
6-11-3 Permitting Disturbing the Peace
6-11-4 Disturbing the Peace by a Person, Association, Firm, or Corporation
6-11-5 Motor Vehicle Maximum Sound Levels
6-11-6 Motorized Vehicles Operating Off of Public Right-of-Way
6-11-7 Noise Measurement Procedures
6-11-8 Exceptions
6-11-9 Penalty
6-11-1 Definitions.
A. "A weighted sound level" means the sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level also
read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
B. "Decibel (dB)" means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound.
C. "Emergencies" means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual
or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
D. "Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)" means the value specified by the
manufacturer as the recommended maximum load weight of a single vehicle.
In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination
weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the
recommended maximum load weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used.
E. "Measurement procedures" means the sound level measurement procedure for
the enforcement of this noise control ordinance as adopted by the Chief of
Police.
F. "Motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce" means any vehicle for
which regulations apply pursuant to Section 18 of the Federal Noise Control Act
of 1972, as amended, pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate
commerce.
G. "Motor vehicles" means any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a
motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semitrailers,
campers, go carts, snowmobiles, amphibious crafts on land, dune
buggies, or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles.
H. "Motorcycles" means an unenclosed vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not
limited to, motor scooters and mini bikes.
I. "Muffler or sound dissipative device" means a device for abating the sound of
escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.
J. "Persons" means any individual, association, partnership, or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency, or instrumentality of a
state or a political subdivision of a state.
K. "Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk,
alley, or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
L. "Real property boundary" means an imaginary line along the ground surface,
and its vertical extension which separates the real property owned by one
person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real
property divisions.
M. "Sound level" means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use
of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, or C as
specified in the American National Standards Institute specifications for sound
level meters. (ANSI SI.4 - 1971, or the latest approved revision thereof.) If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
N. "Sound level meter" means an instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.
6-11-2 Disturbing the Peace. Every person who shall unlawfully disturb the public
quiet of any street, alley, avenue, public square, or any religious or other public
assembly or building, public or private, or any neighborhood, private family, person or
law enforcement officer by giving loud false alarms of fire, by any loud noise, loud
playing or loud rendition of music of any kind, loud singing, loud talking, loud
amplification of sound, by loud ringing bells, loud blowing horns or other instruments,
or by loud indecent, loud obscene, or loud profane language, loud conversation or
conduct, or by loud quarreling, loud assaulting, loud fighting, loud honking horn, loud
squealing tires, loud engine or loud muffler noise, or by any other loud device or loud
means whatsoever including but not limited to the use of a mobile vehicle, which
clearly can be heard by auditory senses (ears) by a reasonable person with reasonable
hearing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If the person holds a valid outdoor
commercial entertainment establishment permit, or is granted permission to hold a
special event, such as Great River Days, Holiday Stroll, parades, etc., this Section does
not apply.
6-11-3 Permitting Disturbing of Peace. Every person who shall suffer or permit
any loud hollering, loud howling, loud screaming, loud bellowing, loud dog barking,
loud profane or loud obscene language, loud fighting, loud playing or loud rendition of
music of any kind, loud singing, loud talking, loud amplification of sound, or any loud
noise in any house, mobile vehicle, or upon any premises owned, occupied or
possessed by him, or of which he has control as agent or otherwise, in such manner
as to disturb any neighborhood or persons or law enforcement officer passing in the
streets, which clearly can be heard by auditory senses (ears) by a reasonable person
with reasonable hearing, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The proof of such
acts having been done in such place shall be prima facie evidence that the same was
done with the permission of the owner, occupant, or possessor, but such presumption
may be rebutted by proof. If the person holds a valid outdoor commercial
entertainment establishment permit, or is granted permission to hold a special event,
such as Great River Days, Holiday Stroll, parades, etc., this Section does not apply.
6-11-4 Disturbing the Peace by a Person, Association, Firm, or Corporation
Legally Holding an Outdoor Commercial Entertainment Establishment Permit.
Every person who has legally obtained an outdoor commercial entertainment
establishment permit who shall suffer or permit any loud hollering, loud howling, loud
screaming, loud bellowing, loud profane or loud obscene language, loud fighting, loud
playing or loud rendition of music of any kind, loud singing, loud talking, loud
amplification of sound within or outside of a building, or any loud noise upon the
premises for which the permit was issued or of which he has control as agent which
clearly can be heard by auditory senses (ears) by a reasonable person of reasonable
hearing and after two (2) separate complaints by persons in a residential district have
been made to the Police Department, verified by the Police Department that this
section is being violated and after two (2) personal notifications by the Police
Department to the person responsible for the premises, upon a third complaint by
persons in a residential district to and verified by the Police Department that this
Section is being violated, all within a period of twenty four (24) hours shall be deemed
to have violated the terms of said permit, shall be charged with a municipal infraction
and shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount set by resolution of City Council
and set out in the Schedule of Penalties in Appendix A to this Code of Ordinances. In
addition, upon the receipt and verification of such three separate complaints, the City
Administrator or his/her designee shall be authorized to immediately suspend the
permit for three (3) days. After three convictions of a municipal infraction, the City
Administrator or his/her designee is authorized to revoke the permit. The permit holder
shall have the right to appeal any suspension or revocation of the permit under this
Section to the City Council. All responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable
for civil penalties.
6-11-5 Motor Vehicle Maximum Sound Levels.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a motor
vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time, in such a manner
that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle exceeds the
level set forth in Table One for the speed limit zone, regardless of the actual
speed of the motor vehicle or motorcycle.
Table One. Motor Vehicle and Motorcycle Sound Limits Measured at 50 Feet
(Maximum Sound Level, Fast Meter Response)
Vehicle Class Sound level in dBA
Speed Limit 35
MPH or Less
Speed Limit
Over 35 MPH
Motor Carrier Vehicle engaged in Interstate
Commerce of GVWR or GCWR of 10,000 lbs. or
more.
86 90
All other motor vehicles of GVWR or GCWR of
10,000 lbs. or more.
86 90
Any Motorcycle 82 86
Any other vehicle or any combination of
Vehicles towed by any other motor vehicle.
76 82
B. Adequate Muffler or Sound Dissipative Devices.
1. No person shall operate or cause to be operated on a public right-of-way
any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other sound
dissipative device in good working order, in constant operation, and that will
sufficiently reduce sound to an acceptable level.
2. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed or
rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair, or
replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motor vehicle or
on a motorcycle.
C. Motor Vehicle Horns and Signaling Devices. The following acts and the causing
thereof are declared to be unlawful:
1. The sounding of any horn, bell, or other auditory device on or in any motor
vehicle on any public right-of-way or public space for the period of more
than one (1) minute in any hourly period, except as a warning of danger.
2. The sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device which produces
a sound level in excess of 85 dBA at fifty (50) feet except as a warning of
danger.
3. No person shall operate or shall permit the operation of any motor vehicle
with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle for
a period not longer than five (5) minutes in any hour while the vehicle is
stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, on a public right-ofway
or public space within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential area
or designated noise sensitive area, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. the following day.
6-11-6 Motorized Vehicles Operating Off of Public Right-of-Way.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any
motorized vehicle off of a public right-of-way in such a manner that the sound
level emitted therefrom exceeds the limits set forth in Table Two at a distance
of fifty (50) feet or more from the path of the vehicle when operated on a public
space or at or across the boundary of private property when operated on private
property. This Section shall apply to all motorized vehicles, whether or not duly
licensed and registered, including, but not limited to, commercial or
noncommercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, go-carts, snowmobiles,
amphibious crafts, campers, and dune buggies.
Table Two. Motorized Vehicle Sound Limits Measured at 50 Feet
(Maximum Sound Level, Fast Meter Response)
Vehicle Type Sound level in dBA
Snowmobile 78
Motorcycle 78
Any Other Motorized Vehicle 78
6-11-7 Noise Measurement Procedures. The Chief of Police shall promulgate the
noise measurement procedures to be used for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
These procedures shall be based on sound measurement methodology and
instrumentation specified in the latest standards and recommended practices of the
American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI) and the Society of Automotive
Engineers, Inc. (SAE). The procedure shall describe how to make sound measures at
various distances from a sound source to obtain a valid result equivalent to a
measurement of fifty feet (50').
6-11-8 Exceptions. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. The operation of vehicles owned by publicly owned or licensed utilities when
engaged in repair or maintenance of said utilities.
B. The ceremonial use of signals or warning devices when used in conjunction with
an event given prior approval by the Chief of Police.
6-11-9 Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a simple misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in Section
1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances.
TITLE 7
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Administration and Enforcement of Traffic Code 1
Traffic Regulations in General 2
Controlled Access Facility 3
Traffic Control Devices 4
Automated Traffic Enforcement 5
Speed Limits 6
Stopping, Standing, Parking 7
Loading and Unloading Zones 8
Parking Meters and Lots 9
Snow Emergency Regulations 10
Load and Weight Restrictions 11
Traffic: Junk, Obsolete, Stored Vehicles 12
Abandoned Vehicles 13
Bicycles 14
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC CODE
SECTIONS:
7-1-1 Definitions
7-1-2 Administration and Enforcement
7-1-3 Power to Direct Traffic
7-1-4 Obedience to Peace Officer
7-1-5 Scheduled Violations
7-1-6 Parking Violations; Uncontested
7-1-7 Administrative Review of Parking Violations.
7-1-8 Parking Violations; Contested
7-1-9 Parking Violations; Vehicle Unattended
7-1-10 Parking Violations; Simple Notice of Fine
7-1-11 Presumption in Reference to Parking Violations
7-1-12 Impounding Vehicles
7-1-1 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following words and phrases when used in this Title shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
A. “Bicycle” shall mean every device solely propelled by human power upon which
any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, and including any device
generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two (2) front or two (2) rear
wheels.
B. “Central business or traffic district” shall mean:
1. The central business or traffic district shall consist of such streets and areas
as shall from time to time be designated by motion of the Council.
2. The following streets and alleys, and areas intersecting and adjacent thereto, are
hereby designated as the central business or traffic district: Mississippi Drive from
Oak Street to the theoretical intersection of Spruce Street; Second Street from
Poplar Street to Pine Street; Third Street from Oak Street to Chestnut Street;
Fourth Street from Poplar Street to Chestnut Street; Oak Street from Mississippi
Drive to Fourth Street; Orange Street from Mississippi Drive to Fourth Street;
Mulberry Avenue from Mississippi Drive to Seventh Street; Walnut Street from
Mississippi Drive to Fourth Street; Cedar Street from Mississippi Drive to Fourth
Street; Sycamore Street from Mississippi Drive to Fifth Street; Iowa Avenue from
Mississippi Drive to Fourth Street; Chestnut Street from Mississippi Drive to Third
Street; Pine Street from Mississippi Drive to Third Street.
C. “Curb loading zone” shall mean a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
D. “Primary road(s)” shall mean those roads and streets both inside and outside the
boundaries of the City of Muscatine that are under the Iowa Department of
Transportation jurisdiction.
(Iowa Code, Section 306.3)
E. “Roadway” shall mean that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more
separate roadways, the term “roadway” as used in this Chapter shall refer
to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
F. “Stop” shall mean complete cessation of movement when required.
G. “Stop, stopping, or standing” shall mean, when prohibited, any stopping or standing
of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a Police Officer or traffic control sign
or signal.
H. “Traffic” shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel.
7-1-2 Administration and Enforcement. Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law
relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief except where
this Code assigns responsibilities to other parties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
7-1-3 Power to Direct Traffic. A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any
officer of the Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency, traffic
may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
7-1-4 Obedience to Peace Officers. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
7-1-5 Scheduled Violations. For violations of the Traffic Code which are designated by
Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of
those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
7-1-6 Parking Violations; Uncontested. Uncontested violations of parking restrictions
imposed by this Code of Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable
at the office of the City Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of ten dollars
($10.00) for all violations except snow route parking violations, junk or obsolete, and
improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit. The amount of the fine payable
for each expired meter and overtime parking violation shall also be ten dollars ($10.00).
However, if the fine for an expired meter or overtime parking is paid within seventy-two hours
(72) hours of the time and date of the violation, five dollars ($5.00) of the fine amount will
be waived. For those violations charged upon a simple notice of fine in the amount of ten
dollars ($10.00), if the number of citations issued for a vehicle exceeds twenty (20) citations
in the same calendar year, the penalty shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each citation
issued in excess of twenty (20) citations in the same calendar year. The simple notice of a
fine for snow emergency parking violations is thirty-five dollars ($35.00), the simple notice
of fine for junk and obsolete violations is twenty dollars ($20.00), and the simple notice of a
fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is two hundred dollars
($200.00). Except for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, if such fine
is not paid within thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by five dollars ($5.00).
7-1-7 Administrative Review of Parking Violations. If the driver or owner charged
desires to have the parking violation administratively reviewed, a request for administrative
review of the violation may be made to the parking violation Administrative Review Panel as
provided in Subsection A of this Section or the violation may be charged and filed with the
district court on a standard traffic citation pursuant to the Code of Iowa, as amended, as
provided in Section 7-1-8 of this Chapter.
A. Administrative Review: A driver or owner charged with a parking violation may request
an administrative review within ten (10) calendar days of the date the parking ticket
was issued. The request shall be made on the form provided by the City and shall be
reviewed by a three (3) member panel made up of a representative from the Police
Department, the Finance Department, and a citizen-at-large to be appointed by the
City Council. The panel shall consider the defenses or mitigating circumstances set
forth on the review request form and shall base its findings and determination thereon.
The panel may dismiss any notice of fine (ticket) for good cause.
B. Violation Not Dismissed By Administrative Review: A driver or owner charged with a
parking violation on a notice of fine (ticket) whose violation was reviewed but not
dismissed by the Administrative Review Panel may contest the violation by requesting
that it be charged and proceed before a court the same as other traffic violations as
provided in Section 7-1-8.
7-1-8 Parking Violations; Contested.
A. Contesting Simple Fine. Persons wishing to contest the simple fine may do so by
appearing in person in the office of the Finance Department no more than ten (10)
calendar days after the date of issuance of the simple fine or ten (10) days after the
decision of the Administrative Review Panel, if an administrative review was requested
pursuant to Section 7-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances.
B. Contesting Simple Fine Procedure. Persons wishing to contest the simple fine will do
so in writing on forms provided by the Finance Department. After filing of the contest,
a date and time of court appearance will be established and notice thereof provided
to the person contesting the citation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6[1])
7-1-9 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended. When a vehicle is parked in violation of
any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation
as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
7-1-10 Parking Violations; Simple Notice of Fine. If the City is regulating the standing
or parking of vehicles under Section 321.236[1] of Iowa Code, the simple notice of a fine
shall contain the following statement:
FAILURE TO PAY PARKING FINES OWED BY YOU CAN BE GROUNDS FOR REFUSING TO
RENEW YOUR MOTOR VEHICLE'S REGISTRATION.
(Iowa Code, Sections 321.40(7), 321.236, & 28E)
7-1-11 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking. In any proceeding charging a
standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the
person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which,
such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
A. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was parked in
violation of the Traffic Code, and
B. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the registered owner
at the time in question.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
7-1-12. Impounding Vehicles. A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause
to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City,
under the circumstances provided below and elsewhere in this Code or as otherwise allowed
by law:
A. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to
traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical
injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or
removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
B. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so illegally parked
as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic,
when a vehicle is parked in any municipal parking lot for more than twenty four hours,
or when a vehicle is parked in a leased or reserved public parking space without proper
authority.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
C. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking during
snow removal operations.
D. Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a continuous
period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be located, the owner
shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
E. Outstanding Violations. When any vehicle has ten (10) or more outstanding, unpaid
parking violations for which payment is late thirty (30) days or more.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
F. Unlawfully Stored and Junked, Obsolete, or Abandoned Vehicles. When a vehicle is
unlawfully stored, or is junked, obsolete, or abandoned as defined elsewhere in this
Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
G. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of any
vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 2 – TRAFFIC REGULATIONS IN GENERAL
SECTIONS:
7-2-1 Parades; Processions
7-2-2 Clinging to Vehicles
7-2-3 Riding on Parts of Vehicles Not for Passengers
7-2-4 Operation of Golf Carts
7-2-5 Avoidance of Traffic Control Devices
7-2-6 All-Terrain Vehicles
7-2-7 Driving through Funeral or Other Procession
7-2-8 Driving on Sidewalks
7-2-9 Careless Driving
7-2-10 Driving on Private Property
7-2-11 State Law; Law of the Road
7-2-1 Parades; Processions. No procession or parade, except forces of the United States
Army, Navy, or Marine Corps, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the Police
and Fire departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in accordance
with a permit issued pursuant to Title 3, Chapter 3 of the City Code.
7-2-2 Clinging to Vehicles. Any person riding upon any bicycle, moped, motorcycle,
coaster, sled, roller skates, skateboards, or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or
himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.
7-2-3 Riding on Parts of Vehicles Not for Passengers.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to permit any person to ride on the
fenders, running boards, front ends, or rear ends of such vehicle or any part of
a vehicle not intended for passengers, except for the purpose of repairing the same.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on the fenders, running boards, front ends,
or rear ends of any vehicle, or any part of a vehicle not intended for passengers,
except for the purpose of repairing such vehicle.
7-2-4 Operation of Golf Carts. A person possessing a valid operator’s license
may operate a golf cart on city streets provided, however, that a golf cart shall not be
operated upon a city street which is a primary road extension through the City but shall be
allowed to cross a city street which is a primary road extension through the City. The golf
carts shall be equipped with adequate brakes, a slow moving vehicle sign, and bicycle safety
flag and operate on the streets only from sunrise to sunset.
7-2-5 Avoidance of Traffic Control Devices. It is unlawful for any person operating a
motor vehicle to leave the roadway and travel across public or private property to avoid
an official traffic control device.
7-2-6 All-Terrain Vehicles. As provided in Iowa Code Section 321G.9(4)(a) and any
amendments thereto, any registered all-terrain vehicle owned by the City of Muscatine may
be operated by Muscatine public safety personnel on all highways and streets in the City of
Muscatine, Iowa, and other public places when required in carrying out their duties as
directed by the Police Chief.
7-2-7 Driving Through Funeral or Other Procession.
A. Upon the immediate approach of a funeral procession, the driver of every other
vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall yield the right-of-way. An
operator of a motor vehicle which is part of a funeral procession shall not be charged
with violating traffic rules and regulations relating to traffic signals and devices while
participating in the procession unless the operation is reckless.
B. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near the right-hand edge of
the roadway as practicable, shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and
safe, and shall have the headlights turned on.
7-2-8 Driving on Sidewalks. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk
area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
7-2-9 Careless Driving. No driver of a vehicle shall operate or halt the same negligently or
needlessly in disregard to the rights or safety of persons or property.
7-2-10 Driving on Private Property. No driver of a vehicle shall operate or halt the same
on private property without the consent of the owner thereof.
7-2-11 State Law; Law of the Road. The provisions of Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa
are hereby adopted by reference and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or amendments thereto, where the violation of such statute or statutes is
declared, directly or indirectly, to be a misdemeanor, except such provisions as are by
their nature inapplicable and not within the powers granted to cities of the class and size of
this city to adopt.
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 3 – CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY
SECTIONS:
7-3-1 Exercise of Police Power
7-3-2 Definition
7-3-3 Exceptions
7-3-4 Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility
7-3-1 Exercise of Police Power. This Chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police
power of the City under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
7-3-2 Definition. For the purpose of this Chapter, a "Controlled Access Facility" shall mean
a highway or street specifically designed for through traffic, and over, from, or to which
owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a
controlled right of easement of access, light, air, or view by the reason of the fact that their
property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other reason. (Specifically this
shall mean U. S. Highways 61 and 92 and Iowa Highways 22 and 38.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
7-3-3 Exceptions. This Chapter shall not be construed to effect existing entrances to the
various Primary Road Extensions in the City.
7-3-4 Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility. It is unlawful for any person to:
A. Cross Dividing Line. Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central dividing
section, or other separation or dividing line on such controlled access facilities.
B. Turns. Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an opening
provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or line.
C. Use of Lanes. Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose
and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb, separation,
section or line.
D. Enter Facility. Drive any vehicle into the controlled access facility from a local service
road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb or
dividing section or dividing line which separates such service road from the controlled
access facility property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366)
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 4 – TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTIONS:
7-4-1 Authority to Install
7-4-2 Crosswalks; Safety Zones; Traffic Lanes
7-4-3 Authority to Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys
7-4-1 Authority to Install. The City Administrator, or his or her designate, shall, on motion
of the Council, place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as
required under this Code or when ordered to do so by motion of the City Council. All such
traffic-control devices hereafter erected shall conform to the state manual and specifications.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.255)
7-4-2 Crosswalks; Safety Zones; Traffic Lanes. The City Administrator, or his or her
designate, is hereby authorized:
A. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface
of the roadway, crosswalks and trail crossings at intersections where, in his or her
opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such
other places as he or she may deem necessary.
B. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he or she
may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
C. To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he or she may deem
advisable, consistent with this Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
7-4-3 Authority to Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys. Whenever the Council shall, by
motion or otherwise, designate any one-way street or alley, the City Administrator, or his or
her designate, shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation
shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited, including the entrance to alleys.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.236[4])
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 5 –AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT
SECTIONS
7-5-1 General
7-5-2 Definitions
7-5-3 Offense
7-5-4 Exceptions to Owner Liability
7-5-5 Penalty and Appeal
7-5-1 General. The City of Muscatine, in accordance with the police powers authorized it by
the State of Iowa for governing safe traffic flow, may deploy, erect or cause to be erected an
automated traffic enforcement system for making photographic, video or digital images of
vehicles that fail to obey red light traffic signals at intersections designated by the City
Administrator or his or her designee or fail to obey speed regulations. The system may be
managed by a private contractor that owns and operates the requisite equipment with
supervisory control vested in the Muscatine Police Department. Photographs, video or digital
images shall be provided by the contractor to the Muscatine Police Department for review. The
Muscatine Police Department will determine which vehicle owners are in violation of the City’s
traffic control ordinance and are to receive a notice of violation for the offense.
7-5-2 Definitions.
A. Automated Traffic Enforcement System. An electronic system consisting of
photographic, video or electronic camera and a vehicle sensor installed to work in
conjunction with an official traffic control device or mobile unit, as calibrated by Police
Department employees or their agents, to automatically produce photographs, video or
digital images of each vehicle that violates a standard traffic control device or speed
restriction.
B. Vehicle Owner. The person or entity identified by the Iowa Department of
Transportation, or registered with any other state vehicle registration office, as the
registered owner of a vehicle. However, if the vehicle is leased or rented, "owner" means
the person to whom the vehicle is leased or rented, not the person to whom the
certificate of title for the vehicle has been issued or assigned or to whom the
manufacturer's or importer's certificate of origin for the vehicle has been delivered or
assigned. For purposes of this section, "leased" or "rented" means the transfer of the
possession or right to possession of a vehicle to a lessee for a valuable consideration for
a continuous period pursuant to a written agreement.
7-5-3 Offense.
A. The vehicle owner shall be liable for a fine as imposed below if such vehicle crosses a
marked stop line or the intersection plane at a system location when the traffic signal
for that vehicle’s direction is emitting a steady red light or red arrow.
B. The vehicle owner shall be liable for a fine as provided in Section 7-5-5 of this Code of
Ordinances if such vehicle travels at a speed above the posted speed limit.
C. The citation will in no event be sent or reported to the Iowa Department of
Transportation or similar department of any state for the purposes of being added to
the vehicle owner’s driving record.
7-5-4 Exceptions to Owner Liability. There shall be no liability pursuant to this Section if:
A. The operator of the vehicle in question was issued a uniform traffic citation for the
violation in question pursuant to Section 321 of the Code of Iowa or Section 7-1-5 of
the City Code; or
B. The violation occurred at any time after the vehicle in question or its state registration
plates were reported to a law enforcement agency as having been stolen, provided that
the vehicle or its plates had not been recovered by the vehicle owner at the time of
the alleged violation; or
C. The vehicle in question was lawfully participating in a funeral procession; or
D. The officer inspecting the recorded image determines that the vehicle in question
entered the intersection in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle.
7-5-5 Penalty and Appeal.
A. Subject to the provisions of 7-5—5 (C), any violation of Subsection 7-5-
3(A) shall be considered a notice of violation for which a civil fine of
($140) shall be imposed, payable to the City of Muscatine.
B. Subject to the provisions of 7-5-5(c), any violation of Subsection 7-5-
3(B) shall be considered a notice of violation for which a civil vin as listed
in the tables below shall be imposed, payable to the City of Muscatine.
1. Standard ATE Mobile ATE Penalties.
Speed Over Limit Civil Fine
1 through 10 mph $ 0
11 through 20 mph $ 140
21 through 25 mph $ 170
26 through 30 mph $ 360
Over 30 mph $ 490
2. Mobile ATE Penalties in School or Construction Zones.
Speed Over Limit Civil Fine
1 through 5 mph $ 0
6 through 10 mph $ 130
11 through 20 mph $ 140
21 through 25 mph $ 170
26 through 30 mph $ 360
Over 30 mph $ 490
C. If the recipient of an automated traffic citation admits and pays the citation within thirty
(30) days of issuance of the citation, such person shall be subject to the penalty set forth
below, rather than the schedule of penalties set forth in subsection B, above.
1. If admitted and paid within thirty (30) days of issuance of the citation, any
violation of Subsection 7-5-3 (A) shall be punishable by a civil penalty of
($75.00)
2. If admitted and paid within thirty (30) days of issuance of the citation, any
violation of Subsection 7-5-3 (B) shall be punishable by a civil fine as listed
int the tables below.
Standard ATE Mobile ATE Penalties
Speed Over Limit Civil Fine
1 through 10mph $ 0
11 through 20 mph $ 75
21 through 25 mph $ 100
26 through 30 mph $ 250
Over 30 mph $ 350
Mobile ATE Penalties in School or Construction Zones.
Speed Over Limit Civil Fine
1 through 5 mph $ 0
6 through 10mph $ 70
11 through 20 mph $ 75
21 through 25 mph $ 100
26 through 30 mph $250
Over 30 mph $ 350
Upon payment of the above penalty to the City Clerk or his designee within thirty days
of issuance of the citation, the recipient of the citation shall not be further prosecuted
or assessed any costs or other expenses for such violation, and the City shall retain all
penalties collected pursuant to this action.
D. Where an automated traffic citation charged upon a simple notice of violation pursuant to
this section is not admitted and paid by the person charged within thirty days of issuance
of the notice of violation, the City may file a civil municipal infraction citation, which shall
be served and filed with the courts in the manner prescribed by the applicable provisions
of this Code. In the even that a municipal infraction citation is filed, the municipal citation
infract shall be subject to the civil penalty set forth in subsection B above, in addition to
the other court costs, service costs, and other relief as may be permitted by law.
E. A recipient of an automated traffic citation may contact the issuing officer and ask for in
in-person review of the citation, the facts surrounding the issuance of the citation and
to present any extenuating circumstances that pertain to that violation. Based on this
review the issuing officer may sustain or void the citation.
7-5-6 Calibration
The Police Chief or his or her designee shall calibrate the ATE equipment placed at
intersections designated by the City to monitor compliance with speed regulations at least once
annually. For purposes of this section, calibration shall mean the procedure by which ATE
equipment is tested and verified to ensure its speed-measuring capabilities are functioning
properly and accurately. Calibration shall be performed through the use of one or more external
verification measures including but not limited to: laser speed determination device, radar,
microcomputer device, satellite GPS device or any other method approved by the Police Chief,
which in his or her discretion, produces the same indicia of reliability.
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 6 – SPEED LIMITS
SECTIONS
7-6-1 General
7-6-2 Parks Cemeteries and Parking Lots
7-6-3 Special Speed Zones
7-6-4 Minimum Speed
7-6-1 General. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard
to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no
person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring
it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume,
however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
7-6-2 Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots. A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour
in any public park, cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this
Chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
7-6-3 Special Speed Zones. In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of
Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 321.285 of the Code of Iowa is greater
or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other
place or upon any part of the City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by
ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The
following special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
A. The lawful speed for the operation of a motor vehicle on Dick Drake Way between
Grandview Avenue and Stewart Road shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour and any
speed in excess thereof shall be unlawful.
B. The lawful speed for the operation of a motor vehicle on Cedar Street between the
West Corporate Line and Parham Street shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour except
for the school district zones two hundred feet (200’) either direction from Muscatine High
School and Hayes Elementary School, where the speed shall be twenty- f ive ( 25)
miles per hour while children are present and any speed in excess thereof shall be
unlawful.
C. The lawful speed for the operation of a motor vehicle on Imperial Oaks, Long Meadow,
Forest Parkway, and West Grove shall be twenty (20) miles per hour.
7-6-4 Minimum Speed. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace officers are hereby authorized to
enforce this provision by directions to drivers, and in the event of apparent willful disobedience
to this provision and refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance herewith the
continued slow operation by a driver shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled
violation under Section 805.8A, Subsection 8 of the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 7 – STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING
SECTIONS:
7-7-1 Standing, Parking Close to Curb
7-7-2 Markings Indicating Angle Parking
7-7-3 Angle Parking Signs, Markings
7-7-4 Parking Restrictions Generally
7-7-5 Moving Other Vehicles into Prohibited Area
7-7-6 Unattended Motor Vehicle
7-7-7 Parking in Alleys
7-7-8 All-night Parking Prohibited
7-7-9 Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited
7-7-10 Hazardous or Congested Places
7-7-11 Parking on Private Property
7-7-12 Persons with Disabilities; Parking
7-7-1 Standing; Parking Close to Curb. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a
roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18")
of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
7-7-2 Markings Indicating Angle Parking. The Council shall designate the streets upon
which angle parking shall be permitted and the City Administrator, or his or her designate,
shall mark such streets by painting the curb and street in such a manner as to clearly indicate
the angle at which vehicles may be parked.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
7-7-3 Angle Parking Signs, Markings. Upon those streets which have been signed or
marked by the City Administrator, or his or her designate, upon motion of the Council, for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
7-7-4 Parking Restrictions Generally. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:
A. Any vehicle having a gross weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds or more for a longer
period than thirty (30) minute between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any street or alley within the residential district of the City.
B. Any truck hauling gasoline or ammunition or other hazardous material between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any street or alley
within the residential district of the City.
C. On a sidewalk, except a bicycle may stop, stand, or park on a sidewalk unless in the
designated business district.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[1])
D. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[2])
E. Within an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[3])
F. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[4])
G. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[5])
H. Within ten feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control
signal located at the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[6])
I. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within ten feet (10’) of points on the
curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the City indicates a different
length by signs or markings.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[7])
J. Within fifty feet (50’) of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked
parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[8])
K. Within twenty feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a
street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five feet (75’) of said
entrance when properly signposted.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[9])
L. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping,
standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[10])
M. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[11])
N. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway outside of cities or within
a highway tunnel.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[12])
O. At any place where official signs or markings prohibit stopping, standing, or parking.
The City Administrator, or his or her designate, on motion of the Council, shall place
and maintain such signs and markings when so required by the provisions of this Code.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[13] & 321.236[1])
P. Upon any street within the corporate limits when the same is prohibited by a general
ordinance of uniform application relating to removal of snow or ice from the streets
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[14])
Q. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private property in a manner
which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.358[15])
R. On any street, alley, highway, or other public place, without having been moved at
least twenty-five feet (25’) for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or longer.
S. On the normal traffic lane of any roadway, whether or not a vehicle is parked between
such normal traffic lane and the curb or edge of the roadway.
T. On the City street right-of-way between the curb and the adjoining private property
line.
1. Exception: The exception to this prohibition of parking within the previously
described portion of the City street right-of-way shall conform to the following
process provided the request for utilizing this is made for and within the residential
(R3, R4, R5, R6) zoning districts and only for the required parking when physical
hardships prevent off-street parking. The applicant shall request to lease this
portion of the City street right-of-way and provide or agree to the following:
a. Provide the written consent of the property owners on either side of the property
owner requesting the lease.
b. Furnish the names and mailing addresses of all property owners between the
intersecting streets where the lease is proposed.
c. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed lease; property
owners between the intersecting streets of the proposed lease will be notified
by mail at least four (4) days prior to the scheduled public hearing.
d. A City staff report shall address the lease and relate potential traffic hazards,
hazards to pedestrians, access problems for fire equipment or rescue squads,
location of under or above ground utilities, and other pertinent information.
e. The City Council shall determine the maximum duration and annual rate for the
granting of a lease. The lessee shall make annual payment and failure to pay
within thirty (30) days of the due date shall constitute automatic cancellation of
the lease.
f. Lessees shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the area leased
and shall pave with concrete, asphalt, or brick the parking area leased in
accordance with design criteria approved by the City. Vehicles parked pursuant
to this Subsection shall be parallel with the curb, headed in the direction of
lawful traffic movement.
g. Applicants for a lease to use a City owned street right-of-way for the purpose
of parking a vehicle shall pay, in addition to the leased rate, an initial fee of as
set out in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to
this Code of Ordinances to cover the administrative cost of processing the
review and mailings.
7-7-5 Moving Other Vehicles into Prohibited Area. No person shall move a vehicle not
owned by such person nor lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away
from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.359)
7-7-6 Unattended Motor Vehicle. No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall
permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and removing the key from the
ignition switch. When standing upon any perceptible grade, will effectively set the brake
thereon and turn the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.362)
7-7-7 Parking in Alleys.
A. No person shall park or allow to stand any vehicle in any alley where official signs
indicate that parking is prohibited except for the expeditious loading and unloading of
such vehicle.
B. In alleys where parking is not prohibited, no person shall park a vehicle or allow the
same to stand in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
ten feet (10') of the width of the alley for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and
no person shall stop or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any building or other abutting property.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.236[1])
7-7-8 All-Night Parking Prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle on any street between
the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. where official signs have been
placed indicating prohibition of such parking. This provision shall not apply to physicians,
operators of official police cars, ambulances, or other vehicles engaging in making emergency
calls.
7-7-9 Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle upon any
roadway for the principal purpose of:
A. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
B. Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.236[2])
7-7-10 Hazardous or Congested Places.
A. The City Administrator, or his or her designate, is hereby authorized to determine and
to designate by proper signs, including painting of the curb yellow, not exceeding one
hundred feet (100’) in length, places in which the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay
in traffic.
B. When official signs are erected or curbs are painted yellow at hazardous or congested
places, as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such
designated place.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.236[1])
7-7-11 Parking on Private Property. It shall be a misdemeanor to park a motor vehicle
upon real property without the consent of the owner or person in possession of such property,
or the agents of either. Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this Section may be ticketed
and/or removed pursuant to the provisions in Chapter 7-12 of the City Code.
7-7-12 Persons with Disabilities Parking. The following regulations shall apply to the
establishment and use of persons with disabilities parking spaces:
A. Establishment. The City Administrator, or his or her designate, is hereby authorized to
establish special parking places for on-street parking areas or off-street parking
facilities for motor vehicles displaying special identification devices as specified by the
Code of Iowa in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa and Iowa
Administrative Code, 661-18.
B. Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking space, located
on either public or private property, constitute improper use of a persons with
disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
1. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with disabilities parking
permit;
2. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit
but not being used by a person issued a permit or being transported in accordance
with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
3. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8 of the Code
of Iowa.
C. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a wheelchair parking
cone in violation of the following:
1. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply with the
requirements of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair
parking cone.
2. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone which is properly placed
under the provisions of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa.
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 8 - LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES
SECTIONS:
7-8-1 Curb Loading Zones
7-8-2 Curb Painted Yellow
7-8-3 Standing in Loading Zone
7-8-4 Public Carrier Stops and Stands
7-8-5 Parking of Buses and Taxicabs
7-8-6 Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands
7-8-1 Curb Loading Zones. The City Council is hereby authorized to determine the location
of loading zones and passenger loading zones and, upon approval of Council, the City
Administrator shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the
hours during which the provisions of this Chapter are applicable. This authority includes but is
not limited to, the designation of loading zones for the use of commercial vehicles only. Loading
zones will be established with a maximum of one (1) per block in areas where convenient
loading from the alley is not available.
7-8-2 Curb Painted Yellow. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle alongside
of any curb painted yellow.
7-8-3 Standing in Loading Zone.
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other
than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of property in any
place marked as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such
zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of property
exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
B. The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a loading zone for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any vehicle which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone to load
or unload property.
7-8-4 Public Carrier Stops and Stands. The City Administrator and Police Chief are hereby
authorized and required to establish bus stops and taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such
number as shall be on motion of the Council determined to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be
designated by appropriate signs.
7-8-5 Parking of Buses and Taxicabs. The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon
any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, or taxicab stand,
respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of such vehicles from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.
7-8-6 Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other
than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or
taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 9 - PARKING METERS AND LOTS
SECTIONS:
7-9-1 Definitions
7-9-2 Individual Parking Spaces
7-9-3 Installation and Construction; Control and Maintenance of Meters
7-9-4 Zones Established
7-9-5 Coin Operation of Meters
7-9-6 On-Street Meter Rates
7-9-7 Municipal Parking Facility Rates
7-9-8 Hours Meters and Lots to be Operated
7-9-9 Parking Meter Violations; Expired Meter, Overtime Parking
7-9-10 Administration
7-9-11 Parking Meter Funds
7-9-12 Ticketing and Payment of Parking Violation
7-9-13 Compliance
7-9-14 Reservation of Powers
7-9-1 Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
A. "Operator" shall mean any individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof,
or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the owner, or is in actual physical control of
a vehicle.
B. "Park or parking" shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon
a street other than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise in nonhandicap
designated parking spaces, or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs, or
signals, or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control
of the operator of the vehicle.
C. "Parking meter" shall mean any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this
Chapter placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this Chapter.
Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time
established by the Council and, when operated, shall at all times indicate the balance of
legal parking time, and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime
parking.
D. "Parking meter space" shall mean any space within the downtown parking zone adjacent
to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by
lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the streets
adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.
E. "Parking zone" shall mean any restricted street upon which parking meters are installed
and in operation or parking time restrictions are established by resolution of City Council
and designated by signage.
F. "Street" shall mean any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path, or other
public place established for the use of vehicles.
G. 'Vehicle" shall mean any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks.
H. "Leased or Reserved Parking Space" shall mean any space within a parking zone which
is duly designated as such for the parking of a single vehicle within an area designated
by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street
or parking lot.
7-9-2 Individual Parking Spaces. The City Administrator, or his or her designate, is hereby
directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in the parking zones described in
Section 7-9-4 of the City Code, and in such other zones as may hereafter be established, such
parking spaces to be defined by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of
the street.
7-9-3 Installation and Construction; Control and Maintenance of Meters. The City
Administrator, or his or her designate, shall cause parking meters to be installed upon the curb
or sidewalk immediately adjacent to the parking spaces in the parking zones established by
Section 7-9-4 of the City Code, such installation to be placed not more than two feet (2') from
the curb nor more than four feet (4') from the front line of the parking spaces as indicated,
and the City Administrator, or his or her designate, shall be responsible for the regulation,
control, operation, maintenance, and use of such parking meters. Each device shall be so set
as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins,
lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time prescribed by resolution
of Council. Each device shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful time limit it
will indicate by proper visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in such
cases, the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator, owner,
possessor, or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
7-9-4 Zones Established. The following named and described areas, streets, portions of
streets, or off-street parking lots, and such other areas, streets, portions of streets, or offstreet
parking lots as may hereafter be established by resolution of the Council shall constitute
the downtown parking zones:
A. Second Street, both sides, from Mulberry Avenue to Pine Street.
B. Third Street, both sides, from Chestnut Street to Mulberry Avenue.
C. Fourth Street, both sides, from Walnut Street to Mulberry Avenue.
D. Fourth Street, both sides, from Sycamore Street to Chestnut Street.
E. Mulberry Avenue, both sides, from Second Street to Fourth Street.
F. Walnut Street, both sides, from Mississippi Drive to Fifth Street.
G. Cedar Street, both sides, from Mississippi Drive to Fourth Street.
H. Sycamore Street, both sides, from Mississippi Drive to Fifth Street.
I. Iowa Avenue, both sides, from Mississippi Drive to Fourth Street.
J. Chestnut Street, both sides, from Mississippi Drive to Third Street.
K. Mississippi Drive, from Sycamore Street to Pine Street, on the north side of the street.
L. Pine Street, from Mississippi Drive to Second Street.
M. Parking Lot #1 in the 200 block of West Third Street.
N. Parking Lot #2 in the 200 block of West Second Street.
O. Parking Lot #7 in the 200 block of East Third Street.
P. Parking Lot #4 in the 200 block of Mississippi Drive off of Sycamore Street.
Q. Parking Lot #8 in the 300 block of East Third Street.
R. Parking Lot #6 in the 100 block of West Third Street.
S. Levee Parking.
7-9-5 Coin Operation of Meters. Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer
of the Fire Department or Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a Police
Officer or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space
alongside of or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall,
upon entering the parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in that
meter such proper coin or coins of the United States of America as is required for that parking
meter and is designated by proper directions on the meter. Failure to deposit such proper coin
or coins shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. Upon the deposit of such coin or coins and
the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so required, the parking space may be
lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the
part of the street in which such parking space is located; provided, that any person placing a
vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused time has
been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a
coin or coins so long as his or her occupancy of such space does not exceed the indicated
unused parking time. If such vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the
parking time limit set for such parking space, and if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking,
then, and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the
period of legal parking time and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter.
7-9-6 On-Street Meter Rates and On Street Parking Restrictions. Parking or standing a
vehicle in a designated parking meter space in an on-street parking zone shall be lawful upon
the deposit of coins of the United States of America as established by resolution adopted from
time to time by the City Council.
A vehicle may be parked only once in an on-street parking stall in the downtown parking zone
for any time period up to the maximum parking time limit as indicated on the parking meter
or by appropriate signs, after which the vehicle shall be moved from that parking stall. A vehicle
moved from the parking stall may not be parked in that same parking stall during the next
consecutive eight (8) hour period even though the vehicle was parked for less than the
maximum parking time limit.
7-9-7 Municipal Parking Facility Rates.
A. The Council may, by resolution from time to time establish the parking rate for offstreet
metered spaces and leased or reserved spaces in Lots 1, 2, 4, 6, 7 and 8.
B. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in any municipal parking facility for a
period longer than twenty four (24) hours and such vehicles shall constitute a nuisance
and the Police Department may move the vehicle off the parking facility to a storage
space and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner of the vehicle.
C. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized vehicle to be parked in a leased or reserved
parking space and such vehicle shall constitute a nuisance and the Police Department
may move the vehicle off the parking facility to a storage space and the cost thereof
shall be assessed to the owner of the vehicle.
7-9-8 Hours Meters and Lots to be Operated.
A. Parking meters shall be operated in the parking zones established by Section 7-9-4 of
the City Code, every day, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, between the hours
of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. and five o’clock (5:00) P.M.
B. As used in this Section, the term “holiday” shall mean the days which are declared to
be legal holidays for City employees under Title 1-15-8, of the City Code. When the
holiday falls on a Saturday, the holiday will be observed on Friday. If the holiday falls
on Sunday, the holiday will be observed on Monday.
C. The Council may, by resolution from time to time determine the length of time that
parking is permissible at both an individual parking space for which a meter is installed
upon the deposit of such coin or coins of United States of America in the parking meter
as herein provided; and the unmetered parking spaces with time limits.
D. Vehicles shall not be parked in designated parking spaces in Lot #2, Lot #4, Lot #8,
and on Second Street, which are not parking meter spaces beyond the length of time
provided by resolution according to Section 7-9-8(C) and vehicles shall not be parked
in more than one such parking space in either Lot #2, Lot #4, or Lot #8 during any
consecutive twenty four (24) hour period.
E. The Council may, by resolution from time to time establish the rate and hours of
operation for leased or reserved parking spaces.
7-9-9 Parking Meter Violations; Expired Meter, Overtime Parking.
A. Evidence. Parking is prohibited in any parking space on a street or in a municipal parking
lot where a meter is installed and displays a signal showing that the parking is not
permitted unless a deposit of such coin or coins of the United States of America is made
as herein provided. Any vehicle parking in violation shall be deemed illegally parked.
The fact that a vehicle is in an individual parking space when the time signal on the
parking meter of the same shows no parking permitted unless a deposit of a proper coin
is made as herein provided shall be deemed prima face evidence of the unlawful parking
of such motor vehicle by its operator or owner.
B. Overtime Parking, Extending Time. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions
of this Chapter for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered
in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime, or beyond the period
of legal parking time established for any parking space as described in this Chapter or
to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond the
maximum legal parking time for the particular parking zone.
C. Expired Meter. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle to remain or be
placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is
displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already
been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
D. Separate Offenses. Each consecutive hour during one calendar day that a vehicle
remains illegally parked as above provided shall be a separate and distinct offense under
this Chapter. The first offense shall terminate one hour after the time a ticket charging
said offense is issued, which time shall be noted on the ticket, and a separate and new
offense shall occur during each one hour period thereafter.
E. To Park within Marked Lines. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle
across any line or marking of a parking meter space or in such position that the vehicle
shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings.
F. Tampering with Meters. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper
with, open or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this Chapter.
7-9-10 Administration.
A. Supervision. It shall be the duty of the City Administrator, or his or her designate, to
provide supervision for the daily operations of the Parking Enterprise fund.
B. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Administrator or his/her designate to
establish the enforcement provisions for this Chapter.
C. Collection; Deposit of Coins. It shall be the duty of the City Administrator or his/her
designate to establish the rules and procedures for the collection of the money deposited
in parking meters and to deposit such money to the designated bank account.
7-9-11 Parking Meter Funds. The coins deposited in parking meters are required and shall
be used to defray the expense of proper regulation of traffic upon the public streets; to provide
for the cost of supervision, regulation, and control of the parking of vehicles in parking zones;
and to cover the cost of purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation,
maintenance, control, and use of parking meters and other parking and traffic control devices.
Any of such funds remaining thereafter may be used either to purchase, lease, or otherwise
acquire parking lots or other off-street parking areas for the parking of vehicles; or such
remaining funds may be used for the retirement of revenue bonds issued for the purpose of
acquiring, improving, maintaining, or operating parking lots or other off-street parking areas
for the parking of vehicles, in the event the revenue from such parking lots or other off-street
parking areas for the parking of vehicles is insufficient to pay the cost of retiring such bonds
and for any other lawful purpose permitted by the Code of Iowa. If the parking enterprise has
a surplus in its fund, then this surplus may be transferred to any other city fund, by resolution
of the City Council.
7-9-12 Ticketing and Payment of Parking Violation. In the event of a meter or non-meter
parking violation, it shall be the duty of the police officers and/or meter attendants of the City
to report:
A. The parking violation involved.
B. In the event of a parking meter violation, the number of each parking meter which
indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter
is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of Section 7-9-9.
C. The state license number of such vehicle.
D. The time during which such vehicle is or was parked in violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter, and the time the ticket was issued.
E. Any other fact or facts, knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough understanding
of the circumstances attending such violation.
7-9-13 Compliance. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this Chapter, or who shall counsel, aid, or abet any such violation or failure to comply, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor except for uncontested violations charged upon a simple
notice of fine under Section 7-1-6 of this Code of Ordinances.
7-9-14 Reservation of Powers. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
City from providing for bus stops, taxicab stands, and other matters of similar nature, including
the loading or unloading of trucks, vans, or other commercial vehicles. Nothing in this Chapter
shall prohibit emergency or utility vehicles from performing their duties or responding to
emergency calls.
TITLE 7 – VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 10 – SNOW EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
SECTIONS:
7-10-1 Definitions
7-10-2 Snow Emergency Route
7-10-3 Standing and Parking
7-10-4 Notice of Snow Emergency
7-10-5 Duration of Snow Emergency
7-10-6 “Alternate Side of Street” Parking
7-10-7 Conflict of Ordinances
7-10-1 Definitions.
A. “Street” or Highway” means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained where any part is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
B. “Roadway” means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
C. “Snow Emergency Routes” are those streets designated as priority.
7-10-2 Snow Emergency Route. The Snow Emergency Routes shall consist of streets or
portion of streets as the City Council may from time to time designate by appropriate motion.
7-10-3 Standing and Parking. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle except as
provided in Section 7-10-6 of the City Code on any alley, street or roadway within the City
during the period of time than an emergency snow removal operation is in effect.
7-10-4 Notice of Snow Emergency. At the time ice or snow accumulations impede or hinder
the safe movement of vehicular traffic upon any alley, street or roadway within the City or
impede or otherwise interfere with the safe movement of emergency or public transportation
over and across the same, the City Administrator or his or her designate may by public media
declare the commencement of an emergency snow removal operation. The City Administrator
may also cause such declaration to be announced in newspapers, when time permits. The
public announcement shall also specify the time and date when the emergency snow removal
operation shall commence and its duration.
7-10-5 Duration of Snow Emergency. The time and day for the beginning and end of the
snow emergency will be included in the initial declaration. The minimum duration will be 48
hours. However, the ending time and date can be amended if necessary because of weather
conditions.
7-10-6 “Alternate Side of Street” Parking During a Snow Emergency.
A. Streets where parking permitted on both sides. During a snow emergency, streets that
normally permit parking on both sides of the street will be subject to “alternate side
of the street” parking. On odd-numbered days of the month, parking is permitted only
on the odd-numbered side of the street. Likewise, parking is permitted only on the
even-numbered side of the street on even-numbered days.
B. Streets where parking only permitted on one side. On all streets where parking is
allowed on one side only, if the permitted side (where parking is allowed) is even
numbered, vehicles can park on that side only on even-numbered days. If the permitted
side (where parking is allowed) is odd-numbered, vehicles can park on that side only
on odd-numbered days.
C. Parking prohibitions not affected. No parking is ever allowed on the side of the street
where parking is prohibited by posted sign.
D. Transition time. The transition time between the first and second day of a snow
emergency is from 12 o’clock midnight until 8:00 o’clock A.M. Enforcement of the
second snow emergency day does not begin until 8:00 o’clock A.M.
E. Downtown Central Business District Exempted. The downtown Central Business District
(area bounded by Mulberry, Third, Mississippi Drive and Pine Streets) is not affected by
these parking rules. Existing parking restrictions will remain in effect.
7-10-7 Conflict of Ordinances. The provisions of this Chapter which become effective during
a snow emergency shall take precedence over conflicting ordinances normally in effect, except
those relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized vehicles or emergency traffic
directions by a Police Officer. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit
parking at any time or place otherwise forbidden by any other provision of law.
Title 7 - Vehicles and Traffic
Chapter 11 – Load and Weight Restrictions
SECTIONS:
7-11-1 Weight Embargo
7-11-2 Signs Posted
7-11-3 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
7-11-4 Exceptions
7-11-5 Permits for Excess Size and Weight
7-11-6 Truck Routes
7-11-7 Employer’s Responsibility
7-11-8 Violation
7-11-1 Weight Embargo. Whenever certain streets by reason of deterioration, rain, snow,
or other climatic conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles
on the those streets is prohibited or the permissible weights reduced, the City may by ordinance
or resolution prohibit the operation of vehicles upon the highway or impose restrictions as to
the weight of vehicles to be operated upon those streets for a total period of not to exceed
ninety days in any one calendar year.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.471)
7-11-2 Signs Posted. The City shall erect and maintain signs designating the ordinance or
resolution at each end of that portion of any street or at the location of any bridge or culvert
affected thereby, and the ordinance or resolution shall not be effective unless and until the
signs are erected and maintained.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.472)
7-11-3 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no
person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on
such signs at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.473 & 475)
7-11-4 Exceptions. The following vehicles shall be exempt from the weight embargo:
A. Commercial vehicles engaged in the furnishing of services at premises fronting on the
prescribed street or premises contiguous to the prescribed street which have no other
means of access.
B. School buses.
C. City emergency or service vehicles.
7-11-5 Permits For Excess Size and Weight. The Public Works Director may, upon
application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing
the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or
load exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges
named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is
responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
7-11-6 Truck Routes:
A. Truck Routes Designated. Every motor vehicle weighing ten (10) tons or more, when
loaded or empty, having no fixed terminal within the City or making no scheduled or
definite stops within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over
or upon the following streets within the City and none other:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
1. All U.S. and State Highways (#22, 38, 61 Business, 61 Bypass, and 92).
2. Cypress Street from East Fifth Street to Isett Avenue.
3. Isett Avenue from Cypress Street to the U.S. Highway 61 Bypass.
4. East Fifth Street from Cypress Street to Cedar Street.
5. Cedar Street from East Fifth Street to Mississippi Drive (Business Route Highway 61
and 92).
6. Industrial Connector Road from Highway(s) 61 and 92 to Dick Drake Way.
7. Stewart Road from the Industrial Connector Road to Oregon Street and along
Oregon Street to Business Route Highway 61 and 92.
8. Lucas Street from the Highway 61 Bypass to Houser Street.
9. Hershey Avenue from the Highway 61 Bypass to Houser Street.
10.Houser Street from Lucas to Grandview Avenue.
11.University Drive from Highway 22 to Highway 61.
12.Oak Street from East Second Street to East Fifth Street.
B. Departure from Designated Truck Route System. All trucks having a fixed terminal,
making a scheduled or definite stop within the City for the purpose of loading or
unloading shall proceed over and upon the Designated Truck Route System as set out
above to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop. From that point, the truck
shall proceed to its destination and return to the truck route by the most direct method.
It is the responsibility of the operator of the truck to have in possession for inspection
a log book, delivery slip or other evidence of the truck's destination and point of origin
to justify the presence of the truck on a street other than the Designated Truck Route
System.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.473)
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this Chapter governing the Designated Truck Route
System shall not apply to school buses, fire trucks, City utility, service, and roadway
maintenance trucks and vehicles.
D. Alternate Truck Routes. Whenever any street or roadway functioning as a part of the
Designated Truck Route System is under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, the
City Administrator or designated representative shall be authorized to designate a
temporary alternate route(s).
7-11-7 Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise
directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the operation of such
vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this Section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
7-11-8 Violation. Any person who operates a truck or vehicle in violation of this Chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a penalty as set out in Section 1-2-14 of
this Code of Ordinances.
TITLE 7 – VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 12 – TRAFFIC: JUNK, OBSOLETE, STORED VEHICLES
SECTIONS:
7-12-1 Definitions
7-12-2 Storing on Streets Illegal
7-12-3 Violation
7-12-4 Removal
7-12-5 Junked Vehicles
7-12-6 Owner Subject to Fine
7-12-7 Junked Vehicles; Removal
7-12-1 Definitions.
A. “Motor vehicle” shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled. The term “car” or
“automobile” shall be synonymous with the term “motor vehicle”.
B. “Junk or obsolete motor vehicle” shall mean a motor vehicle or portion thereof not in
operable condition or not licensed for the current year as provided by the law. For
purposes of this Section, “not licensed for the current year” shall include a vehicle not
displaying current registration validation stickers on its license plates.
C. “Stored vehicle” shall mean a motor vehicle which has been parked in the same location
without having been moved at least twenty-five feet (25’) for a period of twenty-four
(24) hours or longer.
D. “Streets” shall mean streets, alleys, parking lots, avenues, roads, boulevards, highways,
or other public ways located in the City.
E. “Owner” or “operator” shall mean every individual who operates a motor vehicle as the
owner thereof or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the owner or is in actual
physical control of the motor vehicle at the last time it was moved or operated.
7-12-2 Storing on Streets Illegal. No motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or other personal property
shall be stored on the streets of the City
7-12-3 Violation. Any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or other personal property which is found
to be in violation of Section 7-12-2 hereof shall be ticketed for violation of such section by the
Police. The penalty for such violation shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each twenty-four (24)
hours that the vehicle is in violation of said Section.
7-12-4 Removal. In the event that a motor vehicle is in violation of Section 7-12-2 for a
period of longer than forty-eight (48) hours, then in addition to the penalty imposed by Section
7-12-3, said vehicle may be removed or caused to be removed by the City. The City may move
or cause said motor vehicle to be moved to some convenient place. The cost of such removal
and storage charges, if any, are to be borne by the owner or operator.
7-12-5 Junked Vehicles. No junked or obsolete motor vehicles or portions thereof shall be
parked or located on the streets of the City at any time.
7-12-6 Owner Subject to Fine. The owner or operator of any such junked or obsolete motor
vehicle which is parked on the streets of the City in violation of Section 7-12-5 shall be subject
to a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each twenty-four (24) hours or part thereof in which
said junked vehicle is parked on the street in violation of said Section.
7-12-7 Junked Vehicles; Removal. In addition to the penalty provided by Section 7-12-6,
junked or obsolete motor vehicles may be removed by the City to some convenient place. The
cost of such removal and storage charges, if any, shall be borne by the owner or operator of
said junked or obsolete motor vehicle.
TITLE 7 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 13 - ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTIONS:
7-13-1 Definitions
7-13-2 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicle
7-13-3 Notice by Mail
7-13-4 Notification in Newspaper
7-13-5 Fees for Impoundment
7-13-6 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
7-13-7 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
7-13-8 Proceeds from Sales
7-13-9 Duties of Demolisher
7-13-1 Definitions. For use in this Chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])
A. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
1. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more than twenty-four
(24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or other parts
which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
2. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than twenty-four
(24) hours.
3. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property without the
consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than twenty-four
(24) hours.
4. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police authority and has not
been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. However, a police authority may
declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day period by commencing the
notification process.
5. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to create a
hazard to other vehicle traffic.
6. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the Code of Iowa
by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment fees after
notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out the impoundment
order.
B. “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of Iowa whose
business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise
to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
C. “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle
storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor
vehicles.
(Iowa Code, Section 321.90)
D. “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law enforcement agency of a
county or city.
7-13-2 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles. A police authority, upon the
authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other authority having the duties of control
of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may
take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority may employ
its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity, equipment, and facilities
for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. A
property owner or other person in control of private property may employ a private entity which
is a garage keeper (any operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage
facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles) to dispose
of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle
without a police authority’s initiative. If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose
of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and
addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to
the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
7-13-3 Notice By Mail. The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last known
registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the
vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known
addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be
deemed given when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle
identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set
forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving
the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after
the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The
notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a
waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle
or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed
consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher
and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. If the abandoned vehicle was
taken into custody by a private entity without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall
state that the private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of
the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle. If the abandoned vehicle
was taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity hired by a police authority,
the notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal
property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority
or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this Section may ask for
an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters. If the persons
receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal
property within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no
longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property. A
court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the
owner, lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
7-13-4 Notification In Newspaper. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty
the identity and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned
shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice under Section 7-13-3. The published notice
may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be
published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed
for mailed notice in Section 7-13-3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
7-13-5 Fees for Impoundment. The owner, lienholder or claimant shall pay all towing and
storage fees as established by the storage facility, whereupon the vehicle shall be released.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
7-13-6 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles. If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed
as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to
whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose
of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
7-13-7 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles. The City or any person upon whose
property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being
the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of
such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification procedures,
if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or other structural part which
renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate
of authority. The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate
and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
7-13-8 Proceeds from Sales. Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be
applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification required,
in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle or
entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax
Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the
police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
7-13-9 Duties of Demolisher. Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an
abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish
such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or demolish a vehicle
until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
Title 7 - Vehicles and Traffic
Chapter 14 – Bicycles
SECTIONS:
7-14-1 Registration Required
7-14-2 Application
7-14-3 License Type
7-14-4 Second Hand Sales Report
7-14-5 Destroying Frame Number or License
7-14-6 Lost or Destroyed License
7-14-7 License Fees
7-14-8 Riding on Sidewalks
7-14-9 Parking on Sidewalks (Business District)
7-14-10 Number of Persons
7-14-11 Riding Two Abreast
7-14-12 Method of Riding; Rate of Speed
7-14-13 Lamps: Reflective Devices
7-14-14 Traffic Regulations
7-14-1 Registration Required. Every person who shall own a bicycle in the City shall register
such bicycle as provided in this Chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.236[10])
7-14-2 Application. The owner of any bicycle shall apply to the Police Department for
registration of such bicycle and such registration shall be on a form furnished and prescribed
by the Police Department and shall provide a full description of the bicycle, such as name and
address of owner, type, color, manufacturer, and serial number.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.236[10])
7-14-3 License Type. The Bicycle License shall be of a type designated by the Police Chief.
7-14-4 Second Hand Sales Report. All persons buying or selling second hand bicycles shall
notify the Police Department within five (5) days of the purchase or sale.
7-14-5 Destroying Frame Number or License. No person shall willfully or maliciously
remove or destroy any frame number or license.
7-14-6 Lost or Destroyed License. In the event that an owner of a bicycle should lose a
license or that such license should be destroyed or stolen, the owner shall report the same to
the Police Department and there shall be furnished to the owner a new bicycle license at the
cost as set by resolution of the Council.
7-14-7 License Fees. The bicycle license fee shall be as determined by resolution of the City
Council and is listed in the Schedule of Permit and Other Licensing Requirements in Appendix
B to this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.236[10])
7-14-8 Riding on Sidewalks. Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks in the City, except in
the downtown business area, however, Muscatine police officers while on duty may operate
bicycles on sidewalks anywhere in the City. For the purpose of this Section, the downtown
business area shall encompass an area bounded by and including Mississippi Drive, Mulberry
Avenue, Fourth Street, and Pine Street. Under all circumstances, a driver of a bicycle shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians using the sidewalk and due and proper care shall at all times
be exercised by the driver of the bicycle for pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.236[10])
7-14-9 Parking on Sidewalks (Business District). No person shall park any bicycle upon
the sidewalks in the business district; the business district is that area as defined in Section 7-
14-8 of this Chapter.
7-14-10 Number of Persons. Only one person shall ride a bicycle at any time, unless it is of
the tandem type.
7-14-11 Riding Two Abreast. Bicyclists riding upon any street shall not ride more than two
(2) abreast.
7-14-12 Method of Riding; Rate of Speed. When riding upon the streets, bicyclists shall at
all times keep both hands on the handle bars of the bicycle, except to make hand signals and
at no time shall ride at such a rate of speed as to endanger the person or property of others.
7-14-13 Lamps: Reflective Devices. Every bicycle operated within the City during the period
from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when
there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles at a distance of
three hundred feet (300') ahead shall be equipped with a lighted white lamp on the front thereof
of such bicycle. Every bicycle shall also be equipped with a reflex mirror reflector or lamp on
the rear, visible under like conditions from a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') to
the rear of such bicycle.
7-14-14 Traffic Regulations. All persons riding bicycles upon any street shall observe the
traffic laws of the City and of the State insofar as the same may apply to the riding of bicycles
and specifically, but without limitation, shall include traffic rules as to traffic lights, highway
stop signs, signaling change of direction of the course of travel, traveling on the right-hand side
of the street, no turns to the right or left in traffic except at the regular intersection of streets
or alleys and no weaving in and out of traffic.
1
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Building Code 1
Demolition of Buildings 2
Electrical Code 3
Fuel Gas Code 4
Housing Code 5
Addressing 6
Mechanical Code 7
Moving Buildings 8
Plumbing Code 9
Residential Code 10
2
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1 – BUILDING CODE
SECTIONS:
8-1-1 Adoption of Code
8-1-2 Building Official
8-1-3 Building Permits
8-1-4 Amendments
8-1-5 Reserved
8-1-6 Reserved
8-1-7 Applicability
8-1-8 Violation
8-1-1 Adoption of the International Building Code. Pursuant to published notice and
public hearing as required by the Code of Iowa, the document entitled “International Building
Code”, 2015 Edition, as amended and published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted by reference as the Building Code for the City of Muscatine, Iowa, and is made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this Ordinance. An official copy of said code is on file in the office of
the City Clerk.
8-1-2 Building Official. There is hereby created the position of Building Official to be
appointed in the same manner as other department heads. The Community Development
Director and the Building Official are one and the same position and the Building Official,
when exercising the duties prescribed for such office, shall have all the powers of a policeman.
8-1-3 Building Permits.
A. Building Permit Fee. The fee for a building permit when required by this Code shall be
as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
B. Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started or proceeded with
prior to obtaining said permit, the fees above specified may be doubled, but the
payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the
requirements of this Code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties
prescribed herein.
8-1-4 Amendments. That the International Building Code, adopted by the City of Muscatine,
Iowa, be amended to read as follows:
A. Building Permit Fees. A fee for each required permit shall be paid to the Community
Development as set forth in the Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other
Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of Ordinances.
B. Existing Building. Section 101.4.7 is amended to read as follows: “The provisions of
Chapter 34 of the document entitled “International Building Code”, 2015 Edition, shall
apply to matters governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and
relocation of existing building.”
C. Storm Shelters. Section 423.4 is amended to read as follows: “Group E occupancies. In
areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornados is 250 MPW in accordance with
Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500, all Group E occupancies with an aggregate occupant load
of 50 or more, as established in accordance with ICC 500. The shelter of the Group E
occupancy shall have an occupant load of either of the applicable: (1) the total
3
occupant load of the entire structure when the structure is a new structure, or (2) the
calculated occupant load of the square footage added to an existing structure.
1. Exceptions: 1. Group E day care facilities; 2. Group E occupancies accessory to
places of religious worship; 3. Building meeting the requirements for shelter design
in ICC 500.
2. “ICC 500” as referenced and incorporated by Section 423 be amended as follows
a. Deletion of Section 702.2, Sanitation Facilities
b. Section 702.3 is amended to read as follows: “”702.3 Emergency lighting.
Community tornado shelters shall be provided with an emergency lighting
system. The emergency lighting system shall provide an average of 1 footcandle
(11 Lux) of illumination in occupied shelter areas, occupant support
areas, required corridors, passageways and means of egress. Personal use
flashlights shall be permitted for the emergency lighting system
requirement for tornado shelters when provided at a quantity not less than
one (1) flashlight per 10 occupants. Personal use flashlights shall be a
minimum of two “D” cell size or equivalent light output, and readily
accessible from within the occupied shelter areas or immediately adjacent
occupant support areas.”
8-1-5 (Reserved).
8-1-6 (Reserved).
4
8-1-7 Applicability. It is the intent of the City of Muscatine that the International Building
Code and its companion Codes as adopted elsewhere in the City Code shall be the prevailing
construction and occupancy controls within the City unless otherwise mandated by State law.
It shall be the responsibility of the Building Official to make a final decision as to the
applicability of any other codes or ordinances adopted by the City which may present a
conflict with the intent of other regulations contained herein.
8-1-8 Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this
Code.
5
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 2 – DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
SECTIONS:
8-2-1 Permit Required
8-2-2 Permit Application
8-2-3 Supervision of Work
8-2-4 Condition of Site
8-2-5 Requirements
8-2-6 Drawings for Certain Buildings
8-2-7 Aprons, Canopies, Streets, and Sidewalks
8-2-8 Time
8-2-9 Adjacent Frontage Consents
8-2-10 Party Walls
8-2-11 Night Work
8-2-12 Exemption
8-2-13 Burning
8-2-1 Permit Required. Before proceeding with the demolition of any building or structure,
a permit for such demolition shall first be obtained by the owner, his agent, or his contractor
from the Building Department.
8-2-2 Permit Application. Application for said permit shall be made by such owner, his
agent, or his contractor to the Building Official, who shall issue such permit in accordance with
this Chapter upon application and the payment as set out in the Schedule of Building-Related
Permits and Other Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of Ordinances. Such application
shall state the location and describe the building to be demolished, the method of demolition,
and the estimated cost of the demolition. If no new building is to be erected on the site
thereof, the statement shall include a description of the condition in which it is intended to
leave the site thereof. In addition, the applicant shall provide information necessary to ensure
compliance with asbestos investigation and abatement, and proof of notification to the State
of Iowa, as required.
8-2-3 Supervision of Work. Upon the issuance of the required permit, each building may be
demolished, provided that all the work done thereunder shall be subject to the supervision of
the Building Official.
8-2-4 Condition of Site. The site where any building has been left demolished shall be left in
a clean, presentable, and safe condition with the cellar, if any, of the old building properly
filled in and graded so as not to permit accumulation of surface water or discharge to the
detriment of adjoining property. The sanitary sewer shall be cut off and plugged with concrete
at the property line and all utilities shall be properly shut off at the main or in accordance with
rules and regulations of the particular utility.
8-2-5 Requirements. Before any permit is issued granting authority to demolish a building
or structure, the person engaged in the same or the owner of said building or structure shall
file with the Community Development Department proof of public liability insurance naming
the City as an additional insured and covering any personal injury or property damage which
may arise out of said demolition work, with limits of liability limits as established in the
Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of
Ordinances. The person engaged in the work of demolishing said building or structure and the
owner of said building or structure shall also execute an indemnification agreement whereby
they agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City against any loss, cost, damage, expense,
6
judgment, or liability of any kind whatsoever which the City may suffer or which may occur
against, be charged to, or recovered from the City or any of its employees by reason of or
arising out of any such demolition operation.
7
8-2-6 Drawings for Certain Buildings. When requested by the Building Official, the owner
or his agent shall submit a drawing indicating fences, barricades, aprons, canopies, lighting,
and other safeguards to be used in connection with the wrecking program. These safeguards
shall be approved by the Building Official before a permit is issued and the safeguards shall be
erected in strict compliance therewith.
8-2-7 Aprons, Canopies, Streets, and Sidewalks. The wrecker owner, his agent or
contractor, shall construct aprons, canopies, fences, barricades, and other safeguards in
conformance with all Federal, State, and local standards, rules, and regulations. Streets and
sidewalks shall not be blocked without the approval of the Building Official. All damage to
public property as a result of the demolition must be repaired, including damage to sidewalks,
curbs, streets, etc.
8-2-8 Time. Each and every requirement mentioned or described in this Chapter shall be
performed by the owner, his agent or his contractor, within the time set by the Building
Official, unless otherwise prescribed herein.
8-2-9 Adjacent Frontage Consents. If the written consent of and a waiver of claims for
damage against the City by the owners of properties adjoining the site of the proposed
demolition of any building is first obtained and filed with the Building Official, the permission
to occupy the roadway and the sidewalk may be extended beyond the limits of such building
front of the property for which the consent of the owner thereof has been secured upon the
same terms and conditions as those fixed for the occupation of sidewalks and roadways in
front of the building site.
8-2-10 Party Walls. Before a permit is issued for the wrecking of a structure that has one or
more party walls in common with one or more buildings, there shall be delivered to the
Building Official a certificate by a licensed architect or a licensed structural engineer to the
effect that the adjoining premises do not require anchorage, or, if such certificate indicates
that anchorage is necessary, the certificate shall be accompanied by a drawing signed and
sealed by such architect or engineer and subject to the approval of the Building Official
indicating adequate anchorage of floor and roof joists at not greater than ten foot (10')
intervals for each and every floor and roof resting on such party wall, and the adjoining
premises shall be anchored in compliance with such drawing. Owners of adjoining premises
shall be notified of said anchorage, as shown on such drawing.
8-2-11 Night Work. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the demolition of any
building between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., unless
otherwise approved in writing by the City of Muscatine
8-2-12 Exemption. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to the demolition of
garages, out-buildings, or other accessory structures of a similar nature.
8-2-13 Burning. It is unlawful to demolish by burning without approval of the Fire chief and
in accordance with all applicable State and Local rules and policies.
8
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3 – ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTIONS:
8-3-1 Adoption of Code
8-3-2 Supplemental Electrical Regulations
8-3-3 Plans and Specifications
8-3-4 Permits
8-3-5 Inspections
8-3-6 Turning Off Electric Current
8-3-7 Connection to Power Source
8-3-1 Adoption of Code. The most recent edition of the National Electric Code, as
amended and published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as
the Electrical Code for the City of Muscatine, Iowa, insofar as they do not conflict with the
regulations set out in this Chapter, which shall supersede. The current edition of the
National Electrical Code is made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Ordinance.
8-3-2 Supplemental Electrical Regulations. The purpose of this Section is to provide
for additional electrical rules and regulations which are intended to supplement the
provisions of the current edition of the National Electrical Code adopted by the City
Council. The supplemental rules and regulations take precedence over any provisions of
the National Electrical Code which may be in conflict therewith as provided in Section 8-3-
1.
A. Distribution Centers - Divisions of Load. In laying out an electrical installation,
except for a constant current system, every reasonable effort shall be made to
secure distribution centers located in easily accessible places at which points,
cutouts, and switches controlling various branch circuits shall be grouped for
convenience and safety of operations. The electrical load shall be divided as evenly
as possible between branch circuits and all complicated and unnecessary wiring
shall be avoided.
B. Transformers-Meters. Transformers and meters shall comply with the following
regulations:
1. All power or heavy lighting services over two hundred amperes, single-phase
and two hundred amperes, three-phase, shall be metered by a potential and
current transformer or current transformers.
2. Metering transformers shall be enclosed in an approved metal box enclosure or
cabinet with a door locked or sealed by the utility company or mounted in the
mast drip loop at the utility's discretion.
3. Meter loops shall not be opened or closed by anyone without the permission of
an authorized representative of the utility company.
4. A meter board and/or distribution panel board of the size and type approved by
the Code Inspector shall be installed in a proper and convenient place
designated by the utility company to receive the various types of meters used
by the utility company and distribution panels used by the customer.
9
5. Where two or more meters are to be placed on one building for different electric
customers, they shall be grouped at a common place on the exterior portion of
the building. All multiple metering points shall be marked on the cover's
exterior as well as the interior meter base which identifies the building address
and respective apartment identifier with a permanent, wide tip, non-soluble
black ink.
6. Meters shall be placed on solid walls free from vibration and in a convenient and
accessible place for reading as specified by the utility company. They shall be
placed not over six foot six inches or less than four feet from the finish grade
with a minimum of three feet clear space in all directions of the meter.
C. Service Entrance Wiring and Requirements. All service entrance wiring and
requirements shall comply with the following regulations unless elsewhere allowed
in the adopted National Electrical Code and utility company, or a variation thereof is
approved by the Code Inspector due to the type of building occupancy or electrical
service requirements:
1. Only one service shall be permitted for any one building or structure, except as
elsewhere allowed in the adopted National Electrical Code.
2. A minimum of a three-wire, 100 ampere electric service shall be required for
any existing building or structure requiring electrical service, except as allowed
by the utility company. The service locations shall be designated by the utility
company.
3. Newly constructed and existing single residential dwellings receiving new
electric service following the passage of this Chapter shall conform to the
following requirements:
a. They shall be provided with a minimum of a 200 ampere service.
Exception: Each newly constructed multifamily and existing multifamily
residential unit(s) containing less than 1,000 square feet of habitable area
shall be provided with a minimum of a 100 ampere service per the National
Electric Code.
b. Mast type services shall be installed utilizing not less than 2" (inch)
galvanized rigid conduit and shall require a guy brace if the mast extends
more than four 4' (feet) above the adjacent roof.
c. Service from an underground system shall enter the structure above grade
on the exterior portion of the building and shall be sealed with a proper
compound to prevent the entrance of water.
d. Service panel switches shall not be installed over sinks, stationary tubs,
stoves, or near any plumbing appliances where the person operating same
could come in contact with a grounding device.
e. In no case shall more than twelve feet (12') of service wires be allowed on
the inside of any building, or structure without a disconnect being present.
f. Service of 200 amperes or less shall have a sequence of meter, main fused
disconnect switch or breaker, circuit fuses or breakers when the number of
disconnects is six (6) or less. Emergency systems may be connected to line
side of the main switch or breaker as provided by the National Electrical
Code. If the number of disconnects is greater than six (6) the main must be
ahead of the meters.
10
g. Where the electrical service entrance or electric panel is relocated more
than three feet on existing work, the provision of this Section shall apply as
if said relocation was new work. Extensions shall not be allowed on work
where wiring is not in conformance with the adopted National Electrical
Code. Old work shall be brought up to the standards set by the National
Electrical Code and by this Chapter.
D. Workmanship. In all electrical wiring work and installation of electrical apparatus
and equipment, special care and attention shall be given to the mechanical
execution of the work. Care shall be given to assure the neat and orderly running,
connecting, and taping of conductors, securing and attaching related fittings.
8-3-3 Plans and Specifications. Whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the
Inspector, plans and specifications shall be required and shall show, in sufficient detail,
that all electrical work to be done which requires an Electrical Permit conforms to the
adopted Code of the City. Plans and specifications may not have to be submitted where
minor work is proposed and/or the contractor agrees to comply with all the provisions of
this Chapter.
8-3-4 Permits. Before an Electrical Permit is issued as required, the Inspector shall
charge the owner of the property or his contractor the required fee which shall be
established by resolution of the City Council and is set out in the Schedule of Building-
Related Permits and Other Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of Ordinances. No
electrical work will commence without the party performing the electrical work first
insuring that the required permit has been issued by the City. Failure to comply with this
provision shall result in the fee being doubled and subjects the violator to the issuance of a
municipal infraction, at the discretion of the Building Official.
Exception. Minor repair work and installations may not require issuance of an Electrical
Permit when, in the opinion of the Inspector and with the approval of the Building Official,
such work or installation does not require significant changes, alteration and/or repair.
8-3-5 Inspections. The Inspector must be notified when work is ready to be inspected
by the licensed electrician or homeowner (when wiring his/her own home) doing such
work. All inside work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until
inspected and approved by the City. No request shall be made for an inspection until the
work is entirely ready for inspection or unless the Inspector makes arrangements to the
contrary. In case of violation of any of the provisions contained herein, the permit may be
revoked by the City and upon notice of revocation, all work under the permit shall cease.
The Inspector shall examine all work required to be inspected within eight (8) working
hours of notice that the work is ready for inspection. Any materials found to be defective,
improperly installed or not meeting the minimum requirements of the Code shall be
removed, replaced and/or altered to fully comply with all the provisions of this Chapter.
When all work is completed under the Electrical Permit and is found to be in compliance
with the Code, the Inspector shall give his or her approval.
A. Emergency Repair. Emergency repair may be performed by an electrical license
holder, but must be reported to the City Community Development Department
within eight (8) working hours of the repair.
B. Heating and Air Conditioning Installations. Electrical installation of all heating, air
conditioning equipment and electric water heaters shall be performed by an
electrical license holder or the homeowner and comply with this Code.
11
8-3-6 Turning Off Electric Current.
A. The Code Inspector shall have full power and authority to cut off or cause to have
cut off the electric current from any new installation, alteration or extension of
existing systems, existing installation found to be hazardous, or any equipment, in
or on any building, structure or premises which:
1. Does not comply with applicable city codes pertaining to electrical work for
which a permit has been issued, or
12
2. In the opinion of the Inspector an unsafe or hazardous condition exists, or that
danger to persons or property is possible; or
3. The electrical current would interfere with or hinder the necessary work of the
fire or law enforcement officials.
B. Where the current is cut off or ordered cut off under the provisions of this Section,
such current shall not be turned on again without the authorization of the Code
Inspector. Any person engaged in furnishing electricity, shall cut off the current
from any consumer, building, structure, or premises when so ordered by the Code
Inspector for reasons indicated in this Section.
8-3-7 Connection to Power Source. No electrical connection to the power source shall
be made, or any electric meter set until the same has been approved by the Code
Inspector or representative of the utility company.
13
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4 – FUEL GAS CODE
SECTIONS:
8-4-1 Fuel Gas Code
8-4-2 Enforcement
8-4-1 Fuel Gas Code. Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, the
most recent edition of the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54, as prepared and edited by the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), is hereby adopted by reference as the Fuel Gas
Code for the City of Muscatine and is made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Ordinance.
An official copy of said code is in the office of the City Clerk.
8-4-2 Enforcement. The duly franchised agency (the Gas Division of the Interstate Power
and Light Company) shall work together with the City, and the City in turn will cooperate with
the person, firm, or corporation to disconnect or to order disconnection and plug or cap any
gas piping, appliance, or accessory which does not conform to the requirements of the most
recent edition of the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54, as prepared and edited by the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and the American Gas Association, or which may be found
defective and in such condition as to endanger life or property. Where such disconnection has
been made, a notice shall be attached to such appliance, accessory, or gas piping which shall
state that it has been disconnected and the reason therefore, and such notice shall not be
removed nor shall the appliance, accessory, or gas piping be reconnected until it shall have
been made to conform with the requirements of the Code of Standards.
14
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5 – HOUSING CODE
SECTIONS:
8-5-1 Title, Scope, and Enforcement
8-5-2 Definitions
8-5-3 Permits and Inspection
8-5-4 Registration and Inspections of Rental Properties
8-5-5 Minimum Structural Standards for All Dwellings
8-5-6 Minimum Structural Standards for All Rental Housing
8-5-7 Owners Responsibilities
8-5-8 Occupants Responsibilities
8-5-9 Substandard Buildings
8-5-10 Notices and Orders of Building Official
8-5-11 Appeals
8-5-12 Procedures for Conduct of Hearing Appeals
8-5-13 Enforcement of Orders from Building Official or Board of Appeals
8-5-14 Performance of Demolition and Cost Recovery
8-5-1 Title Scope and Enforcement.
A. Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Muscatine Housing Code",
hereinafter referred to as "The Housing Code".
B. Housing Code Adopted. There is hereby adopted by the City of Muscatine, Iowa, for
the purpose of providing minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health,
property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use and occupancy,
location and maintenance of all residential buildings and structures within this
jurisdiction, the "Housing Quality Standards" promulgated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (24 C.F.R. 882.109 (a)-(1)), the
latest version being dated April 1, 1993, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. The "Housing Quality Standards"
promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(24 C.F.R. 882.109 (a)-(1)), is incorporated herein as though fully set out at length
herein.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.17[1][e] & 364.17[7])
C. Scope. The provisions of this Housing Code shall apply to all buildings or portions
thereof which are used or intended to be used for human occupancy. Additionally,
all accessory buildings or structures are hereby subject to all applicable sections
regarding health, safety, and maintenance thereof.
D. Enforcement.
1. Authority. The Building Official, or his or her designated representative, is
hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Code. For
such purposes, he or she shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
2. Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this Code, or whenever the Building Official, or his or her
authorized representative, has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in
any building or upon any premises any condition or Code violation which makes
15
such building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Building
Official, or his or her authorized representative, may enter such building or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty
imposed upon the Building Official by this Code, provided that if such building or
premises be occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and
request entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he or she shall
first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having
charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is
refused, the Building Official, or his or her authorized representative, shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
When the Building Official, or his or her authorized representative, shall have
first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to
secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care,
or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request
is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building
Official, or his or her authorized representative, for the purpose of inspection
and examination pursuant to this Code.
8-5-2 Definitions. For the purpose of this Housing Code, certain terms, phrases, words,
and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this Chapter. Where terms are not
defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which
they are used. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words
used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
Whenever the words "dwelling", "dwelling unit", "rooming house", or "premises" are used
in this Housing Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
"or any part thereof".
A. "Acceptable" or "approved" shall mean in substantial compliance with the
provisions of the Housing Code, or the intent of the Code as approved by the
Building Official or his/her designated representative.
B. "Accessory structure" shall mean a structure which is not used, nor intended to be
used, for living or sleeping by human occupants.
C. "Appurtenance" shall mean that which is directly or indirectly connected or an
accessory to some other structure.
D. "Basement" shall mean a story having at least 1/2 of its height below grade.
E. "Bath" shall mean a bathtub or shower stall connected with both hot and cold water
lines.
F. "Cellar" shall mean a space having its principal height below the first or main floor
which is used, or intended to be used, for storage, location for heating equipment,
etc., and shall not be considered habitable space.
G. "Certificate of Structural Compliance" shall mean a document showing that the
structure for which it is issued was in compliance with the City of Muscatine
Housing Code at the time of issuance.
H. "Communal" shall mean used or shared by, or intended to be used or shared by,
the occupants of two (2) or more rooming units or two (2) or more dwelling units.
16
I. "Condominium" shall mean a dwelling unit which is in compliance with the
requirements of 499B of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
J. "Cooperative" shall mean a dwelling unit which is in compliance with the
requirements of 499A of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
K. "Court" shall mean an open unoccupied space which is more than 50% enclosed by
buildings.
L. "Dining room" shall mean a habitable room used, or intended to be used, for the
purpose of eating, but not for cooking or the preparation of meals.
M. "Dwelling" shall mean any building or structure which is wholly or partly used, or
intended to be used, for living or sleeping by human occupants and includes any
appurtenances attached thereto.
N. "Dwelling unit" shall mean any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable
rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities which are
used, or intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating of meals.
O. "Extermination" shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the Inspector.
P. "Filth" shall mean excrement, either animal or human, or any material connected
therewith.
Q. "Garbage" shall mean animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of food and shall also mean combustible
waste material. The term shall also include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, and other combustible materials.
R. "Habitable room" shall mean a room, or enclosed space, having a minimum of
seventy (70) square feet of total floor area within a dwelling unit or rooming unit
used, or intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, toilet rooms, pantries, laundries, foyers, corridors, closets,
storage spaces, and stairways.
S. "Infestation" shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents, or other pests in such quantities as would be considered unsanitary.
T. "Inspector" shall mean the official or officials of the City of Muscatine delegated the
responsibility to administer the provisions of the Housing Code, together with his or
her duly authorized representative(s) and/or agent(s).
U. "Kitchen" shall mean a habitable room used, or intended to be used, for cooking or
the preparation of meals.
V. "Kitchenette" shall mean a food preparation area of not less than forty (40) square
feet.
17
W. "Lavatory" shall mean a hand washing basin which is connected to both hot and
cold water lines and which is separate and distinct from a kitchen sink.
X. "Multiple dwelling" shall mean any dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling
units.
Y. "Nuisance" shall mean any item or items as defined in Title 9, Chapter 3, of the
City Code.
Z. "Occupant" shall mean any person, including the owner or operator, living in,
sleeping in, and/or cooking in, or having actual physical possession of a dwelling
unit or a rooming unit.
AA."Operator" shall mean any person who rents to another or who has custody or
control of a building, or parts thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are
let and who has custody and control of the premises.
BB."Owner" shall mean any person who has control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or
rooming unit by virtue of a contractual interest in or legal or equitable title to said
dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit. An owner who has sold the premises on a
legally recorded contract but retains legal title shall not be deemed an owner
hereunder.
CC."Person" shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
trust, or estate.
DD. “Plumbing" shall mean and include any or all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal
units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, water heating
devices, catch basins, drains, vents, and other similar supplied fixtures, together
with all connections to water, sewer, or gas services.
EE. "Premises" shall mean a lot, plot, or parcel of land including all building(s) thereon.
FF. "Refuse" shall mean waste materials (except human waste) including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, and dead animals.
GG. “Rental Property (Residential Rental Property) or Rental Unit (Residential Rental
Unit)” shall mean a structure containing one or more dwelling units, rooming
units, or sleeping units, or any structure or part of a structure used as a home,
residence, or sleeping unit by a single person, household unit, or any person(s)
other than the legal owner or other person in control of such unit(s), whether by
day, week, month, year or any other term, regardless of monetary exchange. The
term Rental Unit or Residential Rental Unit may refer to a unit within a rental
property, as context requires.
HH. “Rental Property Registration” shall mean registration with the City of Muscatine of
a structure containing one or more rental units subject to regulation under this
Chapter.
II. “Rental Unit Registration” shall mean registration of any given dwelling unit within
a duly registered rental property.
18
JJ. "Roomer." shall mean an occupant of a rooming house or rooming unit and shall
also mean an occupant of a dwelling who is not a member of the family occupying
the dwelling.
KK. "Rooming unit" shall mean any habitable room, or group of adjoining habitable
rooms, located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities which are
used, or intended to be used, primarily for living and sleeping and contain no
cooking equipment except that a properly connected and safely operated
microwave shall be permitted. A rooming unit shall have a bath and toilet facilities
available for exclusive use by the occupant(s) or for communal use in accordance
with Sections 8-5-6(E)1 and 8-5-6(E)2.
LL. "Rubbish" shall mean inorganic waste material consisting of primarily
noncombustible materials.
MM. "Supplied" shall mean paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of
the owner or operator.
8-5-3 Permits and Inspection.
A. General. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any
building or structure regulated by this Code without first obtaining a separate
permit for each building or structure from the Building Official in the manner and
according to the City Code for Muscatine, Iowa.
B. Fees. Whenever a building permit is required by Section 8-5-3(A) of this Code, the
appropriate fees shall be paid to the Building Official at the rate(s) established by
the City Council and set out in the Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other
Requirements in Appendix D(1) to this Code of Ordinances.
C. Inspection. All buildings or structures within the scope of this Code and all
construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by
the Building Official in accordance with and in the manner provided by the City
Code for the City of Muscatine.
8-5-4 License, Registration, and Inspection Requirements for Rental Facilities
and Rental Units
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to ensure that property owners, their agents
and others, meet their responsibilities with respect to proper operation and
maintenance of rental housing facilities and to provide for inspection as a means of
compelling compliance therewith. It is not the purpose of this chapter to create any
duty on the part of the city, its officers, agents, or employees, owing to any individual
member of the public or to protect any particular or circumscribed class of persons.
Specifically, it is not the intent of this chapter to create any duty or liability by the city,
its officers, agents, or employees, to premises' occupants, owners, tenants, or any
other person.
B. Warning. No person shall place reliance upon this chapter, any inspections performed
or licenses or certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, as indicating the safety of or
quality of construction of any particular premises. Neither this chapter nor inspections
19
made pursuant thereto nor licenses nor certificates issued are intended to assume
theduty of any person to adequately construct and maintain a premises or provide a
safe premises or to, in any way, indicate a decrease in the risk associated with the use
or occupancy of any premises. A license issued or certification that a premise has been
inspected or registered pursuant to this chapter shall not in any way constitute a
warranty or guarantee of the safety or quality of that premises.
C. Indemnification. The applicant for any Rental Facility License or registrant for any
Rental Unit Registration Certificate issued under this chapter, by making such
application or registration, assumes and agrees to pay for all loss or damage to
property whatsoever, and injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or in
connection with or related to the issuance of such Rental Facility License or Rental Unit
Registration Certificate or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant or registrant, to
abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of
the city; and such applicant or registrant, by making such application or registration,
forever indemnifies the city, its officers and employees and agrees to save it and them
harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any
loss, damage, injury or death, costs and expenses, by reason of the foregoing even
though acts or omissions of the city, its officers or employees may have caused or
contributed thereto. The foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be a part of any
license or certificate issued under this chapter whether expressly recited therein or
not.
D. Rental Facility License and Rental Unit Registration Required. No owner or
operator shall rent, or offer for rent, any Rental Facility or Rental Unit for use in whole
or in part for human habitation, unless:
1. A valid Rental Facility License has been issued for the Rental Facility, and
2. Each Rental Unit is registered annually and a valid Rental Unit Registration
Certificate has been issued for the Rental Unit.
All residential Rental Facilities and Rental Units being let for rent and/or occupancy
without a valid Rental Facility License or Rental Unit Registration with the City and fees
paid may be ordered vacated and/or the owner shall be subject to a fine and/or
municipal infraction, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the city
council and set out in Appendix D of this Code of Ordinances.
E. Rental Facility License.
1. Definition: “Rental Facility License” shall mean a license issued by the City of
Muscatine for a structure containing one or more rental units subject to
regulation under this Chapter, which, when issued, shall authorize the owner or
operator to let the Licensed Rental Facility for rent, provided that all other
provisions of this Code are complied with and remain complied with for the
duration of the license.
2. Application Requirements: Application for Rental Facility License required by
this Code shall be made to the Building Official at least thirty (30) days prior to
initial occupancy as a rental property or at least thirty (30) days prior to
expiration of an existing Rental Facility License. The Application shall be on
such form and detail as prescribed by the Building Official.
20
3. Rental Facility License Fees. Rental Facility License fees may be as set forth by
resolution of the City Council and as set out in Appendix D to this Code of
Ordinances and payment thereof may accompany the application for Rental
Facility License.
4. Grounds for Issuance. Following payment of all Rental Facility License Fees,
submission of a proper Application, on forms provided by the Building Official,
and an Initial Inspection by the City of the Rental Facility for compliance with
provisions of this Chapter, the Building Official shall issue a valid Rental Facility
License to the Owner.
5. Grounds for Revocation or Denial of Rental Facility License. Revocation of the
Rental Facility License is at the discretion of the Building Official. The Building
Official may revoke or deny renewal of any Rental Facility License issued under
this Subchapter where any of the following applies:
i. False statements on any application or information or report required by
this Subchapter to be given by the applicant, registrant, or permit
holder;
ii. Conviction or judgment of the licensee for violation of any provision of
this Housing Code;
iii. Refusal by the owner to permit inspection by authorized personnel of the
rental property or unit;
iv. Failure to pay any application, penalty, re-inspection, or reinstatement
fee required by this Chapter as set out in Appendix D of this Code of
Ordinances;
v. Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved
mitigation/remediation plan by the Building Official;
vi. Failure to comply with the provisions of the Title VIII of the Fair Housing
Act of 1968 (as amended);
vii. Declaration of status as a Dangerous or Unsafe Building or Structure
pursuant to 9-3-3(R) of this Code of Ordinances;
viii. Declaration of Status as dangerous or substandard building as defined
by Section 8-5-9 of this Chapter; and
ix. Frequent and recurrent noncompliance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
The owner or agent of the affected property shall be notified in writing by
certified mail of the license or registration revocation or denial.
21
6. Grounds for Emergency Revocation of License. If, at the discretion of the
Building Official, an emergency exists which threatens the immediate health,
safety or general welfare of the occupant or general public, the Building Official
may immediately issue an order revoking the Rental Facility License. Upon
issuance of the order, the occupant of the Rental Facility shall immediately
vacate the premises until the Rental Facility License is reinstated. A Rental
Facility License will apply to any Rental Unit within its Facility; however,
authorization to rent a particular Rental Unit within a Rental Facility may be
revoked without effect on the other units for which the License was issued if the
Building Official revokes the Rental Unit Certificate of Registration as provided
for in City Code section 8-5-4(C)(6).
7. Rental Facility License Term. Rental Facility Licenses will be issued for a term
of three years, and shall be renewed by filing an application with the Building
Official as provided for herein no later than thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the License, provided that an Initial Inspection as set forth in City
Code section 8-5-4(E)(1) is completed and all other provisions of this Chapter
are complied with.
8. Duty to Report Changes. The property owner is responsible for informing the
Building Official of any subsequent changes to any information on the Rental
Facility Application which has changed.
F. Rental Unit Registration.
1. Definition: “Rental Unit Registration” shall mean registration of any given
dwelling unit with a duly licensed Rental Facility with the City of Muscatine,
which, when filed with the City, shall authorize the owner or operator to let the
dwelling unit which is the subject of the Rental Unit Registration for rent or
occupancy, provided that all other provisions of this Chapter are complied with
and remain complied with for the duration of the Rental Unit Registration
Certificate.
2. Registration Form Requirements and Fees: Rental Unit Registration required by
this Code shall be made to the Building Official at least thirty (30) days prior to
initial occupancy as a rental unit or at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration
of an existing Rental Unit Registration. If the Rental Unit Registration is for
initial occupancy of a Rental Unit which does not have a valid Rental Facility
License, the Rental Unit Registration shall accompany a Rental Facility License
application as provided in City Code section 8-5-4(E) above. The Registration
shall be on such form and detail as prescribed by the Building Official. If the
Application is for a Rental Unit for which an Initial Inspection is not necessary
as provided for in City Code section 8-5-4(H)(1), the Application shall be
accompanied by a report of self-inspection as set forth in City Code section 8-5-
4(F)(3).
3. Initial Inspection Requirements. After receiving a new Application for a Rental
Unit Registration under this Chapter, the Building Official shall cause an Initial
Inspection to be scheduled for the Unit as set forth in City Code section 8-5-
4(H)(1).
4. Self-Inspection Requirements. During the interim years between issuance and
renewal of a Rental Facility License (i.e., years two and three of the Rental
Facility License), when annually registering a Rental Unit for which the Rental
Facility License has not expired or been revoked, the property owner shall
include, with its annual registration form and payment of fees, a signed
Certificate of Self Inspection that states the property owner has inspected the
rental property and he or she has determined that property to be in compliance
with the Housing Code. Such Certificate of Self Inspection shall also include an
22
itemized list of items inspected so as to form the basis of the owner’s
representation that the property is in compliance with the Housing Code.
5. Registration Fees. Rental Unit Registration fees shall be as set forth by
resolution of the City Council and as set out in Appendix D to this Code of
Ordinances and payment thereof shall accompany the application for Rental
Unit Registration.
6. Grounds for Issuance of Rental Registration Certificate. Following payment of all
Rental Unit Registration fees, submission of a proper Application, on forms
provided by the Building Official, and initial inspection of the Rental Unit or a
report of Self Inspection as provided for herein, the Building Official shall issue
a valid Rental Unit Registration Certificate to the Owner.
7. Grounds for Revocation or Denial of Rental Unit Registration Certificate.
Revocation of the Rental Unit Registration Certificate is at the discretion of the
Building Official. The Building Official may revoke or deny renewal of any Rental
Unit Registration Certificate issued under this Subchapter where any of the
following applies:
i. False statements on any application or information or report required by
this Subchapter to be given by the applicant, registrant, or permit
holder;
ii. Conviction or judgment of the licensee for violation of any provision of
this Housing Code;
iii. Refusal by the owner to permit inspection by authorized personnel of the
rental property or unit;
iv. Failure to pay any application, penalty, re-inspection, or reinstatement
fee required by this Chapter as set out in Appendix D of this Code of
Ordinances;
v. Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved
mitigation/remediation plan by the Building Official;
vi. Failure to comply with the provisions of the Title VIII of the Fair Housing
Act of 1968 (as amended);
vii. Declaration of status as a Dangerous or Unsafe Building or Structure
pursuant to 9-3-3(R) of this Code of Ordinances;
viii. Declaration of Status as dangerous or substandard building as defined
by Section 8-5-9 of this Chapter; and
ix. Frequent and recurrent noncompliance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
The owner or agent of the affected property shall be notified in writing by
certified mail of the license or registration revocation or denial.
8. Grounds for Emergency Revocation of Certificate of Registration. If, at the
discretion of the Building Official, an emergency exists which threatens the
immediate health, safety or general welfare of the occupant or general public,
the Building Official may immediately issue an order revoking the Rental
Registration Certificate for a particular Rental Unit. Upon issuance of the order,
the occupant of the Rental Unit shall immediately vacate the premises until the
Rental Unit Certificate is reinstated. Authorization to rent a particular Rental
Unit within a Rental Facility may be revoked without effect on the other units
for which a Rental Facility License was issued.
9. Rental Unit Certificate Term. Rental Unit Registration Certificates will be valid
for a term of one year after the date of issuance, and shall be renewed by filing
an application with the Building Official as provided for herein prior to the
expiration of the Certificate, provided that an Initial Inspection as set forth in
23
City Code section 8-5-4(H)(1) or a Report of Self Inspection as required by City
Code section 8-5-4(F)(3) has been completed and all other provisions of this
Chapter are complied with. The Rental Unit Registration may not be renewed
unless all required fees have been paid in full for all rental units of which the
applicant is an owner.
10. Duty to Report Changes. The property owner is responsible for informing the
Building Official of any subsequent changes to any information on the Rental
Unit Registration which has changed.
G. Reinstatement of License and Registration Certificate.
The Building Official will reinstate a revoked Rental Facility License or Certificate of
Rental Unit Registration only after a regular inspection has been completed,
reinstatement fees have been paid in full, and the Rental Facility or Rental Unit has
been brought into compliance with the applicable standards of this Code.
Reinstatement of the Rental Facility License or Rental Unit Registration shall not
extend or change the next inspection date of the Rental Facility License or Rental Unit
Registration.
H. Inspection of Rental Property
1. Initial Inspection Required. An initial inspection is an inspection of a Rental
Facility or Rental Unit that has not previously received a Rental Facility License,
and also for a Rental Facility that has previously received a license, but whose
license is scheduled to or has expired. The initial inspection shall be scheduled
with the Building Official or his or her designee following receipt of a Rental
Facility License Application and is required before any Rental Facility or Rental
Unit therein may be occupied.
2. Regular Rental Inspection. Regular rental inspections of rental facilities, rental
units, and the common areas thereof, shall be inspected in accordance with a
program of rental inspections conducted not more frequently than yearly nor
less frequent than every three (3) years per Rental Facility License and Rental
Unit Registration.
3. Other Rental Inspection. Rental facilities and units may be inspected on a more
frequent basis to ensure compliance with this code based upon one (1) or more
of the following:
i. Information is received indicating that there is a violation of provisions
of this Code, or any state or federal regulations;
ii. An observation is made by a Building Official, or police officer, or fire
Building Official, or any other Government official of a possible violation
of the standards or the provisions of this code or any state or federal
laws;
iii. Information is received indicating that a rental facility or rental unit is
unoccupied and unsecured or that a rental unit is damaged by fire,
water, or other causes detrimental to the structure;
iv. A determination must be made whether there is compliance with a
notice or an order issued by a Building Official;
v. A public health safety or welfare emergency is observed or is reasonably
believed to exist;
vi. A tenant makes a request for an inspection. If a tenant requests a nonemergency
inspection, then the City of Muscatine shall give a written
notice to the owner. Fourteen (14) days after the written notification to
the owner, an inspection may be conducted by the Building Official;
24
vii. A Rental facility’s ownership is to be transferred to the City of Muscatine,
Iowa;
viii. A property is declared a Dangerous or Unsafe Building or Structure
pursuant to Section 9-3-3(R) of this Code of Ordinances; and
ix. A property is declared a Substandard Building pursuant to Section 8-5-9
of this Chapter.
I. Non-Transferability and Notification of Change. Rental Facility Licenses and
Rental Registration Certificates shall not be transferred from one owner to another.
The owner of any rental facility or unit shall notify the Building Official within thirty
(30) days of any change in the information required for Rental Facility License or
Rental Unit Registration. If a rental facility or unit is sold, assigned, or otherwise
transferred, the rental facility/unit must be re-licensed and re-registered within thirty
(30) days of the transfer. The new owner shall notify the Building Official of any
change in contact information for their designated local representative, including a
change in name, mailing address, e-mail address, telephone number, mobile telephone
number, or facsimile number of the designated local representative within thirty (30)
business days of the change.
J. Provisional Approval. The Building Official may grant owners of Rental Units and
Rental Facilities provisional approval to let for rent or occupancy their rental facility or
unit, as the case may be, while formal issuance of Rental Facility License or Rental Unit
Registration Certificate is pending, provided that all requirements for issuance of the
Certificate of Rental Facilities License or Rental Unit Registration are satisfied.
K. Fee Schedule. Fees shall be charged for services rendered in relation to this Section.
These services include but are not limited to the following: registration, inspections,
failure to appear for any scheduled inspections, and late cancellations. The amounts
shall be established by resolution of the City Council and are set out in Appendix D of
this Code of Ordinances. As a nuisance abatement remedial measure, the fee schedule
shall include any unpaid nuisance abatement fees or costs that have been incurred by
the City of Muscatine and a per tax parcel per response surcharge for police and fire
department responses, excluding emergency medical responses, in an amount equal to
the approximate cost of the response, plus a processing fee, for all responses above
the nuisance threshold set forth immediately below within a calendar year. The
nuisance threshold is exceeded if the number of responses is greater than three (3)
times the number of units on the tax parcel. In the case of police, fire or rescue
responses (excluding domestic violence calls), the number shall be based upon
founded calls. Within ten (10) days of the date of a surcharge invoice, the owner may
request the Community Development Department review the call log to verify the
number of responses and provide the owner with the dates and nature of the
responses included in the bill.
8-5-5 Minimum Structural Standards for All Dwellings.
A. Kitchens. Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen or kitchenette equipped with the
following:
25
1. An approved kitchen sink.
2. Space capable of properly accommodating a refrigerator and a stove or range.
3. Proper access terminals to utilities necessary to properly operate a refrigerator
and stove or range.
4. Adequate space for the storage and preparation of food.
B. Sanitation. Every kitchen sink, toilet, lavatory basin, and bath shall be properly
connected to an approved water and sewer system as provided for in the City of
Muscatine City Code. Additionally, sanitary facilities shall include the following:
1. Every dwelling unit shall contain a toilet.
2. Every dwelling unit shall contain a bath or shower compartment.
3. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory basin.
4. Every toilet and bath shall be contained within a room which will afford privacy
to the user and shall be separated from a food preparation area by a tight
fitting door.
C. Required Water Heating Facilities. Every kitchen sink and bath and lavatory basin
required in accordance with the provisions of this Housing Code shall be properly
connected with supplied water heating facilities. Every supplied water heating
facility shall be properly connected and shall be capable of heating water to such a
temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn on every
kitchen sink and lavatory basin required at a temperature of not less than one
hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit (forty-eight (48) degrees Centigrade).
Such supplied water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements
of this Section, regardless of space heating facilities which are not in operation.
D. Exits.
1. Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall have access to two (2) independent,
unobstructed means of egress remote from each other. At least one shall be an
exit which discharges directly to corridors or stairways or both to a public way.
If both means of egress are to a common corridor, they shall be in opposite
directions or in compliance with local building and/or fire codes.
2. Every means of egress shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Handrails. All stairways comprised of four (4) or more risers shall be
provided with a substantial and safely constructed handrail.
b. Guardrails. All unenclosed floor and roof openings, open and glazed sides of
landings and ramps, balconies, or porches which are more than thirty inches
(30") above grade and any roof used for other than maintenance purposes
shall be protected by a substantial and safely constructed guardrail.
c. Every stairway shall have a reasonably uniform riser height and uniform
tread width which shall be adequate for safe use.
d. Doors and windows accessible from outside the unit shall be lockable from
inside the unit.
e. In basement units where one means of egress is a window, such window
26
shall have an unobstructed opening no less in area than that required in the
Building Code.
f. No existing fire escape shall be deemed a sufficient means of egress unless
it is in compliance with the fire codes of the State of Iowa and any
applicable City rule or regulation.
g. Every doorway providing ingress or egress from any dwelling unit, rooming
unit, or habitable room shall be at least six feet, four inches (6' 4") high and
twenty-four inches (24") wide.
E. Natural Artificial Light. Every habitable room shall be provided with adequate
natural and/or artificial light to permit normal indoor activities and to support the
health and safety of the occupants.
F. Ventilation.
1. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with natural ventilation as follows:
a. Every window or other device with openings to the outdoor space which are
capable of being used for ventilation purposes and currently contain screens
shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
b. Every door opening directly from a dwelling unit or rooming unit to the
outdoor space shall fit reasonably tight within its frame and shall be
maintained in a good state of repair.
c. For natural ventilation, every bathroom or toilet compartment shall have at
least one openable window facing directly to the outdoors.
2. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with mechanical ventilation as follows:
a. In lieu of openable windows for natural ventilation, as specified in Section 8-
5-5(F)1(c), adequate ventilation which provides not less than two (2) air
changes per hour in all bathrooms or toilet compartments.
b. No mechanical exhaust system, exhausting vapors, gases, or odors shall be
discharged into an attic, crawl space, or cellar unless such attic, crawl
space, or cellar is adequately vented to the outside.
G. Heating. Heating shall be provided as follows:
1. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed and are
capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
toilet rooms located therein to a temperature of at least sixty-eight (68)
degrees Fahrenheit (nineteen (19) degrees Centigrade) at a distance of three
feet (3') above the floor level. Said heating facilities shall be so designed and
equipped that heat, as herein specified, is available for all dwelling units and
rooming units between the hours of 6:30 A.M. and 10:30 P.M., of each day, an
d shall maintain a temperature of not less than sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit
from 10:30 P.M. to 6:30 a.m. of each day.
2. Every central heating unit, space heater, water heater, and cooking appliance
shall be located and installed in such a manner so as to afford reasonable
protection against interference of egress facilities or egress routes in the event
of uncontrolled fire in the structure.
3. Every fuel-burning heating unit or water heater shall be effectively vented in a
safe manner to a chimney or duct leading to the exterior of the building. The
27
chimney duct and vent shall be of such design as to assure proper draft and
shall be adequately supported.
4. No fuel-burning furnace or water heater shall be located within any sleeping
room or bathroom unless there is adequate combustion air, an automatic
shutoff is provided, and the continuing operation of the furnace and/or water
heater poses no threat to the occupant, as determined by the Inspector.
5. Every steam or hot water boiler and every water heater shall be protected
against overheating by appropriate pressure and temperature limit controls.
6. Every fuel-burning space heating unit and water heater shall be equipped with
an electronic ignition or with a pilot light and an automatic control to interrupt
the flow of fuel to the unit in the event of failure of the ignition device.
H. Electrical Requirements. Extension cords shall not be used or considered as
permanent wiring intended to meet the requirements contained in this section.
1. Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) separate floor or wall-type
electric double convenience outlets which shall be properly installed, on
adjacent walls or otherwise separated for reasonable access from all spaces
within the room.
28
2. Every toilet room, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, basement, and cellar
shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture, and
one floor or wall-type electrical outlet which shall be properly installed.
I. Minimum Space and Occupancy Standards. Minimum space and occupancy
standards shall be the minimum requirements established in the Housing Quality
Standards as adopted, and amended by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
J. Ceiling Height. The ceiling height in every habitable room shall be at least six feet,
eight inches (6' 8"). In addition, obstructions of space by such items as water and
gas pipes, cabinetry, etc. shall be permitted when such obstructions are located in
such a fashion that they do not interfere with normal or emergency ingress and
egress and are approved by the Inspector.
8-5-6 Minimum Structural Standards for All Rental Housing.
A. Access. Access to each dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not require first entering
any other dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Exception: Access to rooming units may be through a living room or kitchen of a
unit occupied by the owner or operator of the structure.
No dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit containing two (2) or more sleeping
rooms shall have such arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one (1) sleeping room
can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room
arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going
through another sleeping room.
Exception: Access may be provided through not more than one room which is
restricted for use as a sleeping room for children under five (5) years of age.
However, all other occupancy minimums shall apply.
B. Lighting in Public Halls and Stairways. Lighting shall be provided as follows:
1. Public passageways and stairways in dwellings accommodating three (3) or
more dwelling units or rooming units shall be provided with a convenient wall
mounted light switch(es) which activates an adequate lighting system.
2. Exterior stairways serving individual units shall be supplied with sufficient
illumination to allow their safe use.
C. Fire Regulations. All rental housing shall be provided with fire protection equipment
as follows:
1. All structures containing three (3) or more dwelling units or rooming units shall
be provided with a sufficient number of fire extinguishers which are approved
by the Fire Marshall. Fire extinguishers shall be properly hung in an area
accessible to all tenants within the individual unit, or in the common corridors at
each level and in the basement.
2. All dwelling units and rooming houses shall be provided with smoke detectors
29
as required.
3. Location and Installation. All smoke detectors shall be located and mounted on
a ceiling or on a wall not more than twelve inches (12") from the ceiling at a
point centrally located within the required area. Smoke detectors shall be
located in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation and this Code.
4. Power Source and Maintenance. Buildings required by State and local law to
install smoke detectors receiving their primary source from building wiring shall
comply with all applicable laws concerning installation, inspection, and
maintenance. All other units may receive their primary source of power from
batteries.
5. Owner’s Responsibility. The owner shall be responsible for the installation and
testing of all smoke detectors as a condition to occupancy.
a. If the unit is currently (and otherwise legally) occupied on the effective date
of this Ordinance, the owner shall cause all existing smoke detectors to be
tested. Any non-functioning and/or inoperable detectors and batteries shall
be immediately replaced by the owner, at the owner’s expense. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner to provide verification of compliance with this
section when requested by the City, or the owner shall be guilty of a
municipal infraction.
b. When a unit is scheduled for occupancy by a new tenant(s), it shall be the
responsibility of the owner to install and test all required smoke detectors
prior to occupancy. All non-functioning and/or inoperable detectors and
batteries shall be replaced at the owner's expense. The owner shall retain
verification of this requirement and produce it when requested by the City,
or the owner shall be guilty of a municipal infraction.
c. The owner shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of all
detectors and batteries located in common corridors and other areas
required by law that are not under the direct control of the occupant(s).
6. Occupants Responsibility.
a. The occupant shall be responsible for the replacement of all batteries
necessary for the proper operation of all supplied smoke detectors within
the rental dwelling. The occupant shall be required to notify the owner, in
writing, of any deficiencies known to exist in the supplied detector. It shall
be the responsibility of the occupant to test all smoke detectors on a regular
basis to insure proper operation. Failure to keep batteries replaced, as
necessary for their safe operation, shall cause the occupant to be in
violation of this Section and subject to a municipal infraction citation.
Detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located
in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.
Smoke detectors hereinafter installed in areas where sleeping rooms are on
an upper level shall be placed above the stairway. When actuated, the
detector shall provide an alarm for the dwelling unit or rooming unit.
D. Sanitation.
1. Toilets and Lavatory Basins. At least one toilet and one lavatory basin shall be
supplied for each eight (8) persons, or fraction thereof, residing within a
30
dwelling containing a rooming unit, or units, including members of the
operator's family whenever they share said facilities.
Exception: In rooming houses where rooms are let to males only, flush urinals
may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) of the required number of
toilets.
2. Baths. At least one bath shall be supplied for each eight (8) persons, or fraction
thereof, residing within a dwelling containing a rooming unit or units, including
members of the operator's family whenever they share the use of said facilities.
E. Communal Toilets, Kitchens, and Dining Rooms.
1. Communal Toilets and Baths. Communal toilets and baths shall be located on
the same floor or the floor immediately above or below the rooming unit.
2. Communal Kitchens. If a communal kitchen is supplied, it shall comply with the
following requirements:
a. The minimum floor area of communal kitchens shall be sixty (60) square
feet.
b. Floor area in communal kitchens which permits roomers to prepare and eat
meals shall be one hundred (100) square feet.
c. The kitchen shall contain adequate food storage capacity, an approved sink,
and a stove or range.
d. It shall include at least one cabinet of adequate size suitable for the storage
of food and eating and cooking utensils.
e. It shall contain a table and adequate chairs for the normal use of the
facilities if a communal dining room is not supplied.
f. Every communal kitchen shall be located within a room accessible to the
occupants of each rooming unit sharing the use of such kitchen, without
going outside of the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or
rooming unit of another occupant.
3. Communal Dining Rooms. Every dwelling or rooming house within which the
occupant of any rooming unit is permitted to prepare meals or cook within a
communal kitchen containing less than one hundred (100) square feet of floor
area, as provided in Section 8-5-6(E)2(b), shall contain a communal dining
room which complies with the following requirements:
a. Every communal dining room shall be located on the same floor as the
communal kitchen and located as nearly adjacent to the communal kitchen
as is practicable.
b. Accessibility to the communal dining room by occupants shall be the same
as requirements for communal kitchens in Section 8-5-6(E)2(f).
c. The communal dining room shall contain a table and adequate chairs for the
normal use of the facilities.
d. Every communal dining room shall contain not less than seventy (70)
square feet of floor area.
F. Lead Based Paint. Every owner or operator of a dwelling shall comply with HUD
Lead Based Paint Regulations, 24 CFR, Part 35, issued pursuant to the Lead Based
Paint Poisoning Prevention Act.
31
32
G. Shades, Draperies, and Window Coverings.
1. Every window in rooms used for sleeping purposes in rooming units and
furnished dwelling units shall be supplied with shades, draperies, or other
devices or materials which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the
occupants.
2. Every window in rooms used for sleeping purposes in unfurnished dwelling units
shall be supplied with hardware necessary to support shades, draperies, or
other devices or materials which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the
occupants.
H. Mobile Home Tiedown Requirements. All mobile homes shall be provided with two
(2) frame ties and two (2) over-the-top tiedowns equal to or better than the
specifications outlined in booklet TR-75 published by the Department of Defense.
8-5-7 Owners Responsibilities.
A. Maintenance of Structure.
1. Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, ceiling, stair, step, elevator, handrail, porch,
guardrail, sidewalk, and appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in a safe and
sound condition and shall be capable of supporting the loads that normal use
may cause to be placed thereon.
2. Every foundation, floor, exterior wall, exterior door, window, and roof shall be
maintained in a reasonably weather tight, watertight, rodent proof, and insect
proof condition.
3. Every door and window to include all hardware associated with every door and
window shall be maintained in good and functional condition and shall fit
reasonably well within its frame.
4. Every interior partition, wall, floor, ceiling, and other interior surface shall be
maintained so as to permit it to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and
where appropriate, shall be capable of providing privacy.
B. Maintenance of Accessory Structures.
1. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, window, exterior door, and appurtenance
of every accessory structure shall be so maintained as to prevent the structure
from becoming a harborage for rats or other vermin and shall be maintained in
a reasonably watertight, structurally sound condition capable of withstanding
imposed wind and snow loads.
2. Security. Every accessory building and/or garage shall be secured against
unauthorized entry, or it shall be declared a public nuisance subject to
abatement and/or civil penalty. It shall be the responsibility of the person(s)
having the possession and use of the accessory building to comply with this
Section.
C. Drainage.
33
1. Rainwater Drainage. Rainwater shall be directed away from the building so as to
prevent water damage to the structure.
2. Grading and Drainage. Every premises shall be graded and drained so no
stagnant water will accumulate or stand thereon.
Exception: This Section shall not affect the existence or maintenance of
approved storm water detention systems.
D. Chimneys. Every chimney shall be adequately supported and maintained in a
reasonably good state of repair.
E. Protection of Exterior Wood Surfaces. All exterior wood surfaces of a dwelling and
its accessory structures, porches, and similar appurtenances shall be protected
from the elements and against decay by a non-lead based paint or other approved
protective covering.
Exception: Any exterior wood surface comprised of a type or species of wood or
which has been treated to resist decay and infestation shall be exempted from the
above listed requirement when approved by the Inspector.
F. Egress from Structure. Every means of egress shall be maintained in good
condition and shall be free of obstruction at all times. If the means of egress is a
fire escape, it shall be maintained in a good state of repair. Egress via exterior
stairways shall be provided with sufficient illumination to allow for their safe use by
the occupant.
G. Screening. Every openable exterior window, door, or similar device intended to be
used for ventilation in a non-air conditioned environment, shall be supplied with
properly fitted screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh to the inch. All doors
leading into common stairways or corridors shared by more than one tenant shall
be supplied with screening sufficient to allow ventilation into the common areas
when such areas are not air conditioned. Such screening shall be maintained in
good repair.
H. Electrical System. The electrical system of every dwelling or accessory structure
shall not by reason of overloading, dilapidation, lack of insulation, improper fusing,
or for any other cause, expose the occupants to hazards of electrical shock or fire,
and every electrical outlet, switch, and fixture shall be maintained in good and safe
working condition.
I. Maintenance of Supplied Plumbing Fixtures. Every supplied plumbing fixture and
water and waste pipe shall be maintained in a good and sanitary working condition.
Water pressure shall be adequate to permit a proper flow of water from all open
outlets at all times. (Except during maintenance and repair.)
J. Maintenance of Gas Appliances and Facilities.
1. Every gas pipe shall be sound and tightly put together and shall be free of
leaks, corrosion, and obstruction causing reduced pressure or volume.
2. Gas pressure shall be adequate to permit a proper flow of gas from all open gas
valves at all times.
K. Maintenance of Heating and Supplied Cooling Facilities. The heating equipment of
34
each dwelling shall be maintained in a good, safe working condition and shall be
capable of heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms located therein to the
minimum temperature required by this Code. However, heating and supplied
cooling equipment shall not be required to be maintained in operational condition
during what is considered to be off season periods. Owners of rental properties
with fuel burning furnaces that are 10 years or older or that have been inoperative
for one year or longer are required to have annual carbon monoxide tests. Tests
must be performed by a properly certified and registered mechanical contractor.
Owners shall immediately notify the Inspection Department of failed tests. Owners
shall provide a legible certified copy of successful test results to the Inspection
Department not later than 30 days after the test. This requirement does not apply
if a carbon monoxide detector is installed within 10' of the furnace.
L. Floors. Every toilet room floor surface, bathroom floor surface, and kitchen floor
surface shall be maintained so as to permit them to be kept in a clean, dry, and
sanitary condition.
M. Supplied Facilities. No supplied facility shall be removed, shut off, or disconnected
from any occupied dwelling unit or rooming unit except for such temporary
interruption(s) as may be necessary while actual (and active) repairs,
replacements, or alterations are being made, unless authorized by court order.
N. Maintenance of Sanitary Facilities. All toilets, baths, and lavatory basins shall be
maintained in good working condition.
O. Fire Protection. All fire extinguishers and early warning fire protection systems shall
be maintained in good working condition at all times.
P. Pest Extermination. The property owner shall be responsible for extermination of
pests when it is determined by the Health Officer, or his or her designate, that the
infestation is present in two (2) or more dwelling units or rooming units within a
dwelling.
Q. Garbage Disposal. Every owner of a dwelling shall supply an approved exterior
location for the disposal of garbage and in compliance with the City Code for
Muscatine, Iowa.
R. Occupancy Control. A dwelling unit shall not exceed occupancy maximums.
S. Cooking in Rooming Units. No owner or operator shall knowingly allow the use of
cooking equipment within any rooming unit.
8-5-8 Occupant's Responsibilities.
A. Occupant Responsible for Controlled Areas. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit shall keep in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition that part of the
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or premises thereof he or she occupies and
controls, to include:
1. Every floor and floor covering shall be kept reasonably clean and sanitary.
2. Every wall and ceiling shall be kept reasonably clean and free of dirt or greasy
film.
35
3. No dwelling shall be used for the storage or handling of refuse, except as
provided in this Code.
B. Plumbing Fixtures. The occupants of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied
plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible
for the reasonable care, proper use, and proper operation thereof.
36
C. Extermination of Pests. Every occupant of a single-family dwelling shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests on the
premises. Every occupant of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units or
rooming units shall be responsible for such extermination within the unit occupied
by him or her whenever said unit is the only one infested. However, whenever it is
determined by the Health Officer, or his or her designate, that infestation is caused
by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonably rodent proof and/or
insect proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
D. Storage and Disposal of Garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling shall dispose of
rubbish, garbage, and any other organic waste in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in container(s) required by the City Code of Muscatine, Iowa.
E. Electrical Wiring. No temporary wiring or extension cords shall be used, except
extension cords which run directly from portable electric fixtures to convenience
outlets and which do not lie beneath floor coverings or extend through doorways,
transoms, or similar structural elements or attached thereto. The occupant shall
not knowingly overload the circuitry of the dwelling unit or rooming unit. Multiplug
connectors may only be used when they are equipped with an overcurrent device
and individually approved by the Inspector.
F. Supplied Facilities. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures
and facilities therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for
the reasonable care, proper use and proper operation thereof.
G. Preparation of Meals in Rooming Units Prohibited. No occupant of a rooming unit
shall prepare meals in his or her rooming unit unless an approved kitchen and/or
dining room is contained within the rooming unit or in accordance with communal
facilities outlined in Section 8-5-6 of this Code.
H. Occupancy Control. No occupant shall allow the occupancy of any dwelling unit or
rooming unit within which he or she resides to exceed the occupancy standards
outlined in Section 8-5-5 of this Code.
8-5-9 Substandard Buildings.
A. Definition. Any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, guest room, or the premises on which the same is located, in which
there exists a violation of this Code to the extent that the violation endangers the
life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupant(s)
thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building.
B. Substandard Buildings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be
substandard are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure
specified in Section 9-3-3(R) of this Code.
37
8-5-10 Notices and Orders of Building Official.
A. General.
1. Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the Building Official has inspected,
or caused to be inspected, any building or portion thereof and has found and
determined that such building or portion thereof is a substandard building, he or
she shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation, vacation, or
demolition of the building or portion thereof.
2. Notice and Order. The Building Official shall issue a notice and order directed to
the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:
a. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the
premises upon which the building is located.
b. A statement that the Building Official has found the building to be
substandard with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to
render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 9-3-3 (R8) of
this Code.
c. A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the
Building Official.
i. If the Building Official has determined that the building or structure must
be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured
therefore and the work commenced within such time (not to exceed
sixty [60] days from the date of the order) and completed within such
time as the Building Official shall determine is reasonable under all the
circumstances.
ii. If the Building Official has determined that the building or structure must
be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be
vacated within a certain time from the date of the order as determined
by the Building Official to be reasonable, given the nature of the
violation(s).
iii. If the Building Official has determined that the building or structure must
be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated
within such time as the Building Official shall determine reasonable (not
to exceed sixty [60] days from the date of the order), that all required
permits be secured therefore within sixty (60) days from the date of the
order, and that the demolition be completed within such time as the
Building Official shall determine is reasonable.
d. Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without
vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time specified,
the Building Official (i) will order the building vacated and posted to prevent
further occupancy until the work is completed, and (ii) may proceed to
cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the
property or its owner.
38
e. Statements advising (i) that any person having any record title or legal
interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action
of the Building Official to the City Council, provided the appeal is made in
writing as provided in this Code and filed with the Building Official within
thirty (30) days from the date of service of such notice and order, and (ii)
that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative
hearing and determination of the matter.
3. Service of Notice and Order. The notice and order, and any amended or
supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner and
posted on the property. The failure of the Building Official to serve any person
required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as
to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or
obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this Section.
4. Method of Service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all
persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice
and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each
such person at his address as it appears on the last assessment roll of the
county or as known to the Building Official. If no address of any such person so
appears or is known to the Building Official, then a copy of the notice and order
shall be posted on the property where the violation exists. The failure of any
such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any
proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner
herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.
5. Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at
the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed
by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date, and manner in which
service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in
acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the
notice and order retained by the Building Official.
B. Recordation of Notice and Order. If compliance is not had with the order within the
time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the
Building Official may file in the Office of the County Recorder a certificate
describing the property and certifying (i) that the building is a substandard
building, and (ii) that the owner has been so notified. Whenever the corrections
ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it
no longer exists as a substandard building on the property described in the
certificate, the Building Official shall file a new certificate with the County Recorder
certifying that the building has been demolished or all required corrections have
been made so that the building is no longer substandard, whichever is appropriate.
C. Repair, Vacation, and Demolition.
1. Standards to be Followed. The following standards shall be followed by the
Building Official (and by the City Council or Housing Board if an appeal is taken)
in ordering the repair, vacation, or demolition of any substandard building or
structure:
a. If any building declared a substandard building under this ordinance shall
either be repaired in accordance with the current Building Code or shall be
39
demolished at the option of the building owner.
b. If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately
dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public or of the
occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
D. Notice to Vacate.
1. Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in
Section 8-5-10(A)3, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be
in substantially the following form:
DO NOT ENTER UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to enter this building or remove or deface this notice. Any
person(s) found inside this building are subject to immediate arrest. Building
Department, City of Muscatine.
2. Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the Building Official shall require
that the owner comply with all provisions of the Housing Code with respect to
occupancy prior to removal of the posting, and subsequent occupancy of the
building send a notification there of in the notice and order issued by him under
Section 8-5-10(A)(2), reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions
which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building
which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish,
or remove such building under permit. Nothing contained herein shall prevent
authorized person(s) from entering the property for the sole purpose of
removing personal belongings during all reasonable hours, with prior
notification and approval of the City.
No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the
required repairs, demolition, or removal have been completed and a Certificate
of Structural Compliance Occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the
Building Code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
8-5-11 Appeals.
A. Appeal to Council or Housing Appeals Board. In any instance where a party is left
aggrieved by an adverse action of the Building Official under this Chapter, such
person shall have an opportunity to appeal the decision to the City Council or an
equivalent Housing Appeals Board formed by Council as allowed by State law. The
Council or equivalent board established by Council as allowed by law shall render
all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a copy to the Building
Official. Appeals shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in
Section 8-5-11(B) of this Code.
B. Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service under this Code may appeal any
notice and order or any action of the Building Official under this Code by filing at
the office of the Building Official a written appeal containing:
1. A heading in the words: "Before the City Council of the City of Muscatine, Iowa"
2. A caption reading: "Appeal of ", giving the names of all appellants
participating in the appeal.
40
41
3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the
building or land involved in the notice and order.
4. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific order or
action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the
contentions of the appellant.
5. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the
reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed,
modified, or otherwise set aside.
6. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing
address.
7. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one
appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
C. Filing of the Appeal. The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date
of the service (or other such time as may have been imposed by the Building
Official based on the type of violation) of such order or action of the Building
Official; provided, however, that if the building or structure is in such condition as
to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public
or adjacent property, or has otherwise been declared a Public Nuisance as
contained elsewhere herein, and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance
with this Code, such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of the
service of the notice and order of the Building Official.
D. Processing of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to Section 8-5-
11(C), the Building Official shall present it to the City Council in accordance with
this Chapter. The Council shall then proceed by scheduling and noticing appellant
as provided under Section 8-5-11(E) or by establishing or forwarding as soon as
practicable the appeal to an equivalent Housing Appeals Board formed by Council
as allowed by State law, which Board shall then schedule and notice appellant as
provided in Section 8-5-11(E).
E. Scheduling and Notice of Appeal for Hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving
the written appeal, the City Council or Housing Appeals Board shall fix a date, time,
and place for hearing of the appeal by Council or the Board. Such date shall be not
less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the appeal
was filed with the Building Official. Written notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be given at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing to each
appellant by the secretary of the Council or Board, either by causing a copy of such
notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof,
postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the appeal.
F. Effect of Failure to Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance
with the provisions of this Code shall constitute a waiver of his or her right to an
administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or to any portion
thereof.
G. Scope of Hearing on Appeal. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the
appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
42
H. Staying of Order Under Appeal. Except for vacation orders made pursuant to
Section 8-5-10, enforcement of any notice and order of the Building Official issued
under this Code shall in abeyance during the pendency of an appeal therefrom
which is properly and timely filed.
8-5-12 Procedures for Conduct of Hearing Appeals.
A. General.
1. Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording, or
by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by
Council or the Housing Appeals Board.
2. Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing shall also be transcribed from the
recording if requested by any party thereto. A transcript of the proceedings
shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of the fee
prescribed therefore. Such fees may be established by Council, but shall in no
event be greater than the cost involved.
3. Continuances. Council or the Appeals Board may grant continuances for good
cause shown.
4. Oaths, Certification. In any proceedings under this chapter, Council or the
Appeals Board, or any member thereof, has the power to administer oaths and
affirmations and to certify to official acts.
5. Reasonable Dispatch. Council or the Appeals Board and its representatives shall
proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it. Due regard
shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their
representatives.
B. Form of Notice of Hearing. The notice to appellant shall be substantially in the
following form, but may include other information:
"You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the City Council/or the
Housing Appeals Board at.... on the day of , 20 , at the hour ,
upon the notice and order served upon you. You may be present at the hearing.
You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any
relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses
testifying against you. You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books, documents, or other things
by filing an affidavit therefore with the City Council or Housing Appeals Board.”
43
C. Subpoenas.
1. Filing of Affidavit. The Council or Housing Appeals Board and any appellant(s)
may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the attendance of
witnesses or the production of other evidence at a hearing upon the request of
a member of Council or the Housing Appeals Board or upon the written demand
of any party. The issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon
the filing of an affidavit therefore which states the name and address of the
proposed witness, specifies the exact things sought to be produced and the
materiality thereof in detail to the issues involved, and states that the witness
has the desired things in his possession or under his control. A subpoena need
not be issued when the affidavit is defective in any particular.
2. Penalties. Any person who refuses without lawful excuse to attend any hearing
or to produce material evidence in his possession or under his control, as
required by any subpoena served upon such person as provided for herein, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Conduct of Hearing.
1. Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating
to evidence and witnesses.
2. Oral Evidence. Oral evidence shall be permitted.
3. Hearsay Evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of
supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in
itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over an objection in civil
actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
4. Admissibility of Evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the
type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or
statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over
objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdictions in this state.
5. Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded.
6. Rights of Parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others:
a. To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the
hearing.
b. To introduce documentary and physical evidence.
c. To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues
of the hearing.
d. To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify.
e. To rebut the evidence against him.
f. To represent himself or to be represented by anyone of his choice who is
lawfully permitted to do so.
44
7. Official Notice.
a. What May be Noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken,
either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact which
may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or of official records of
the Council or Housing Appeals Board or departments and ordinances of the
City or rules and regulations of the Council or the Board.
b. Parties to be Notified. Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the
matters to be noticed and these matters shall be noted in the record,
referred to therein, or appended thereto.
c. Opportunity to Refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a
reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially noticed matters
by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority; the manner of
such refutation to be determined by the Board or hearing examiner.
d. Inspection of the Premises. Council or the Board may inspect any building or
premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided
that (i) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the
inspection is made, (ii) the parties are given an opportunity to be present
during the inspection, (iii) only those items listed in the official notice may
be noted during the inspection, and (iv) the Council or Board shall state for
the record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed
and the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to
rebut or explain the matters so stated by the Council or Board.
E. Method and Form of Decision.
1. Hearing Before Council or the Board Itself. Where a contested case is heard
before the Council or the Board, no member thereof who did not hear the
evidence or has not read the entire record of the proceedings shall vote on or
take part in the decision.
2. Form of Decision. The decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of
fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements to be
complied with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant
personally or sent to him by mail, postage prepaid, at the address listed on the
appeal.
3. Effective Date of Decision. The effective date of the decision shall be as stated
therein.
a. Any appellant aggrieved by any decision may appeal the same to the
District Court of Muscatine County within thirty (30) days after receiving the
decision of Council or the Board.
8-5-13 Enforcement of Orders from Building Official, City Council, the Housing
Board.
A. Compliance.
1. General. After any order of the Building Official, Council, or the Housing Board
made pursuant to this Code shall have become final, no person to whom any
such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such order. Any
such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a
45
misdemeanor.
2. Failure to Obey Order. If, after any order of the Building Official, Council, or
Housing Board made pursuant to this Code has become final, the person to
whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey such order, the
Building Official may (i) cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection 1
of this section, or (ii) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as
a public nuisance.
3. Failure to Commence Work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not
commenced within the time specified in the final notice and order issued under
this Code:
a. The Building Official shall cause the building described in such notice and
order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING DO NOT OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this
notice. Any unauthorized person(s) found inside this building are subject to
immediate arrest. Building Official - City of Muscatine.
b. No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in
this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted
until the repairs, demolition, or removal ordered by the Building Official
have been completed and a Certificate of Structural Compliance issued
pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
c. The Building Official may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided,
order demolition to cause the building to be demolished and the materials,
rubble, and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such
demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and
recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this Code.
B. Extension of Time to Perform Work. Upon receipt of an application from the person
required to conform to the order and an agreement by such person that he or she
will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the Building Official may, in his
or her discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional one
hundred twenty (120) days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation, or
demolition if the Building Official determines that such extension of time will not
create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property.
C. Interference with Repair or Demolition Work Prohibited. No person shall obstruct,
impede, or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor, or authorized
representative of the City or with any person who owns or holds any estate or
interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated, or demolished
under the provisions of this Code whenever such officer, employee, contractor, or
authorized representative of this jurisdiction, person having an interest or estate in
such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing,
vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building pursuant to the provisions
of this Code or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such
work as authorized or directed pursuant to this Code.
46
8-5-14 Performance of Demolition.
A. General.
1. Procedure. When any work, repair, or demolition is to be done pursuant to this
Code, the Building Official shall cause the work to be accomplished by private
contract under the direction of the Building Official. Plans and specifications
therefor may be prepared by the Building Official, or he or she may employ
such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as he or she
may deem reasonably necessary.
2. Costs. Costs incurred under Section 8-5-14(A)(1) shall be paid out of the City
treasury. Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved
and levied as a special assessment against the land on which the building or
structure is located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection
in the manner provided for other taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
47
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 6 – ADDRESSING
SECTIONS:
8-6-1 Numbers Required
8-6-2 Location of Numbers
8-6-3 Numbers Obtained from the Community Development Department
8-6-4 Material; Size
8-6-5 Allowing Buildings Without Numbers
8-6-6 Failure to Comply
8-6-7 Numbers Designated
8-6-8 System; Base Lines
8-6-9 Numbers Assigned
8-6-10 Street Names
8-6-1 Numbers Required. The owners of improved property, or property having erected
thereon any building, shall cause their property fronting upon the public streets and avenues
within the City to be numbered as hereinafter described in this Chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
8-6-2 Location of Numbers. The owner of every building, residence, or store within the
Corporate Limits of the City shall have the number of their buildings, residences, or stores,
conspicuously fixed on their property and visible from the public street.
8-6-3 Numbers Obtained from the Community Development Department. The owners
of every building, residence, or store erected within the Corporate Limits of the City shall be
assigned an address as part of the permit issuing process for every such structure as
required.
8-6-4 Material; Size. The number placed upon buildings, residences, or stores, as
prescribed in the foregoing Sections, may be of metal, wood, or plastic or may be painted
upon metal or glass, but in every case the number must be at least two and one-half inches
(2 1/2") in height. If painted, such numbers shall be of durable and legible characters, and no
numbering done or attempted to be done in numbers or figures of a less size than prescribed
in this Section shall be regarded as complying with the provisions of this Chapter.
8-6-5 Allowing Buildings Without Numbers. Legible characters of less than 2 ½” in
height may be used when posted on rural type mail boxes which are accessible from the
improved street in front of the building.
8-6-6 Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein provided, or
fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after being notified in writing by the City to do
so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number on the principal building and assess
the costs against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
8-6-7 Numbers Designated. It shall be the duty of the Community Development
Department to designate the numbers to be assigned to each building, residence, or store as
prescribed in this Chapter.
48
8-6-8 System; Base Lines. In designating and assigning numbers to buildings, residences,
and stores, the system of commencing and continuing the numbering of each block or square
as the same appears recorded upon the plat of the City proper shall be by what is known as
the "Philadelphia Plan", which is one hundred (100) to each block, the hundred indicating the
block and the unit of ten (10), as the case may be, indicating the building. In numbering the
additions to the City, the same plan shall be followed as far as practicable. In numbering the
City proper, on streets running East and West the base line shall be Iowa Avenue, and on
streets running North and South the base line shall be Front Street. In numbering South
Muscatine to the corporate limits of the City, the base line shall be the Chicago, Rock Island
and Pacific Railroad track. Iowa Avenue shall be the dividing line of the City proper, and
including that portion of the City lying between Eighth Street and Fulliam Avenue, from which,
upon all streets running at right angles thereto, all buildings shall be numbered "East" and
"West" respectively, in the following manner: The parts of streets lying East of Iowa Avenue
shall be known as "East Mississippi Drive", "East Second", and "East Third" streets, and so on,
and the parts of streets lying West of Iowa Avenue shall be known as "West Mississippi
Drive", "West Second", and "West Third" streets and so on. The even numbers shall be placed
upon the South and West sides of the streets and the odd numbers on the opposite sides of
the streets.
8-6-9 Numbers Assigned. In the numbering of buildings, residences, or stores, each main
door or entrance to every building, residence, or store shall be assigned one number. On each
block, in whole or in part occupied by businesses, houses, stores, etc., or by residences not
detached but compacted together, the unimproved property shall be assigned numbers as
deemed appropriate by the Community Development Department.
8-6-10 Street Names. The name of a newly constructed street segment must comply with
all of the following criteria in order for it to be accepted as a public street:
A. A newly developed street segment will assume the name of the one which it aligns and
directly connects.
B. A newly developed street segment may only share a name with an existing street if it
aligns with the existing street and either connects with the existing street, or which
plans for making a connection to the existing street exist.
C. Once a street name in its current format is used, it may not be used in another
format: e.g. Oak Street or Oak Drive, 1st Street or 1st Avenue, etc.
D. Names that are the same, or are pronounced the same (homonyms) or similarly, with
different spellings may only be used once: e.g. Smith Avenue or Smythe Avenue, Ellis
Street or Allice Street, Allen Drive or Alan Drive, etc.
E. Either the singular form or plural form of a word may be used for a street name, but
not both: e.g. Oak Drive or Oaks Street, Adam Street or Adams Street, etc.
F. When applying Section C, D and E, the names of all streets within service area of all
emergency responders serving Muscatine shall be considered.
G. A street name shall not use special characters such as hyphens, apostrophes, or
dashes.
H. Directional shall not be used as street names: e.g. East Street, North Lane, West
Avenue, etc.
49
I. A street name should be easy to read so that children can use the name in an
emergency situation.
J. All streets shall be identified with an approved sign.
50
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 7 – MECHANICAL CODE
SECTIONS:
8-7-1 Adoption of International Mechanical Code
8-7-2 Plans and Specifications
8-7-3 Inspections
8-7-4 Permits
8-7-1 Adoption of the International Mechanical Code. Pursuant to published notice and
public hearing as required by the Code of Iowa, the document entitled “International
Mechanical Code”, 2015 Edition, as amended and published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the Mechanical Code for the City of Muscatine,
Iowa, and is made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Ordinance. An official copy of said
Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
8-7-2 Plans and Specifications. Whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the Mechanical
Inspector, there shall be a separate plan for each building, public or private, accompanied by
specifications describing the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning of such building
showing the type, size, and location of all mechanical equipment to be used which may be
retained by the Mechanical Inspector. Such drawing and description will be furnished by the
owner or his authorized agent.
8-7-3 Inspections. The Mechanical Inspector must be notified when work is ready for
inspection by the person doing such work. All inside work must be left uncovered and
convenient for examination until inspected and approved. No notice shall be sent for
inspection until the work is entirely ready for inspection. In case of any violation of this
Section, the approval of such plans may be revoked by the Mechanical Inspector and upon
notice of revocation being given, all work under such plans shall cease. The Mechanical
Inspector shall examine the work within twenty four (24) hours after notice that it is ready
for inspection has been received. Defective material must be removed and replaced with
sound material. When the entire mechanical work is completed to the satisfaction of the
Mechanical Inspector, he or she shall give his or her approval.
8-7-4 Permits. Before the Building Official issues a permit as required, the Mechanical
Inspector shall charge the owner of the property, or his or her designated agent, and shall
collect from said party permit fees as set by resolution of Council and set out in the Schedule
of Building-Related Permits and Other Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of
Ordinances, except that no permit shall be required for the repair of mechanical equipment.
No mechanical work will commence without the party performing the mechanical work first
making sure that the required permit has been obtained. Failure to comply with this provision
shall result in the fee being doubled. Appeal of the regulations contained in Section 8-7-1
may be made to the City Council.
51
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 8 – MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTIONS:
8-8-1 House Mover Defined
8-8-2 Permit Required
8-8-3 Application
8-8-4 Bond Required
8-8-5 Insurance Required
8-8-6 Permit Fee
8-8-7 Inspection; Structure to be Moved; Route
8-8-8 Reporting Application to Council
8-8-9 Supervision by Building Department
8-8-10 Damages
8-8-11 Permit Revocation
8-8-1 House Mover Defined. A “house mover” means any person or business who
undertakes to move any house, building, structure or any part or parts thereof from one
location to another when the moving of such house, building, or structure or part or parts of
structures requires traveling upon, across, along or over any street, avenue, highway,
thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk or other public ground in the City.
8-8-2 Permit Required. No person shall engage in the activity or business of house moving
as defined in Section 8-8-1 of this Code of Ordinances, unless such person or business shall
have first applied for and obtained a permit to do so from the Council as hereinafter provided
in this Chapter.
8-8-3 Application. Any person or business desiring a house moving permit as required
herein shall file an application with the Office of the Building Official. Such application shall
contain:
A. The date or dates and time of moving the house, structure or building.
B. The detailed statement setting forth the proposed route to be followed in moving the
structure, the equipment to be used and specifying the person in charge of the moving
operation.
C. The location of the premises to which the structure is to be moved and the zoning
classification thereof.
D. The name of the owner of the structure and the name of the owner of the premises to
which it is being moved showing that the applicant is entitled to move the house.
E. A plot plan of the location to which the structure is to be moved, showing the exact
proposed location of the structure, the boundaries of the lot upon which the structure
is to be placed, and the dimensions of said lot.
F. A statement showing the maximum length and width, including eaves, and loaded
height of the structure to be moved.
G. An agreement that the house mover shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from
any claims or damages for injury to person or property resulting from the moving of
the structure for which the permit is requested.
52
53
H. An agreement that the applicant shall immediately report any damage done by the
moving operation to any street, sidewalk, alley, curb, highway, tree or other public
property and that the applicant will upon demand pay the cost of repair occasioned by
said damage to the City.
8-8-4 Bond Required. The applicant for a house mover’s permit shall file with the
application a bond, with an approved corporate surety in the penal sum as set by resolution
of City Council and set out in the Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other
Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of Ordinances, conditioned that all work done under
such permit shall be done in good and workmanlike manner, and that the applicant will pay to
the City or to any person injured all damages for injuries to person or property, including but
not limited to damages to any street, curb, sidewalk or any other public property caused by
negligence, fault or mismanagement of cause, in doing work under such permit.
8-8-5 Insurance Required. Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall obtain and
furnish to the City an insurance policy for public liability and property damage in the amount
as set by resolution of City Council and set out in the Schedule of Building Related Permits
and Other Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of Ordinances. Said insurance policy shall
name the City and the applicant as insured and shall provide that said policy cannot be
revoked, cancelled, or modified in any way until the City has been notified by certified mail at
least ten (10) days prior to the proposed action.
8-8-6 Permit Fee. The fee for a house moving permit shall be the amount as set by
resolution of Council and set out in the Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other
Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of Ordinances and shall be paid at the time the
application is filed.
8-8-7 Inspection; Structure to be Moved; Route. Before any permit is issued under the
provisions of Sections 8-8-2 and 8-8-5 of this Chapter, the Building Official shall carefully
inspect the structure proposed to be moved and shall determine whether such structure when
moved will comply with the provisions of this Code and the Housing Laws of the State. The
Building Official shall inspect the route proposed to be used in moving the structure and will
insure that the applicant has secured estimates from owners of all wires, poles, or other
property to be effected by the proposed moving of the structure.
8-8-8 Reporting Application to Council. The Building Official shall report the application
for a permit to the Council at its next regular or special meeting and shall either recommend
the permit be granted or otherwise. This Section shall not be construed as an assumption by
the City of the payment of any sum to any person except the amounts deposited in
accordance with this Section.
8-8-9 Supervision by Building Official. Any building or other structure moved under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be moved under the supervision of the Building Official, and no
building or other structure shall be moved during normal high traffic periods. This section
shall not be construed to hold the house mover responsible for traffic or other delays caused
by factors outside the house mover’s control.
8-8-10 Damages. The house mover shall report any damages done to any street highway,
alley, sidewalk, curb, tree, telephone or light poles or wires, or to any other public or private
property, except property owned by the house mover or the structure being moved, to the
Public Works Director within twelve (12) hours after the occurrence. The house mover shall,
upon demand, pay any damages resulting from an injury to any person or property. Nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent the house mover from contesting any claim in good faith
54
in any court.
55
8-8-11 Permit Revocation. Any permits granted under Section 8-8-2 of this Chapter may be
revoked at any time by the Council upon showing being made that the permit holder has
violated the provisions of this Chapter.
56
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 9 – PLUMBING CODE
SECTIONS:
8-9-1 Adoption of International Plumbing Code
8-9-2 Plans and Specifications
8-9-3 Inspections
8-9-4 Permits
8-9-1 Adoption of the International Plumbing Code. Pursuant to published notice and
public hearing as required by the Code of Iowa, the document entitled “International
Plumbing Code”, 2015 Edition, as amended and published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the Plumbing Code for the City of Muscatine,
Iowa, and is made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Ordinance. An official copy of said
Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
8-9-2 Plans and Specifications. Whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the
Plumbing Inspector, there shall be a separate plan for each building, public or private,
accompanied by specifications describing the drainage of such building, showing the size
and kind of pipes, the traps, closets, and fixtures to be used, which may be retained by
the Plumbing Inspector. Such drawing and description will be furnished by the owner or his
authorized agent.
8-9-3 Inspections. The Plumbing Inspector must be notified when work is ready for
inspection by the plumber doing such work. All inside work must be left uncovered and
convenient for examination until inspected and approved. No notice shall be sent for
inspection until the work is entirely ready for inspection. In case of any violation of this
Section, the approval of such plans may be revoked by the Plumbing Inspector and upon
notice of revocation being given, all work under such plans shall cease. The Plumbing
Inspector shall examine the work within twenty four (24) hours after notice that it is ready
for inspection has been received. Defective pipe or fittings must be removed and replaced
with sound pipe and fittings. When the entire plumbing work is completed to the
satisfaction of the Plumbing Inspector, he or she shall give his or her approval.
8-9-4 Permits. Before the Building Official issues a permit as required, the Plumbing
Inspector shall charge the owner of the property, or his or her designated agent, and shall
collect from said party permit fees as set by resolution of City Council and set out in the
Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other Requirements in Appendix D to this Code
of Ordinances, except that no permit shall be required for any replacement of existing
plumbing or plumbing fixtures unless such replacement requires a physical relocation,
addition, or expansion of the same. No plumbing work will commence without the party
performing the plumbing work first making sure that the required permit has been
obtained. Failure to comply with this provision shall result in the fee being doubled. Appeal
of the regulations contained in Section 8-9-1 may be made to the City Council
57
TITLE 8 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 10 – RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTIONS:
8-10-1 Adoption of the International Residential Code
8-10-2 Amendments
8-10-1 Adoption of the International Residential Code. Pursuant to published
notice and public hearing as required by the Code of Iowa, the document entitled
“International Residential Code”, 2015 Edition, together with Appendix Chapters F
and J, as amended and published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted by reference as the Residential Code for the City of Muscatine, Iowa, and is
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this ordinance. An official copy of said code is
on file in the office of the City Clerk.
8-10-2 Amendments: That the International Residential Code, adopted by the City
of Muscatine, Iowa, be amended by:
A. Climatic and Geographical Design Criteria. Table R301.2(1) is amended by
insertion of the following criteria and the addition of footnotes n, o, and p.
Footnotes a-m remain as printed in the International Residential Code.
B. Deletion of Section R313, Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
C. Deletion of Section P2904, Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinklers.
58
D. One-story wood or metal frame accessory buildings associated with a Group R
Division 3 Occupancy and not used for human occupancy with a floor area not
to exceed two hundred (200) square feet may be constructed on a four inch
(4”) concrete slab utilizing anchor bolts on six foot (6’) centers, or other
anchoring systems as may be approved by the Building Official.
E. One-story wood or metal frame accessory buildings with a height not
exceeding sixteen (16’) and side walls not exceeding twelve feet (12’)
associated with a Group R Division 3 Occupancy and not used for human
occupancy or exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet in floor area may
be constructed on a floating slab provided there is a perimeter footing one
foot (1’) deep and one foot (1’) wide which requires the installation of one (1)
number four (4) reinforcing steel bar centrally located throughout the footing.
F. A single family dwelling not more than one story in height may be constructed
on eight inch (8”) wide trenched footings provided they are forty two inches
(42”) below grade and are reinforced with a minimum of two (2) number four
(4) reinforcing steel bars running horizontally through the top one-third (1/3)
and the bottom one-third (1/3) of the foundation wall.
TITLE 9
HEALTH AND SANITARY REGULATIONS
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Food Establishments and Hotel Sanitation 1
Health Regulations 2
Nuisance 3
Natural Water Course; Drains and Drainage 4
Weeds 5
TITLE 9 – HEALTH AND SANITARY REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1 – FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND HOTEL SANITATION
The following provisions of the Iowa Code and all administrative rules adopted
pursuant thereto are hereby adopted by reference and the City Council shall be
responsible for the licensing, inspection, and enforcement thereof:
Chapter 137C, hotel sanitation code.
Chapter 137D, home food establishments.
Chapter 137F, food establishments and food processing plants.
Iowa Administrative Code, Section 481-30 food and consumer safety.
Iowa Administrative Code, Section 481-31 food establishment and food
processing plant inspections.
Iowa Administrative Code, Section 481-37 hotels and motels.
TITLE 9 – HEALTH AND SANITARY REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 2 – HEALTH REGULATIONS
The following provisions of the Iowa Code and all administrative rules adopted
pursuant thereto are hereby adopted by reference and the City Council shall be
responsible for the licensing, inspection, and enforcement thereof:
Iowa Administrative Code, Chapter 22, Tattoos.
Iowa Administrative Code, Chapter 46, Tanning.
Iowa Administrative Code, Chapter 15 and 1351.
TITLE 9 – HEALTH AND SANITARY REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3 – NUISANCE
SECTIONS:
9-3-1 Nuisance Defined
9-3-2 Definitions Generally
9-3-3 Nuisances Enumerated
9-3-4 Nuisances Prohibited and Authority to Abate
9-3-5 Notice to Abate.
9-3-6 Contents of Notice to Abate
9-3-7 Method of Notice
9-3-8 Request for Hearing
9-3-9 Abatement by the City
9-3-10 Report to Council; Abatement Costs
9-3-11 Assessment of Costs
9-3-12 Failure to Abate
9-3-13 Penalty
9-3-14 Abatement in Emergency
9-3-15 Adoption of Iowa Code 657A.1A-657A.10.
9-3-1 Nuisance Defined. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably
offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially
to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, is a
nuisance, and a civil action by ordinary proceedings may be brought to enjoin and
abate the nuisance and to recover damages sustained on account of the nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
9-3-2 Definitions Generally.
A. "Garbage" means all wastes from the preparation or spoilage of food.
B. "Filth" means excrement, either animal or human, or any material connected
herewith.
C. "Junk" means any metal or wood, whether usable or not, stored in such a
manner that it constitutes a health or safety hazard.
D. A “junked or obsolete car or motor vehicle” shall be a car or motor vehicle, or
a portion thereof, not in running condition or not licensed for the current year
as provided by law. This definition shall not apply to a vehicle, or part thereof
stored within a building, or protected with a fitted cover designed specifically
as a vehicle cover. The use of tarps, blankets, or similar temporary covers shall
not be deemed acceptable under this Section.
E. "Refuse" means any material not junk, garbage, or filth deposited upon
property in an unsightly or unhealthy condition.
9-3-3 Nuisances Enumerated. A "nuisance" shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
A. Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place for
the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances,
becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of
individuals or the public.
B. Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome
substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
C. Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal
authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water.
D. Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of
any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural
course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
E. Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences,
buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys,
commons, landing places or burying grounds.
F. Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the view
of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or
of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof.
G. Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as
old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles
within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof construction.
H. Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash.
I. Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other vegetation in
the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.
J. Dutch Elm Disease or Emerald Ash Borer Damage. Trees infected with Dutch
Elm Disease or knowingly impacted and damaged by the Emerald Ash Borer.
K. Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established
airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation
including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a
proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located. (See Airport
Zoning)
L. Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and
lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons participating in
criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code of Iowa or places
resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as defined in Section
124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness,
quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the
disturbance of others.
M. Stagnant Water. All lots and parcels of ground wherever water is permitted to
accumulate and stand until stagnant or upon any privately owned lot.
N. Vehicles. Any unused, abandoned, junked, or obsolete cars or motor vehicles
whether on private or public property.
O. Junk, Refuse, and Garbage. All lots or parcels of land upon which junk, refuse,
garbage, or filth is allowed to accumulate.
P. Containers. Abandoned or unattended refrigerator, icebox, or similar container
with doors that may become locked located outside of buildings and accessible
to children, or to allow any such refrigerator, icebox, or similar container to
remain outside of buildings on premises in the person’s possession or control to
remain abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children.
Q. Poison. Any poison, poisonous meat, or any other poisonous substance in any
place outside of any residence, or where it may endanger life by being taken and
used by any person, or who shall so expose any such poison or poisonous
substance where the same shall be taken by any dog, hog, cat, or any animal or
living thing.
R. Dangerous or Unsafe Building or Structure. Dangerous or Unsafe Building or
Structure shall mean any structure or building meeting any or all of the following
criteria:
1. Whenever any portion or member of a building or appurtenance thereof is
likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby
injure persons or damage property.
2. Whenever a portion or member of a building has wracked, warped, buckled,
or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have
materially less resistance to winds or snow loading than is required in the
case of similar new construction.
3. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of 1)
dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 2) faulty construction; 3) the removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building; 4) the deterioration, decay or
inadequacy of its foundation; or 5) any other cause, is likely to collapse
partially or completely.
4. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is
unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
5. Whenever the building or structure has been damaged by fire, wind, flood,
or has become dilapidated or deteriorated as to become 1) an attractive
nuisance to children; 2) a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or as to 3) enable
persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts.
6. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air, or sanitation facilities,
or otherwise, is determined by the Building Official or Health Officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such condition that it is likely
to cause sickness or disease.
7. Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fireresistive
construction, faulty electrical wiring, gas connections, or
maintenance of heating and/or cooling equipment, or other cause, is
determined by the Building Official or City Fire Marshall to be a fire hazard.
8. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after demolition
or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any building or structure
is abandoned, or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period
of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof to be an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
S. Ashes, cinders, leaves, grass, tools, implements, machines, soil, dirt, sand, gravel,
lumber, brick, or other building material, or any other thing or substance
deposited, stored, placed, or permitted to be or come in or into or upon any street,
alley, public place, or into or upon any privately owned property which obstructs,
hinders, or prevents the full and free use of any part of such street, alley, public
place, or private property the free and uninterrupted flow of water in, upon, and
away from the same.
9-3-4 Nuisances Prohibited and Authority to Abate. The causing, permitting, or
continuing of any nuisance as provided in this Chapter is hereby prohibited, and may
be abated in the manner provided in this Chapter, or as otherwise provided by law.
9-3-5 Notice to Abate. Whenever any nuisance as set out in this Chapter is found to
exist, the City shall provide notice in the manner required by Section 9-3-6 to the
owner, occupant, or agent of the property upon which such nuisance is found to exist
or from which such nuisance comes, or upon the person causing or permitting such
nuisance to exist upon or in any street, alley, public place, or private property.
9-3-6 Contents of Notice to Abate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
A. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
B. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
C. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the
nuisance.
D. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
E. Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not
abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against such person.
9-3-7 Method of Notice. The method of notice shall be in accordance with Section
364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa.
9-3-8 Request for Hearing. Any person to whom the Notice to Abate is directed may
appeal the determination that the condition of the property constitutes a nuisance by
requesting a hearing before the City Council. The request must be in writing and be
delivered to the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the Notice to Abate
or it will be conclusively presumed a nuisance exists and it must be abated as stated
in the Notice to Abate.
9-3-9 Abatement by the City. Whenever any person having been served with a
notice for the reason and in the manner required by this Chapter shall refuse, fail, or
neglect to abate or remove the nuisance referred to in such notice within the time
therein stated, the City may cause such nuisance to be abated and removed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
9-3-10 Report to Council; Abatement Costs. If the City abates a nuisance under
Section 9-3-9 of this Chapter, the City Clerk shall report the fact in writing to the
Council, stating the cost and value of all tools, appliances, materials, labor, and
assistance used, consumed, and performed by and for him or her, giving the several
items thereof, and the name of the person responsible for the commission of such
nuisance and a description of the property, lot, or parcel of ground whereon such
nuisance existed or from which the same came.
9-3-11 Assessment of Costs. Upon receiving such report under Section 9-3-9, the Council
may assess the costs against the property by resolution for collection in the same manner
as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
9-3-12 Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who
shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time
required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances or applicable Federal, State or County laws.
9-3-13 Penalty. A failure to abate a nuisance as defined in this Chapter or a failure
to perform an action required herein, following notice as provided in this Chapter,
shall constitute a municipal infraction and the requirements of this Chapter may be
enforced under the procedures applicable to municipal infractions and/or in lieu of
the abatement procedures set forth in this Chapter.
9-3-14 Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action which may be required under this Chapter without prior notice. The
City shall assess the costs as provided in Section 9-3-11 after notice to the property
owner under the applicable provisions of Sections 9-3-6 and 9-3-7 and hearing as
provided in Section 9-3-8.
9-3-15 Adoption of Iowa Code 657A.1A-657A.10
A. Applicability. Effective July 1,2019, and pursuant to Iowa Code section
657A.10B, the City of Muscatine elects that the provisions of Iowa Code
sections 657A.1 A through 657A.10, inclusive, shall apply to structures within
its jurisdiction.
B. Appointed Building Official. The City appoints Community Development
Director, or his or her designee, as the responsible building official as defined
in Iowa Code section 657A.1(8).
C. Fees. The fee for a building inspection, and for preparation of the official's
written findings, pursuant to Iowa Code section 657A.1 A(3), shall be $50, or
as may from time to time be amended by resolution of Council and set forth in
the Schedule of Fees in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances, and shall be
payable in advance to the City Clerk
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
TITLE 9 – HEALTH AND SANITARY REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4 – NATURAL WATER COURSE; DRAINS AND DRAINAGE
SECTIONS:
9-4-1 Natural Water Courses
9-4-2 Owner to Construct Draining
9-4-3 Authority of City
9-4-4 Failure to Construct Drain
9-4-1 Natural Water Courses. No person shall obstruct a natural water course so
as to endanger personal property or cause a returning or prevention of the natural
flow of surface water.
9-4-2 Owner to Construct Draining. The Council shall have the power and authority
to require the owner or leasee of any lot, part of lot, or tract of ground extending into,
across, or bordering upon any natural water course for the drainage of surface water
or a water course of any kind who shall, by grading or filling such lot, part of lot, or
tract of ground, obstruct the ordinary flow of water through such ravine or water
course, to build or construct, to the extent of such lot or filling, such a drain or passage
way for water as will readily carry off and discharge such water naturally flowing
thereon.
9-4-3 Authority of City. When the owner or leasee of any lot shall grade or fill said
lot, part of lot or tract of ground extending into, across, or bordering on any hollow or
ravine so as to obstruct the flow of water, the City Council shall have the power to
order such owner or leasee to construct such drain within a reasonable amount of time
to be designated by the City Council. Said order shall be served upon the owner or
leasee of the said lot, part of lot, or tract of ground by certified mail with return receipt.
If the owner or leasee of said tract of ground shall fail or refuse to construct said drain
within the time and in the manner required, the Director of Public Works or his or her
designee shall at once proceed to build such drain and report the expense thereof,
with all costs arising there from, to the Council, whereupon the Council may, by
resolution, levy and assess such sum as a special tax upon the property in which such
drain is constructed.
9-4-4 Failure to Construct Drain. In all cases where the owner or leasee of any lot,
part of lot, or tract of ground extending into, across, or bordering on any hollow or
ravine which constitutes a drain for surface water, or water course of any kind, shall,
without constructing a suitable drain, fill or grade such lot, part of lot, or tract of ground
so as to obstruct the flow of water through such water course or ravine, and cause
such water to accumulate on any street, alley, public place, private lot, or private
ground, shall be considered to have caused a nuisance and shall be deemed guilty of
a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as set out in the Schedule of Penalties
in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.
TITLE 9 – HEALTH AND SANITARY REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5 – WEEDS
SECTIONS:
9-5-1 Purpose
9-5-2 Definitions
9-5-3 Noxious Weeds
9-5-4 Duties of Owners
9-5-5 Notice
9-5-6 Proof of Service
9-5-7 Work Done by City
9-5-8 Cost of Work Done by City
9-5-1 Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedure to be
followed for the removal of noxious weeds on property within the City.
9-5-2 Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
A. "Noxious weed" includes weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle,
cocklebur, and any weeds, grass, or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers,
or other ornamental plants, in excess of eight inches (8") in height.
B. "Owner" means a record holder of legal title as shown on the records of the
Muscatine County Assessor.
9-5-3 Noxious Weeds. It shall be a misdemeanor for the owner of real estate located
within the Corporate Limits of the City to permit the growth of noxious weeds on any
real estate as set out in this Chapter.
9-5-4 Duties of Owners. It shall be the duty of the owner to cut or remove, and to
keep cut or removed, all noxious weeds from his, her, or its property and from all
adjacent property between the property line and the improved street and/or alley
line(s).
9-5-5 Notice. The City shall give notice to the property owners by one publication in
a newspaper of general circulation within the City, stating that all property owners are
required to destroy, cut, trim, or otherwise eradicate all noxious weeds on their
property and the adjacent unimproved public right(s)-of-way within a reasonable time
but not less than five days from the date of the said publication.
9-5-6 Proof of Service. In addition to the notice as set out in Section 9-5-5, the City
shall mail a notice to the property owner believed to be violating the provisions of this
Section advising that all noxious weeds located on his, her, or its property and adjacent
public right(s)-of-way shall be destroyed, cut, trimmed, or otherwise eradicated within
five (5) days from the delivery of mail in the ordinary course of delivery. Said notice
shall be sent by ordinary mail to the last known address of the owner or as shown on
the current County Assessors records. It shall be presumed that five (5) days is
sufficient time for the delivery of mail within ordinary course. A copy of the publication
as required in Section 9-5-5, together with a copy of the notice sent by regular mail
as herein set out shall be deemed proof of service.
9-5-7 Work Done by City. When any owner fails to destroy, cut, trim, or eradicate
noxious weeds within the notice period(s) contained in this Chapter, the City shall
cause the noxious weeds to be cut or removed by private contractor or with City
employees and equipment at City expense.
9-5-8 Cost of Work Done by City. The City Clerk shall submit an itemized statement
to the City Council for all work performed under this Chapter. The itemized statement
shall include the cost of cutting and/or removing the noxious weeds to include labor,
equipment costs, and reasonable administrative costs. Upon receipt of the itemized
statement, the Council shall audit it, and if allowed, shall by resolution assess the cost
as a special assessment against the property. The City Clerk shall certify the
assessment to the County Treasurer, to be collected as any other special assessment.
1
Title 10 – Zoning
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Zoning Purposes
Zoning Districts; Map
AG Agricultural District
FP Flood Plain District
FC Flood Channel (Floodway) District
R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts
R-4 Residential District
R-5 Residential District
R-6 Residential District
R-L Large Scale Residential Development District
C-1 Neighborhood and General Commercial District
C-2 Central Commercial District
C-3 Planned Commercial District
M-1 Light Industrial District
M-2 General Industrial District
S-1 Special Development District
S-2 Institutional – Office District
S-3 Large Scale Mixed Use Development (MXD) District
A-P Airport District
Garage, Accessory Building, & Accessory Uses
Signs, Canopies, and Awning Regulations
Fence Regulations
Mobile Home Regulations
Nonconforming Use Regulations
Cemetery Development Standards
Additional Height, Yard, and Density Regulations
Off-Street Parking & Loading Regulations
Sight Distance Triangle Regulations
Keeping of Animals in Residential Districts
Wireless Technology Siting Ordinance
Administration
Definitions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
2
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 1 – Zoning Purposes
Sections
10-1-1 Short Title
10-2-2 Basic Intent and Purpose
10-1-1 Short Title
These regulations shall be referred to as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
10-2-1 Basic Intent and Purpose
A. These regulations have been based upon the comprehensive plan for the City of
Muscatine, which was adopted by the City of Muscatine. Said comprehensive plan
included estimates of population growth; land use surveys; a land use plan; plans for
major thoroughfares, other transportation facilities, community facilities, public
services, and utilities; and a public works program.
B. Need for public services and facilities in both size and location depends upon the
character and intensity of land use. Regulation of the use of land is thus fundamental to
a coordinated optimum physical development of the community. The land use
regulations are intended to be the foundation of the entire process of improvement of
the physical environment.
C. The regulations are intended to preserve and protect existing property uses and values
against adverse or unharmonious adjacent uses.
D. The land use regulations divide the area into a number of zoning districts:
1. Because of frequent and costly flooding, some areas should be kept in their
natural state and not developed and development in other areas required to
include adequate floodproofing. These would be included in a Flood Plain
District.
2. The comprehensive plan indicated the need for various land uses such as
commerce, residence, industry, transportation, and public uses. These urban
uses should be directed into that land area where they may be most efficiently
served by public services and facilities, such as sewers, water, schools, parks,
public transportation, and the like. Remaining lands should be reserved
agricultural and rural uses. Consequently, the regulations include an Agricultural
District for agricultural and non-urban land uses.
3
3. In the past, residential neighborhoods have deteriorated due to encroachment
by isolated commercial and industrial uses. The great majority of our population
live in single-family homes which they own. The regulations establish residential
districts particularly designed to provide maximum protection for single-family
homes.
4. Other residential districts are established for two family homes, mobile homes,
town houses, and for apartments. Density, yard, and parking regulations would
insure good living conditions in these areas. Much of present day building is by
large projects instead of lot by lot. A Large-Scale Residential District is provided
where large-scale projects may be located with approval of the site plan. This
introduces an important measure of flexibility into the regulations.
5. Commercial districts recognize the different types of commercial areas that will
be needed by the future growth of the community. There is a zoning district for
the neighborhood commercial area, i.e., the grocery store, drugstore complex
serving the adjacent residential neighborhoods and for the more widely used
commercial areas along major streets and highways. There is a central
commercial district for the downtown area and a special "planned district" for
commercial development based on a site plan.
6. For industry there are two districts: a "light" industrial district for manufacturing
and related industrial activity, and a "general" industrial district which provides
for additional uses with approval under the provision for conditional uses.
7. A Special Development District has also been furnished to provide the
opportunity for imaginative site development with a variety of uses in special
areas of the City.
8. The regulations emphasize the character as well as location and density of the
land uses. Special inducements are offered for good design of apartment areas.
Landscape planting is required in all front yards and for automobile filling
stations, parking lots, and garages. Advertising is carefully controlled.
9. The regulations are reasonable in relation to existing conditions. Yard
dimensions are adjusted to peculiarities of existing lots. Lots that are now too
small may be used provided current building setbacks can be maintained.
4
10. All uses are required to provide their own off-street parking (with a few
exceptions). Over a period of years, enforcement of this requirement will enable
streets to be used primarily for traffic movement.
11. Each of the regulations have been designed to work harmoniously with the
others with the totality providing that minimum degree of land use control
essential to the realization of the optimum urban environment.
E. Jurisdictional Area. These regulations apply to all lands within the corporate limits of the
City of Muscatine.
5
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 2 – Zoning Districts; Map
Sections
10-2-1 Use Districts
10-2-2 District Map and Boundaries
10-2-3 Effect of Vacations on Boundaries
10-2-4 New or Annexed Land
10-2-5 Areas Under Water
10-2-6 Flood Insurance Rate Maps
10-2-7 District Regulations
10-2-1 Use Districts
The City of Muscatine is hereby divided into the following specific districts:
AG - Agricultural
FP - Flood Plan
FC - Flood Channel
R-1 - Single-Family Residential
R-2 - Single-Family Residential
R-3 - Single-Family Residential
R-4 - Two-Family Residential
R-5 - Multi-Family Residential
R-6 - Multi-Family Residential
RL - Large-Scale Residential Development
C-1 - Neighborhood and General Commercial
C-2 - Central Commercial
C-3 - Planned Commercial
M-1 - Light Industrial
M-2 - General Industrial
S-1 - Special Development
S-2 - Institutional; Office
S -3 - Large Scale Mixed Use Development (MXD) District
A-P - Airport District
6
10-2-2 District Map and Boundaries
The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map attached hereto and made a part
hereof, which map is designated as the "District Map". The District Map and all notations,
references, and other information shown thereon are a part of this Ordinance and have the
same force and effect as if the District Map and all the notations, references, and other
information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein, the original of which
District Map is properly attested and is on file with the Community Development Department
of the City of Muscatine, Iowa. The boundary lines are shown upon the District Map within the
center line of streets, alleys, public ways, and railroads; in cases not covered by the provisions
of this section, the boundary lines shall determine the distances in feet, if given, from other
lines on the map, but if no distances are given, then by scale of the map. Where boundary lines
are shown approximately on the location of property lines and the exact location is not
indicated by means of figures, distances, or otherwise, then the property line shall be the
boundary. Appeals may be filed with the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
10-2-3 Effect of Vacations on Boundaries
Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council
of the City of Muscatine, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public
way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the
vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended
districts.
10-2-4 New or Annexed Land
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Muscatine shall automatically be
placed in the AG Agricultural District until otherwise changed by ordinance.
10-2-5 Areas Under Water
All areas within the Corporate Limits of the City which are underwater and not shown as
included within any district, shall be subject to all of the regulations of the district which
immediately adjoins the water area. If the water area adjoins two (2) or more districts, the
boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line
until they meet the other district.
10-2-6 Flood Insurance Rate Maps
The boundaries of the Flood Plain District are hereby established as the areas classified as
“Zone AE or Zone A”; and the boundaries of the Flood Channel (Floodway) District are here by
established as the areas shown as “Floodway Areas in Zone AE” on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Muscatine County and Incorporated Areas, City of Muscatine, Panels
19139C0185C, 192C, 225C, dated July 18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D, 175D, 187D, 188D, 189D,
193D, 281D, 282D, 301D, dated April 16, 2014, and Panels 19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E,
dated November 4, 2016 which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for
7
Muscatine County. These maps hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the
Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this ordinance.
10-2-7 District Regulations
Except as hereinafter provided:
A. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally
altered, nor shall any building or land be used except for a purpose permitted in the
district in which the building or land is located.
B. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally
altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which the
building is located.
C. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally
altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which the
building is located.
D. The density and yard regulations of this Ordinance are minimum regulations for each
and every building existing at the effective date of this Ordinance and for any
building hereafter erected or structurally altered. No land required for yards or
other open spaces about an existing building or any building hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be considered a yard or lot area for more than one building.
E. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as
herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one main building on a lot
except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
F. No strucutre shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent specifically
provided hereinafter, except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading
regulations of this Ordinance.
G. Cooperatives, condominiums, and all other forms of property ownership do not
affect the provisions of these regulations and all requirements shall be observed as
though the property were under single ownership.
H. All inhabited mobile homes shall be located in a mobile home park that has received
a conditional use permit, and if appropriate, subdivision approval as required. No
mobile home outside an approved mobile home park shall be connected to utilities,
except those mobile homes being offered for sale and not inhabited.
I. Site Plan Review
1. Approval of site plans should be made in accordance with good planning
practices, taking into consideration: adequate parking areas, safe ingress and
egress to the site, sufficient landscaped areas, adequate screening of
unsightly areas such as loading docks, trash containers and parking areas.
8
Further, the development of one site should not cause problems relating to
surface drainage, noise, lighting, signing, and incompatible relationships
between new and existing adjacent land uses.
Site plan review is required for all new construction on undeveloped land in
the following situations:
a. The C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts.
b. The M-1 and M-2 Industrial Districts.
c. All non-residential development in the Residential Districts.
d. For multi-family construction of more than four (4) units per
lot.
e. Site plan review approval is required in all of the above
situations where remodeling, modification or alteration of an
existing structure will increase the square footage by fifty
percent (50%) or more.
f. A filing fee for such site plan review shall be charged as
established.
2. Approval
Approval should be made on the basis of the merits of the plan presented as
it relates to the guidelines set forth below. A Building Permit will not be
issued prior to the approval of the site plan, and a Certificate of Occupancy
Permit will not be granted unless the site is developed according to the plan.
The Site Plan Review Committee shall consist of a representative of the City
Engineer, Building Official, and the Community Development Director and/or
as appointed by the City Administrator. Site plan approval shall require a
unanimous decision. If such a decision is not rendered, an appeal may be
made to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. Site Plan Information to be Provided and Required Elements
General Criteria
a. A plan drawn to scale indicating the property boundaries of the site,
the dimensions of all lot lines and square footage or acres involved.
b. All points of access to and from the site should be identified, and
include data on location, width, and type of all proposed curb and
access points.
c. Parking layout and a notation listing the number of the required
parking spaces and the number to be provided. Indicate the
estimated traffic to be generated by completed development and
peak periods during the day.
9
d. The location of all structures, either existing or proposed, for the site.
This also includes sign size, type and location as well as any outside
lighting.
e. The location of all utilities available to the site and the location of all
laterals to be extended to serve the proposed development.
f. The development shall not cause surface drainage to flow onto
adjacent property. The site plan shall indicate a drainage plan with
sufficient control grades to indicate the handling of surface drainage.
g. Indicate the construction schedule, and stages of development if
applicable; construction shall begin within one year of approval of the
site plan. An extension shall be requested if construction has not
taken place within this one year period.
h. Noxious fumes, including dust, that are in sufficient quantity to be
harmful to health shall not be emitted beyond the property line.
i. Noise, including vibration, shall not cause the ambient noise level as
measured at the property line to exceed 75 decibels (dba).
j. No outside lighting shall shine directly onto adjacent property.
Landscaping and Screening Criteria
k. Landscaping plans are required and shall indicate existing site
conditions as well as proposed plants and shrubs identified by
botanical name and size.
l. Ground covers shall be specified to be planted densely enough to
provide 80% coverage within three years of installation and 100%
coverage when plant material reaches maturity.
m. A regular schedule for maintaining all landscape areas shall be
established. Any trees, shrubs, and plants which fail to show healthy
growth shall be replaced within two years of the date occupancy is
granted.
n. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent streets and properties
by a screening fence (at least 75% opaque) or a compact evergreen
hedge at least four feet high to screen out headlights, unless
otherwise approved due to extenuating circumstances. Planted areas
shall be bordered by concrete, masonry or railroad tie curbs at least 6
inches high for protection during snow removal and other vehicular
damage.
o. Screening with natural vegetation and fences shall otherwise comply
with all provisions of the City Code.
10
p. On-site trash bins, receptacles, including bottle redemption device,
outside storage or holding areas, and mechanical equipment shall be
screened from view by screening fence (at least 75% opaque) or
compact evergreens of sufficient height and density to screen the
view at maturity or within 3 years whichever is first.
11
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 3 – AG Agricultural District
Sections
10-3-1 Permissive Uses
10-3-2 Conditional Uses
10-3-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-3-1 Permissive Uses
A. Agricultural activity and raising and selling of livestock, except that all livestock
operations or farms with livestock in excess of ten (10) head shall have a minimum lot
area of twenty (20) acres and shall not locate any feed lot or accessory structures within
two hundred feet (200') from any lot in any Residential District.
B. Single-family dwelling, provided that it has a minimum lot area of two (2) acres.
C. Public park, playground, and recreational area.
D. Privately operated recreational facility, including riding stable, lake, swimming pool
tennis court, and golf course, except miniature course or driving range, provided that
any accessory building in connection therewith shall be located not less than two
hundred feet (200') from any lot in any Residential District.
E. Public and private forest, wildlife preservation, or similar conservation project.
F. Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a
public elementary or public high school and having no rooms regularly used for housing
or sleeping purposes.
G. Place of worship.
H. Greenhouse or nursery for the raising of flowers and other horticultural products,
including the raising of such products for sale on the premises.
I. Cemeteries of ten (10) acres or more in size. Also note Chapter 10-25 for Cemetery
Development Standards.
J. Roadside stand designed for temporary or seasonal use and which is adjacent to a road
and which is used for the sale of farm products primarily produced or grown on the
premises.
K. Animal hospital, veterinary clinic, or kennel, provided that any building or enclosure in
connection therewith shall be at least one hundred feet (100') from any lot in any
Residential District.
12
L. Grain bin and farm-related building, which is used in connection with on-premises
agricultural activity.
M. Watertower.
N. Historic site open to the public.
10-3-2 Conditional Uses
A. Extraction of coal, sand, gravel, top soil, and other natural resources
B. Airport, except that all airport facilities are exempt from the height and area regulations
and accessory use regulations; provided further, that all airport facilities shall be
developed in accordance with current Federal Aviation Administration specifications
and guidelines.
1. Airport or aircraft-related commercial activities, provided that such activities are
located completely within the property of the airport.
2. No use of any land shall be made under this Section which violates the provisions
of Title 10, Chapter 19 of this City Code.
C. Electrical distribution substation, pipeline pumping station, sewage lagoon, or sanitary
landfill.
D. Farm implement operation for the sale of new and used farm equipment and
implements including the accessory service and maintenance thereof.
1. A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. City Code
Section 10-2-7(I), entitled Site Plan Review, shall be followed as a guide in
developing said plan.
2. Minimum lot size for this activity is 2.5 acres.
E. Farm supply sales of the following primary products:
1.
a. Agricultural chemicals.
b. Liquid and dry bulk fertilizer.
c. Feed.
d. Fuel.
e. Ancillary agricultural products as approved by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
f. Ancillary carryout food items, packaged ready to consume
convenience snacks and non-alcoholic beverages.
13
2. A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. City Code
Section 10-2-7(I), entitled Site Plan Review, shall be followed as a guide in
developing said plan.
3. Minimum lot size for this activity is 2.5 acres.
10-3-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height: 35 feet, except for as provided for in Title 10, Chapter 26.
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: 50 feet.
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: 20 feet.
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: 50 feet.
E. Minimum Frontage: 100 feet.
F. Minimum Lot Area: 2 acres.
G. Minimum Lot Area per Family: 2 acres.
14
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 4 – FP Flood Plain District
SECTIONS:
10-4-1 Intent and Purpose
10-4-2 District Boundaries
10-4-3 General Provisions
10-4-4 Permissive Uses
10-4-5 Conditional Uses
10-4-6 Height, Area, Parking Requirements
10-4-7 Flood Control Manual
10-4-8 Administration
10-4-9 Variances
10-4-10 Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
10-4-11 Definitions
10-4-1 Intent and Purpose
A. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as amended,
delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure safety from flood
and to promote health and the general welfare.
B. It is the purpose of the Flood Plain District to apply special regulations to the use of
land in those areas of the City which are subject to predictable inundations at frequent
intervals and to assure that flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained. Such land use controls are necessary to
qualify property owners for flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968 (as amended).
C. The regulations, while permitting reasonable economic and social use of such
properties, will help protect health, safety, and general welfare and reduce financial
burdens imposed on the community, governmental units, and its individuals caused by
frequent and periodic floods and the overflow of lands.
D. The standards required by this Chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes. This Chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain
(Overlay) District areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall
not create liability on the part of the City of Muscatine or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made there under.
15
10-4-2 District Boundaries
A. The boundaries of the Flood Plain District are hereby established as the areas classified
as “Zone AE or Zone A” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Muscatine County
and Incorporated Areas, City of Muscatine, Panels 19139C0185C, 192C, 225C, dated July
18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D, 175D, 187D, 188D, 189D, 193D, 281D, 282D, 301D,
dated April 16, 2014, and Panels 19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E, dated November 4,
2016 which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Muscatine County.
These maps hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain
Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the Flood
Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this ordinance.
B. All lands included in such Flood Plain Districts shall be subject to the terms imposed
herein, in addition to the terms imposed by any other zoning use district in which said
lands should be located.
10-4-3 General Provisions
A. It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provision of this Chapter shall prevail.
B. All activities in this district shall obtain all necessary permits required by Federal or
State law (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334).
C. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any
tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
10-4-4 Permissive Uses
When the use proposed herein is allowable in a zoning district, the following uses and types of
activities are permitted in the district; provided that such uses and types of activities do not
entail any man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited
to buildings or other structures (including the placement of factory built buildings), mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
B. Open recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap
and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
16
C. Marinas.
D. Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
E. For residential districts, area within the Flood Plain District, may be used for computing
lot area requirements and may, therefore, be used for yard and park areas.
F. Storage yard for materials and equipment not subject to removal or major damage by
flood waters.
10-4-5 Conditional Uses.
A. Any permissive or conditional use in the Zoning District applicable to the location in
question and not identified as a permissive use in Section 10-4-4 is considered a
conditional use.
B. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate located in the Flood Plain
District, including but not limited to buildings or other structures (including the
placement of factory built buildings), mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, or drilling operations, is considered a conditional use.
C. In addition to complying with the provisions contained within Section 10-22-1 of the City
Code, conditional uses in the Flood Plain District must meet the following criteria to be
approved:
1. Any proposed new construction or substantial improvements including the
placement of factory-built buildings shall meet the following standards:
a. Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
designed and/or modified and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure.
b. Use construction materials and equipment that are resistant to flood
damage.
c. Use construction methods and practices that shall minimize flood
damage.
d. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
e. Factory-built homes including those placed in existing factory-built
17
home parks or subdivisions shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the structures is a minimum of one foot
above the 100-year flood.
f. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures located in the flood plain shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated one foot above the level of the 100-year
flood.
g. All new and substantially improved residential and nonresidential
structures with fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not
including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
i. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.
iii. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
iv. Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, low damage potential storage.
h. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures located in the Flood Plain District shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated one foot above the level of the 100-year
flood or together with all attendant utility and sanitary systems be flood
proofed. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer
registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that:
i. The floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the
100-year flood level; and
18
ii. That the structure, below the 100-year flood level is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water.
i. All utility and sanitary facilities shall be flood proofed one foot above the
level of the 100-year flood so that any space below the level of the 100-
year flood is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
j. On site waste disposal systems shall be located or designed to avoid
impairment to the system or contamination from the system during
flooding.
k. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well
as the discharge of effluent into flood waters.
l. Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be
provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater than one
foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
m. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
n. Water supply treatment facilities shall be provided with a level of
protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood
elevation.
o. Utilities such as a gas or electrical system shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and
the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
p. All applications for conditional use permits for new or substantially
improved structures shall be accompanied by records of elevations and
flood proofing levels, and whether or not such structures contain a
basement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain the
appropriate topographic data, engineering studies, or other studies
needed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the City Administrator or
his/her designee, and/or other appropriate agency or official. All such
data shall be prepared and certified by technically qualified persons and
will be maintained by the City Administrator or his/her designee.
q. All applications for conditional use permits for new or substantially
improved structures shall be reviewed by the City Administrator or
his/her designee to determine if the site of the proposed improvements
is reasonably safe from flooding and that all necessary permits have
been received as required by Federal or State law (including Section 404
19
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. 1334).
r. Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of one foot above the 100- year flood level. Other material
and equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to
major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to
flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
s. Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc. shall
provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a
minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for
adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works
shall be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
t. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental to a
residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied.
i. The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 sq. ft. in size. Those
portions of the structure located less than one foot above the
Base Flood Elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant
materials.
ii. The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited
storage. The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
iii. The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.
iv. The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
v. The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one
foot above the base flood elevation.
vi. The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of 10-4-5 (C)(1)(g) of this Ordinance.
2. All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new developments located in
the Flood Plain District shall be reviewed by the appropriate agency to assure
that:
20
a. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
b. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
c. Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
d. All such proposals greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser,
include, within such proposals, base flood elevation data.
e. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots
with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles
during the 100-year flood
3. Factory-built home development is considered a conditional use in the Flood
Plain District, provided the subject property is appropriately zoned for such use
and further provided that such development follows the procedures designed in
the Zoning Ordinance for consideration of such use.
a. For new factory-built home parks, for expansions to existing factorybuilt
home parks and for existing factory-built home parks where the
repair, reconstruction, or improvement of streets, utilities, and pads
equal or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads
before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement has commenced, it is
required that:
i. Ground anchors for tie downs be provided in accordance
with the Mobile Home Manufacturers Association standards.
ii. The special flood hazard is disclosed to the factory built home
and/or lot purchaser or lessee in the purchase contract, deed
or lease. Notification of both the 100-year flood elevation
and the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be
provided.
iii. Adequate surface drainage and easy access for a hauler is
provided.
iv. In the instance of elevation on piers, lots are large enough to
permit steps, and steel reinforcement is provided for piers
more than six feet high.
v. Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or piers so that
the lowest floor of the home will be one foot above the level
of the 100-year flood.
21
b. For factory built homes moving into existing factory-built home parks,
where concrete pads for the placement of factory built homes are in
existence and where street and utility connections are in existence, it is
required that:
i. Ground anchors for tie downs are required in accordance with
the Mobile Home Manufacturers Association standards.
ii. The special flood hazard is disclosed to the factory built home
and/or lot purchaser or lessee in the purchase contract, deed, or
lease. Notification of both the 100-year flood elevation and the
regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided.
4. All pressurized tanks and other containers storing materials or bulk materials
hazardous to the public health, safety, and welfare shall be anchored to prevent
lateral movement, collapse, flotation, or buoyancy.
5. Further, requirements for recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zone AE or
Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Muscatine County and
Incorporated Areas, City of Muscatine, Panels 19139C0185C, 192C, 225C, dated
July 18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D, 175D, 187D, 188D, 189D, 193D, 281D, 282D,
301D, dated April 16, 2014, and Panels 19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E, dated
November 4, 2016:
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days.
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
c. Meet the permit, elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes".
d. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanent attached additions.
10-4-6 Height, Area, & Parking Requirements
The height, area, and parking requirements must conform to the district on which the Flood
Plain District is superimposed.
10-4-7 Flood Control Manual
The 2002 Flood Control Manual for the City of Muscatine, as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference. Said Flood Control Manual shall have the same force and effect as though fully set
forth herein. Copies of said Flood Control Manual are available in the office of the City Clerk.
22
10-4-8 Administration
Duties and responsibilities of the City Administrator or his/her designee, specifically relating to
this Chapter, shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following:
A. Review conditional use permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from federal, state and local governmental agencies including
approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for floodplain
construction.
B. Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in relation to North American
Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures or (ii) the elevation to which new or substantially
improved structures have been floodproofed.
C. Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural Resources
prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence
of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
D. Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report concerning the City
of Muscatine’s participation, utilizing the annual report form supplied by the Federal
Insurance Administrator.
E. Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or modifications to
the City of Muscatine corporate limit.
F. A conditional use permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any
floodplain development (any man-made change to improved and unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations), including the placement of
factory-built homes
10-4-9 Variance
The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from the
terms of this Ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
A. Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause,
(ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of the
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
23
B. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the 100-year flood would result. Consideration of the effects
of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an
equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
C. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for
buildings than what is ordinarily required by this Ordinance, the applicant shall
be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that: (i) the
issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and (ii) such
construction increases risks to life and property.
E. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the Department
of Natural Resources.
10-4-10 Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
A. Hearings
Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment of an Appeal, an application for a
Conditional Use or a request for a Variance, the Board shall hold a public
hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public
notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral
evidence. The board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such
information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical
assistance and/or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person
or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources.
B. Decisions
The Board shall arrive at a decision on an Appeal, Conditional Use or Variance
within a reasonable time. In passing upon an Appeal, the Board may, so long as
such action is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing, setting
forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision. In granting a
Conditional Use or Variance, the board shall consider such factors as contained
in this section and all other relevant sections of this ordinance and may prescribe
such conditions as contained in Section 10-4-10 (B) 2.
24
1. Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board of Adjustment Shall
be Based
In passing upon applications for Variances, the Board shall consider
all relevant factors specified in other sections of this Ordinance and:
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
b. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land
or downstream to the injury of others.
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination
and unsanitary conditions.
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner.
e. The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the City.
f. The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
g. The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.
h. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the
foreseeable future.
i. The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program
for the area.
j. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
k. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
l. The cost of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of
public utilities (sewer, gas, electrical and water systems),
facilities, streets and bridges.
m. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of
this Ordinance.
25
2. Conditions Attached to Variances - Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purpose of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include, but not
necessarily be limited to:
a. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
b. Limitation of periods of use and operation.
c. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
d. Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided
such are approved by the Department of Natural
Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to
achieving the purpose of this Ordinance.
e. Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with
the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with
the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall
require that the applicant submit a plan or document
certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory
flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for
the particular area.
6. Appeals to the Court - Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by
any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in
part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to
the court within thirty days after the filing of the decision in the office of the
Board.
26
10-4-11 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted
so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most
reasonable application.
Basement - Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground
level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see "lowest floor."
Development - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations.
Existing Factory-Built Home Park or Subdivision - A factory-built home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to
be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 25, 1981.
Expansion of Existing Factory-Built Home Park or Subdivision - The preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Factory-Built Home - Any structure, designed for residential use, which is wholly or in
substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for
installation or assembly and installation, on a building site. For the purpose of this
Ordinance factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular
homes and also include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site
for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Factory-Built Home Park - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more
factory-built home lots for rent or sale.
Flood - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff
of surface waters from any source.
Flood Elevation - The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the
occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of
flood waters related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood.
A. For locations in areas classified as “Zone AE” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
for Muscatine County and Incorporated Areas, City of Muscatine, Panels 19139C0185C,
192C, 225C, dated July 18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D, 175D, 187D, 188D, 189D, 193D,
281D, 282D, 301D, dated April 16, 2014, and Panels 19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E,
dated November 4, 2016: the flood elevation is the base flood elevation shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
27
B. For locations in areas classified as “Zone A” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for
Muscatine County and Incorporated Areas, City of Muscatine, Panels 19139C0185C,
192C, 225C, dated July 18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D, 175D, 187D, 188D, 189D, 193D,
281D, 282D, 301D, dated April 16, 2014, and Panels 19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E,
dated November 4, 2016:, and located south of Hershey Avenue one of the two
methods shall be used to calculate the base flood elevation:
1. Computed using data on file with the City Engineer, or;
2. The Iowa Department of Natural Resources may be contacted to compute
such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of
Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make such a
calculation.
C. For locations in areas classified as “Zone A” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for
Muscatine County and Incorporated Areas, City of Muscatine, Panels 19139C0185C,
192C, 225C, dated July 18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D, 175D, 187D, 188D, 189D, 193D,
281D, 282D, 301D, dated April 16, 2014, and Panels 19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E,
dated November 4, 2016:, and located north of Hershey Avenue, the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be
responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make such a calculation.
Flood Insurance Rate Map - The official map prepared as part of (but published separately
from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - A study initiated, funded, and published by the Federal Insurance
Administration for the purpose of evaluating in detail the existence and severity of flood
hazards; providing the city with the necessary information for adopting a flood plain
management program; and establishing actuarial flood insurance rates.
Flood Plain - Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood.
Flood Plain Management - An overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of flood plains, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and flood plain
management regulations.
Floodproofing - Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate
flood damage to such structures.
Floodway Fringe - Those portions of the flood plain, other than the floodway, which can be
filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow
velocities.
Historic Structure - Any structure that is:
28
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to
the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest Floor - The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement
except when all the following criteria are met:
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods
with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of Section 10-4-5(C)1(d), and
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low
damage potential uses such as building access, parking or storage, and
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service)
contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot above the 100-year flood
level, and
D. The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C, and D above, the lowest floor
is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
New Construction: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
August 25, 1981 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New Factory-Built Home Park or Subdivision - A factory-built home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to
be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
100-Year Flood - A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once
every 100 years.
29
Recreational Vehicle - A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use of a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway- The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Substantial Damage - A damage or any original sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Special Flood Hazard Area - The land subject to the "100-year flood". This land is identified as
Zone A or AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Muscatine County and Incorporated Areas,
City of Muscatine, Panels 19139C0185C, 192C, 225C, dated July 18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D,
175D, 187D, 188D, 189D, 193D, 281D, 282D, 301D, dated April 16, 2014, and Panels
19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E, dated November 4, 2016.
Start of Construction - Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the development
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
Structure - Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including,
but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, and
other similar uses.
Substantial Improvement - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
of a structure, which satisfies following criteria:
30
A. The cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed.
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by 25 percent or more.
All additions constructed after August 25, 1981 shall be added to any proposed addition
in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed 25
percent
The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions or
B. Any alterations of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
Variance - A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management
regulations.
Violation - The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
regulations contained in this chapter.
31
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 5 – FC Flood Channel (Floodway) District
SECTIONS:
10-5-1 Intent and Purpose
10-5-2 District Boundaries
10-5-3 Permissive Uses
10-5-4 Conditional Uses
10-5-5 Responsibility for Studies
10-5-1 Intent and Purpose
1. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as
amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure
safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
2. It is the purpose of the Flood Channel (Floodway) District to apply special
regulations to the use of land in those areas of the City which are subject to
predictable inundation and flow of flood waters such that the floodway
efficiency will not be affected, or its capacity restricted. Such land use controls
are necessary to qualify property owners for flood insurance under the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (as amended). The regulations, while permitting
reasonable economic and social use of such properties, will help protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare and reduce financial burdens imposed
on the community, governmental units, and its individuals caused by frequent
and periodic floods and the overflow of lands.
3. The standards required by this Chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes. This Chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated
Floodway District areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the City of Muscatine or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter
or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.
32
10-5-2 District Boundaries.
The boundaries of the Flood Channel (Floodway) District are here by established as the areas
shown as “Floodway Areas in Zone AE” as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for
Muscatine County and Incorporated Areas, City of Muscatine Panels 19139C0185C, 192C, 225C,
dated July 18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D, 175D, 187D, 188D, 189D, 193D, 281D, 282D, 301D,
dated April 16, 2014, and Panels 19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E, dated November 4, 2016,
which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Muscatine County. These maps
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood
profiles and all explanatory material contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also declared
to be a part of this ordinance.
All lands included in such Flood Channel (Floodway) District shall be subject to the terms
imposed herein.
10-5-3 General Provisions
A. It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provision of this Chapter shall prevail.
B. All activities in this district shall obtain all necessary permits as required by Federal or
State law (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334).
C. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any
tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
10-5-4 Permissive Uses
The following open space uses shall be permitted within the Flood Channel (Floodway) District
to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that they do not
require structures, placement of factory built buildings, fill, other obstructions, excavation,
alteration of a watercourse, or storage of materials or equipment unless as otherwise provided
by this Ordinance.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
B. Industrial and commercial uses such as docks, dock piers, boat landings, loading areas,
parking areas, and airport landing strips.
C. Open recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap
and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
D. Open space, nonstructural uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
33
E. For residential districts, area within the Flood Channel (Floodway), may be used for
computing lot area requirements.
F. Other water-oriented uses such as dams, power plants, underground pipelines, canals,
drainage ditches, and bridges, provided such uses shall be approved by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources and meet other applicable Federal, State, and local
regulations (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334).
10-5-5 Conditional Uses
Any use that includes structures, placement of factory-built buildings, fill, other obstructions,
excavation, alteration of a watercourse, or storage of materials or equipment requires a
conditional use permit.
No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposit,
obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses shall be permitted which acting
alone or in combination with existing or proposed uses affects unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood. For any such use, review shall be
conducted by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources to determine if the proposed use
would increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood.
10-5-6 Responsibility for Studies
Where topographic data, engineering studies, or other studies are needed by the appropriate
City agency and/or Iowa Department of Natural Resources to determine the effects of flooding
on a structure and/or the effects of the structure on the flow of water, the applicant shall
submit such data or studies. All such data shall be prepared by technically qualified persons. All
such data shall be maintained by the City of Muscatine.
10-5-7 Administration
Duties and responsibilities of the City Administrator or his/her designee, specifically relating to
this Chapter, shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following:
A. Review conditional use permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from federal, state and local governmental agencies including
approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for floodplain
construction.
B. Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural Resources
prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence
of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
34
10-5-8 Definitions
Words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning
they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application,
additionally definitions as contained in Section 10-4-11 shall also apply to this Chapter.
35
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 6 – R-1, R-2, & R-3 Residential Districts
Sections
10-6-1 Permissive Uses
10-6-2 Conditional Uses
10-6-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-6-1 Permissive Uses
A. Single-family dwelling.
B. Public park or playground.
C. Place of worship.
D. Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent
to a public elementary or public high school and having no rooms regularly used for
housing or sleeping purposes.
E. Golf course, except miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial
purposes.
F. Agricultural activity, except that all livestock operations or farms with livestock in
excess of ten head shall have a minimum lot area of twenty acres and shall not
locate any feed lot or accessory structures within 200 feet of any lot in any
Residential District.
G. Privately operated lake, swimming pool, tennis court, or similar recreational uses on
a site of not less than five acres, provided that any building in connection therewith
shall be located not less than 200 feet from any lot in any Residential District; but
not a miniature golf course or driving tee operated for commercial purposes.
H. Cemeteries existing at the time of the adoption and incorporation of this
amendment December 4, 1986 namely Greenwood Cemetery, Saint Mary's
Cemetery and Memorial Park Cemetery.
10-6-2 Conditional Uses
A. Group home sponsored by a religious, education, or eleemosynary institution,
provided that such home:
1. Has single kitchen facilities;
2. Is under 24 hour adult supervision
3. Is not a penal or mental institution; and
4. Has not more than 50% of the site area occupied by buildings.
36
B. Nursing, rest, or convalescent home, provided that it is:
1. Located at least 50 feet from any lot in any Residential District;
2. Situated on a site of not less than 20,000 square feet; and
3. Has not more than 50% of the site area occupied by buildings.
C. Hospital, provided that:
1. It is located at least 100 feet from any lot in any Residential District;
2. It is situated on a site of not less than five acres;
3. It has not more than 50% of the site area occupied by buildings; and
4. The building is set back from all required yard lines an additional foot for
each foot of building height.
D. Educational or philanthropic institution, provided that:
1. It is located at least 50 feet from any lot in any Residential District;
2. Is situated on a site of not less than 20,000 square feet; and
3. Not more than 50% of the site area is occupied by buildings.
E. Nursery, day care center, or play school, provided that any play lot used in
connection therewith be suitably fenced and screened in accordance with the
requirements of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
F. Conversion of single-family homes into two-family homes in those locations where
on July 19, 1973, more than 40% of the frontage on one side of the street between
two intersecting streets was used for two-family homes or two-family homes and
multiple-family dwellings.
G. Electrical distribution, substation, or pipeline pumping station or water tower.
H. Cable T.V. broadcast facility and tower.
I. Funeral home, provided that:
1. The facility is connected to a sanitary sewer;
2. Ample off-street parking is available as determined by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment;
3. All parking areas are screened from adjacent property with a minimum
four-foot high (above vehicle headlights) screening fence (75% opaque),
hedge- type landscaping, or the equivalent;
4. Outside lighting does not shine directly onto adjacent property; and
5. That the following not be permitted: crematory, emergency ambulance
service, exterior display of grave monuments or markers.
37
J. Any contiguous site expansion to existing cemeteries listed in 10-6-1(H) above shall
be subject to review and approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
K. Bed and Breakfast Homes within an existing residence constructed prior to 1930 and
located in an R-3 Zoning District. (Refer to DEFINITIONS in Chapter 32).
L. Clinic as a Conditional Use in the R-3 Single Family Residential District specifically
within the geographical area described as those lots adjacent to and fronting along
Young Avenue, real estate located on the southeast side of Parham Street between
Young Avenue and Cedar Street and that real estate north of Cedar Street between
Parham Street and the hospital located at 1518 Mulberry Avenue.
M. Barber or beauty shop within an owner-occupied home that:
1. It consists of one (1) single chair;
2. Has a minimum of two (2) off-street standard parking stalls for this chair;
and
3. Otherwise complies with the definition of a Home Occupation (10-32-1).
N. Iowa Certified Assisted Living Facility. This development provides for integrated
levels of services and housing for senior living arrangements. The intent is a campus
like setting on a minimum of three (3) acres, served by all utilities. The project may
consist of a mixture of single detached units, cluster units with shared common
areas and townhouse type congregate living features.
10-6-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height (R-1, R-2, and R-3): 35 feet, except for as provided for in
Title 10, Chapter 26.
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth (R-1, R-2, and R-3): 25 feet.
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth:
1. R-1 and R-2 Districts: 10 feet.
2. R-3 District: 6 feet.
D. Minimum Rear Yard Depth (R-1, R-2, and R-3): 25 feet
E. Minimum Frontage:
1. R-1 District: 100 feet
2. R-2 District: 80 feet
3. R-3 District: 60 feet
F. Minimum Lot Area and Minimum Lot Area Per Family:
38
1. R-1 District: 20,000 Square Feet
2. R-2 District: 10,000 Square Feet
3. R-3 District: 7,000 Square Feet
39
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 7 – R-4 Residential District
Sections
10-7-1 Permissive Uses
10-7-2 Conditional Uses
10-7-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-7-1 Permissive Uses
A. Two-family dwelling.
B. Single-family dwelling.
C. Rowhouses, townhouses, and three or four-family houses where the site being
developed is one-half acre or larger.
D. Public park or playground.
E. Place of worship.
F. Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent
to a public elementary or high school and having no rooms regularly used for
housing or sleeping purposes.
G. Golf course, except miniature course and driving tees operated for commercial
purposes.
H. Mobile home park subdivision. Mobile home shall mean a factory-assembled or
manufactured dwelling unit, with the necessary utility connections, which is
transported to a site and affixed to a permanent frost-free foundation. Mobile
homes shall be located as a Conditional Use in the R-4 District and comply with Title
10, Chapter 23 of City Code, if the site on which they are located is to be leased by
the occupant of the mobile home. If the purpose of the development of a mobile
home park is to sell individual lots in fee to the occupants of mobile homes, then the
following shall apply:
1. Proposed, mobile home parks shall be a minimum size of ten acres prior to
the subdivision of the tract into individual lots.
2. Mobile home parks shall be located in the R-4 Residential District. The
rezoning shall be based on a development plan for the entire mobile home
park.
3. The subdivision of real estate for mobile home lots shall comply with all
applicable standards of Title 11 of the City Code, entitled Subdivision
40
Regulations. Further, said subdivisions shall comply with the provisions of the
design criteria set forth in this Chapter.
4. Upon development of a mobile home park, the axle, tongue, and wheels shall
be removed, the unit shall be affixed to a permanent frost-free foundation
and the license shall be turned over to the County Assessor and the unit shall
then be taxed as real property along with the land on which it is situated.
5. All mobile home park subdivisions shall be developed in accordance with the
design and performance standards set forth in this Chapter.
6. Design and performance standards:
a. The minimum area to be considered for a mobile home park
subdivision shall be ten acres.
b. Individual lots shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet;
c. Each lot shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on an improved
public street.
d. The following minimum setback criteria shall apply to the perimeter
property lines of each individual lot:
i. Front yard: 15 feet
ii. Side yard: 6 feet
iii. Rear yard: 10 feet
e. A minimum of two improved off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each mobile home.
f. All utilities shall be underground.
g. The only accessory storage structure permitted shall be a maximum
of nine feet by ten feet affixed to a four-inch-thick concrete slab.
h. Garages for the storage of motor vehicles are permitted.
i. The permanent frost-free foundation shall not extend more than 36
inches above grade.
j. Landscaping will be required, as appropriate, by the Planning and
Zoning Commission around the perimeter of the mobile home park
subdivision. This will be determined on a case-by-case review.
k. All standards for roads, sidewalks, utilities, easements, and other
applicable criteria as outlined in Title 11 of the City Code, entitled
Subdivision Regulations, shall apply to the subdivision of real estate
for mobile homes.
41
l. Private recreation areas are encouraged within the mobile home park
subdivision. Deed covenants established by the subdivider may
accomplish this, the ongoing maintenance would be the responsibility
of the subdivider or a homeowner's association.
m. All fences shall comply with Title 10, Chapter 22.
n. In view of the reduced setback requirement, a safe line of sight is
needed as vehicles back into the street.
o. All restrictive covenants shall be submitted to the Commission for
review, but enforcement of these provisions shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider, his assigns or homeowners:
association and shall not be the responsibility of the City of
Muscatine.
p. Other related items may be required by the Commission and City
Council as determined on a case-by-case review.
q. Upon approval of the final plat, any future changes to the plat and lot
arrangement shall be reviewed and approved by the Commission.
10-7-2 Conditional Uses
A. Mobile homes in accordance with the provisions of Title 10, Chapter 23.
B. Group home sponsored by a religious, education, or eleemosynary institution,
provided that such home:
1. Has single kitchen facilities;
2. Is under 24 hour adult supervision; and
3. Is not a penal or mental institution.
C. Nursing, rest, or convalescent home, provided that it is:
1. Located at least 50 feet from any lot in any Residential District; and
2. Situated on a site of not less than 20,000 square feet.
D. Nursery, day care center, or play school, provided that any play lot used in
connection therewith be suitably fenced and screened in accordance with the
requirements of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
E. Electrical distribution station, pipeline pumping station, or water tower.
F. Funeral home, provided that:
1. The facility is connected to a sanitary sewer;
2. Ample off-street parking is available as determined by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment;
42
3. All parking areas are screened from adjacent property with a minimum fourfoot
high (above vehicle headlights) screening fence (75% opaque), hedgetype
landscaping, or the equivalent;
4. Outside lighting does not shine directly onto adjacent property; and
5. That the following not be permitted: crematory, emergency ambulance
service, exterior display of grave monuments or markers.
G. Barber or beauty shop within an owner-occupied home that:
1. Does not exceed a single chair
2. Provides minimum two off-street standard parking stalls per chair;
3. Otherwise complies with the definition of a Home Occupation (10-32-1);
4. Where the predominate use of the structure prior to the ancillary use of a
barber or beauty shop is non-residential, an outside employee with
standard off-street parking (one per employee) may be considered.
10-7-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height: 35 feet, except for as provided for in Title 10, Chapter 26
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: 25 feet
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: 6 feet
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: 25 feet
E. Minimum Frontage: 50 feet
F. Minimum Lot Area: 5,000 square feet
G. Minimum Lot Area per Family:
1. Single Family: 5,000 square feet
2. Two Family: 2,500 square feet
3. Multiple: Overall site must be at least ½ acre in size.
43
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 8 – R-5 Residential District
Sections
10-8-1 Permissive Uses
10-8-2 Conditional Uses
10-8-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-8-1 Permissive Uses
A. Multiple-family dwellings or townhouses on tracts of not less than three acres.
B. Rooming house or boarding house.
C. Single and two-family dwelling.
D. Group home sponsored by a religious, education, or eleemosynary institution,
provided that such home:
1. Has single kitchen facilities;
2. Is under 24 hour adult supervision; and
3. Is not a penal or mental institution.
E. Nursing, rest, or convalescent home, provided that it is:
1. Located at least 50 feet from any lot in any Residential District;
2. Situated on a site of not less than 20,000 square feet; and
3. Has not more than 50% of the site area occupied by buildings.
F. Private club, fraternity, sorority, or lodge, excepting when the chief activity of which
is a service customarily carried on as a business.
G. Public park or playground.
H. Place of worship.
I. Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent
to a public elementary or public high school and having no rooms regularly used for
housing or sleeping purposes.
J. Golf course, except miniature course and driving tees operated for commercial
purpose.
K. Clinics, but not animal clinics.
44
10-8-2 Conditional Uses
A. Nursery, day care center, or play school, provided that any play lot used in
connection therewith be suitably fenced and screened in accordance with the
requirements of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Electrical distribution station, pipeline pumping station, or water tower.
C. Funeral home, provided that:
1. The facility is connected to a sanitary sewer.
2. Ample off-street parking is available as determined by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
3. All parking areas are screened from adjacent property with a minimum
four-foot high (above vehicle headlights) screening fence (75% opaque),
hedge- type landscaping, or the equivalent.
4. Outside lighting does not shine directly onto adjacent property.
5. That the following not be permitted: crematory, emergency ambulance
service, exterior display of grave monuments or markers.
D. Barber or beauty shop within an owner-occupied home that:
1. Does not exceed two chairs.
2. Provides minimum two off-street standard parking stalls per chair.
3. Otherwise complies with the definition of a Home Occupation (10-32-1).
4. Where the predominate use of the structure prior to the ancillary use of a
barber or beauty shop is non-residential, an outside employee with
standard off-street parking (one per employee) may be considered.
10-8-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height: 35 feet, except for as provided for in Title 10, Chapter 26
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: 25 feet
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: 6 feet
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: 25 feet
E. Minimum Frontage: 50 feet
F. Minimum Lot Area: 5,000 square feet
G. Minimum Lot Area per Family:
1. Single Family: 5,000 square feet
2. Two Family: 2,500 square feet
3. Multiple: 1,000 square feet
45
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 9 – R-6 Residential District
Sections
10-9-1 Permissive Uses
10-9-2 Conditional Uses
10-9-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-9-1 Permissive Uses
A. Single-family or two-family dwelling.
B. Rowhouses, townhouses, or multiple-family dwellings on tract no less than three (3)
acres nor more than five (5) acres.
C. Public park or playground.
D. Place of worship.
E. Public school, elementary or high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent
to a public elementary or high school and having no rooms regularly used for
housing or sleeping purposes.
F. Golf course, except miniature course and driving tees operated for commercial
purposes.
G. Public park or playground.
H. Clinic, except animal clinic.
I. Nursing, rest, or convalescent home, provided that it:
1. Is located at least fifty feet (50') from any lot in any Residential District;
2. Is situated on a site of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
and
3. Has not more than fifty percent (50%) of the site area occupied by buildings
10-9-2 Conditional Uses
A. Nursery, day care center, or play school, provided that any play lot used in
connection therewith be suitably fenced and screened in accordance with the
requirements of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Electrical distribution station, pipeline pumping station, or water tower.
46
C. Funeral home, provided that:
1. The facility is connected to a sanitary sewer;
2. Ample off-street parking is available as determined by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment;
3. All parking areas are screened from adjacent property with a minimum
four-foot high (above vehicle headlights) screening fence (75% opaque),
hedge- type landscaping, or the equivalent;
4. Outside lighting does not shine directly onto adjacent property; and
5. The following not be permitted: crematory, emergency ambulance service,
exterior display of grave monuments or markers.
D. YMCA, a YWCA, or a Family "Y" which is affiliated with the National "Y" Organization,
provided that any substantial change in activities to be conducted on the site after
original approval shall be subject to review by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in the
same manner as the original Conditional Use.
E. Barber or beauty shop within an owner-occupied home that:
1. Does not exceed two chairs;
2. Provides minimum two off-street standard parking stalls per chair;
3. Otherwise complies with the definition of a Home Occupation (10-31-1).
4. Where the predominate use of the structure prior to the ancillary use of a
barber or beauty shop is non-residential, an outside employee with
standard off-street parking (one per employee) may be considered.
10-9-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height: 35 feet, except for as provided for in Title 10, Chapter 26
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: 25 feet
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: 6 feet
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: 25 feet
E. Minimum Frontage: 50 feet
F. Minimum Lot Area: 7,000 square feet
G. Minimum Lot Area per Family:
1. Single Family: 7,000 square feet
2. Two Family: 3,000 square feet
3. Multiple: 3,000 square feet.
47
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 10 – R-L Large Scale Residential Development District
Sections
10-10-1 Purpose
10-10-2 Location
10-10-3 Intensity of Land Use
10-10-4 Permissive Uses
10-10-5 Height & Setback Requirements
10-10-6 Open Space
10-10-7 Conditions
10-10-8 Filing Procedures
10-10-9 Approval of Outline Development Plan
10-10-10 Preliminary Development Plan
10-10-11 Final Development Plan
10-10-12 Building Permits
10-10-13 Failure to Begin Planned Development
10-10-14 Changes in Final Development Plan
10-10-15 Enforcement
10-10-1 Purpose
The R-L District is intended to provide the developer of land in the City of Muscatine the
opportunity to creatively, economically, and aesthetically develop the property based upon a
comprehensive plan for its development. It is the purpose of this Chapter to encourage
flexibility in the design and development of land in order to promote its most appropriate use;
to facilitate the adequate and economic provision of streets and utilities; and to preserve the
natural and scenic qualities of open areas.
10-10-2 Location
A. The R-L District may be applied anywhere in the City, provided that the objectives
and provisions of this Chapter are satisfied and that the planned development is
consistent with the spirit and intent of the City's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Any planned development in which apartments, condominiums, or townhouses are
proposed, or in which a mixture of apartment, condominium, townhouse, single
and/or two-family housing types are proposed, and for which development of at
least five acres is proposed, shall conform to the requirements set forth herein.
48
10-10-3 Intensity of Land Use
A. The following chart shall be used to determine the residential density range to be
permitted within the R-L District:
Type of Development Maximum Density Per Acre
Garden apartments (2-3 stories) 15 units or 38 bedrooms
Mid-rise apartments (4-6 stories) 28 units or 57 bedrooms
High-rise apartments (above 6 stories) 60 units or 130 bedrooms
Townhouse 10 units or 25 bedrooms
B. Where a proposed R-L development is a combination of different residential types,
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall evaluate the planned development's
density range based upon the relative proportion of residential types proposed. If
single or two-family houses are proposed, each house must have a minimum lot
area of 7,000 square feet; this may consist of direct ownership and/or common
interest in real estate within the development.
10-10-4 Permissive Uses
A. Single-family, two-family, townhouse and multiple-family residential.
B. Park or playground.
C. Customary accessory or associated uses, such as private garages, storage spaces,
recreational, and community facilities.
D. Additional uses shall be allowed only to the extent that the Planning and Zoning
Commission find them to be:
1. Designed to serve primarily the residents of the R-L District.
2. Compatibly and harmoniously incorporated into the unitary design of the
development.
3. Compatibly and harmoniously related to adjacent neighborhood uses. Such
additional uses may include:
a. Place of worship.
b. Public or private school.
c. Institution.
d. Public or semi-public facility.
e. Golf course, tennis courts, swimming pool, or other sports facilities.
f. Nursery, rest, or convalescent home.
g. Day care center.
49
10-10-5 Height & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height: None.
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: None.
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: None.
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: None.
10-10-6 Open Space
A minimum of 25% of the R-L site area shall be developed as open space, including walkways,
plazas, landscaped areas, pools, fountains, and playgrounds. Parking areas and vehicle access
facilities shall not be considered in calculating open spaces.
10-10-7 Conditions
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may
impose conditions regarding the layout, circulation, performance, preservation,
care, and maintenance of the proposed development and may require that
appropriate deed restrictions be filed.
B. Upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council
may require the developer to file a bond or security to secure the City for the actual
construction and installation to specifications determined by or in accordance with
the regulation of the City Council.
1. Street Improvements
Streets shall be filled or excavated to the grade approved by the City and set
by the City Engineer. All streets shall be graded the full platted width and
pavement shall be constructed of seven inches Portland cement concrete
pavement, unless otherwise concurred with by the City Engineer and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
2. Sewers
a. The developers shall make adequate provision for disposal of sanitary
sewage from the proposed development. The developers shall, at their
expense, construct a sanitary sewer system, including all necessary
pumping stations, manholes, and other necessary appurtenances to
provide for the discharge of sanitary sewage from all lots or parcels of
land within the proposed development with an existing City sanitary
sewer; such sewage system to be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the City. Design
and construction of the sewage system and sewer grades must be
approved by, and shall be under the supervision and inspection of the
50
City Engineer. The developers may be required to pay a reasonable
charge for such engineering, inspection service and hookup fees.
b. Storm Sewers. Storm drainage structures shall be constructed where
needed as determined by the City Engineer. Minimum size of all storm
sewer shall be twelve-inch Class III reinforced concrete pipe.
c. When it is impracticable to connect such sewage system with an
existing City sewer and it is necessary to dispose of such sanitary
sewage by a septic system, such system and the installation thereof
shall meet the standards and specifications set by the Department of
Public Health, State of Iowa.
3. Water and Gas Service. The developer shall install, or cause to be installed,
all necessary water mains, fire hydrants, and gas mains as approved by local
utilities and the City.
4. Electric Service. The developer shall install, or cause to be installed, all
necessary electric transmission lines.
5. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed, or cause to be installed, by the
developer according to specifications prescribed by the City and located and
set at the grade established by the Engineer.
10-10-8 Filing Procedures
The procedure for obtaining a change of zoning district to R-L shall be as follows:
A. A petition for a zoning change to R-L shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department. Such petition shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance and rules of procedure of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. The applicant shall accompany the request for a zoning change with four (4) copies
of an outline development plan. The outline development plan shall include both
maps and written statement, and must show enough of the area surrounding the
proposed planned development to demonstrate the relationship of the
development to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed.
C. The outline development plan must contain the following information:
1. Maps and Diagrams
Maps and diagrams may be in general schematic form but must include:
a. The title by which the development is to be known and recorded.
b. The existing topographic character of the site and adjacent land.
c. Existing and proposed land uses and the approximate locations of
buildings and other structures and their exterior facades.
51
d. The character and approximate density of dwellings.
e. The approximate locations, width, and dimensions of all existing and
proposed streets, alleys, walkways, and thoroughfares.
f. The locations and approximate dimensions of all areas to be reserved
for future use as school sites, parks, playgrounds, or similar features.
g. The locations, approximate dimensions, and character of all areas,
sites, grounds, streets, or similar features which are to be dedicated
for public use.
h. Landscaping and tree planting plan.
i. The location and approximate dimensions of parking lots and areas.
j. The locations and size of existing storm and/or sanitary sewers, water
mains, or field drains within or readily accessible to the tract.
k. The location and character of all existing easements.
l. The bearing and distance from monumented block or lot corner within
the tract to some corner of a congressional district division within the
City.
m. A plat giving the names, as shown on the last deed of record, of all
property owners within 200feet of the perimeter of the tract.
n. A legal description of the tract.
o. The name and seal of the registered engineer or surveyor who
prepared the documents.
2. Written Statement
The written statement must contain the following information:
a. A statement of the character of the planned development, to include:
i. Its relationship to the Comprehensive Plan of the City of
Muscatine.
ii. Its relationship to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed.
iii. Its relationship to topographic features of the site and adjacent
land.
iv. Limiting conditions such as soils, excessive grade or slope,
unstable ground, high water table, etc.
b. A general indication of the expected schedule of development.
c. A statement of the present ownership of all land included within the
planned development.
52
d. A list of the current addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of
the perimeter of the tract.
10-10-9 Approval of Outline Development Plan
A. Within 90 days after the filing of the outline development plan, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall forward the outline development plan to the City Council
with a written report recommending that the plan be approved, approved with
modifications, or disapproved and giving the reasons for these recommendations.
1. Recommendations from City staff and general concurrence of utility
companies are required in conjunction with the Planning and Zoning
Commission review.
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public meeting prior to
making a recommendation on the proposal. The public meeting shall be held
in accordance with State and Municipal codes and Planning and Zoning
Commission rules of procedure.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the following factors in making
its recommendation to the City Council:
1. That the proposal substantially conforms to the Comprehensive Plan for the
City.
2. That the existing character of the neighborhood will not be adversely
affected, and that adequate safeguards are provided to minimize possible
detrimental effects on adjacent properties and the neighborhood.
3. That there is ample provision for water supply, sanitary sewage disposal,
storm and surface water drainage, and other utilities.
4. That soil conditions, natural characteristics, topography, and geography do
not present a substantial hazard to development.
5. That there is adequate availability to police and fire protection, parks and
recreational facilities, schools, and other community facilities and public
services.
6. That the location, height, and bulk of buildings and structures on the site are
in proportion to each other and relate well to other structures and visual
perspective in the vicinity.
7. That patterns of pedestrian circulation and the effective use and design of
open spaces, landscaping, exterior facade, and amenities are considered.
8. That vehicular access is adequate to and within the site, that parking and
loading spaces are adequate and well located, and that there are no conflicts
between vehicular traffic and other uses and activities proposed.
53
9. That the proposed installation of driveways, landscaping, and other site
details are generally in harmony with the proposed structures, adjacent
properties, and with the rights and interest of the general public.
C. After receiving the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing as provided by the Code of Iowa. Subsequent to
holding said public hearing, the City Council shall approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove the outline development plan.
1. If the outline development plan is approved, the City Council shall amend the
Zoning Map to show the R-L District.
2. If the outline development plan is approved with modifications, the City
Council shall not amend the Zoning Map until the applicant has filed with the
City Council written consent to the plan as modified.
3. No building permits may be issued on land within the R-L District until the
final development plan has been approved under the procedures provided in
the following sections.
10-10-10 Preliminary Development Plan
A. Within six months after an outline development plan has been approved, an
applicant shall file a preliminary development plan with the Community
Development Department. Upon the filing of a preliminary development plan, the
Community Development Director shall immediately refer one copy of such plan to
the City Engineer and one copy to the Building and Zoning Administrator. This
preliminary plan shall then be presented at the next regular Planning and Zoning
Commission meeting.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize the submission of preliminary
development plans in stages, if so requested by the applicant.
C. If a preliminary development plan covering at least 20% of the area of the outline
development plan has not been submitted within six months following the approval
of the outline development plan, the City Council may withdraw its approval of the
outline development plan. In its discretion and for good cause, the City Council may
extend for three months the period for filing the preliminary development plan.
D. The preliminary development plan shall include all of the following information:
1. The location, width, and dimensions of all existing and proposed
thoroughfares, streets, alleys, sidewalks, and walkways.
2. All plot lines and plot designs (if applicable).
54
3. Areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks, parkways,
playgrounds, school sites, public buildings, and similar public or semi-public
uses.
4. The location and dimensions of each building site, common open area,
improvement, and indication of open spaces around buildings and structures.
5. Elevation and perspective drawings of proposed structures and
improvements, except single-family residences and single-family residence
accessory buildings. These drawings need not be of final architectural
decisions and need not be in detail.
6. A development schedule indicating approximate dates for start and
completion of the project, if such schedule varies considerably from the
schedule submitted with the outline development plan.
7. All agreements, provisions, or covenants which will govern the use,
maintenance, protection, performance, and/or design of the development
and any of its common open areas.
8. Off-street parking plan.
9. A circulation diagram indicating proposed movement of vehicles and
pedestrians within the development and to and from existing features and
location and type of traffic regulation devices needed to facilitate or ensure
the safety of this circulation pattern.
10. A landscaping and tree planting plan.
11. The location and size of all existing storm or sanitary sewers, water mains, or
field drains within or readily accessible to the development.
12. The location and character of all existing easements and those proposed to
be provided by the owner.
13. The location of all proposed sewers.
14. The location of all proposed water and gas mains.
15. Grading plan, to include the location of waterways on the site or on adjacent
land, and drainage plan with sufficient control grades to indicate the intent
of the developer.
16. The scale used on the drawings.
17. Any other plans, diagrams, or information, as requested by the Planning and
Zoning Commission or the City Council.
E. The preliminary development shall be prepared by and have the seal of an
architect or engineer duly registered to practice in the State of Iowa.
55
F. Approval of Preliminary Development Plan. Recognizing that some developments
may proceed in stages and only in conjunction with outside phased financing
approval, utility installation and related indirect action, the developer and City may
jointly decide on the following approval process:
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the preliminary
development plan to determine if it is in substantial compliance with the
outline development plan and recognized principles of civic design, land use,
and landscape architecture. A recommendation of the City staff is required
prior to Planning and Zoning Commission review. The Commission may then
recommend to the City Council, within 45 days after the filing of the
preliminary development plan, that the plan be approved, approved with
modifications, or disapproved.
2. After receiving the preliminary development plan, the Commission may
mutually agree with the developer to concurrently review the preliminary
and final development plan as a single process. If this option is selected, then
the Commission shall forward a recommendation to City Council on the final
development plan.
3. If the City Council disapproves a preliminary or final development plan, the
applicant shall re-file within 45 days of disapproval, or the City Council may
withdraw its approval of the outline development plan.
10-10-11 Final Development Plan
A. Within six months following the approval of the preliminary development plan, the
applicant shall file copies of a final development plan. The Community
Development Director shall refer one copy of the plan and accompanying papers to
the Building and Zoning Administrator and one copy to the City Engineer for review
prior to the next Commission meeting.
B. In its discretion and for good cause, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
extend for six months the period for the filing of the final development plan, upon
request of the applicant.
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the final development plan and
shall recommend to the City Council within 45 days after the filing of the final
development plan, that the plan be approved if that plan is in substantial
compliance with the approved preliminary development plan. If the preliminary
development plan had been approved by the City Council with modifications, the
final development plan shall include those modifications.
D. If the City Council disapproves a final development plan, the applicant shall file with
the Community Development Department a revised final development plan within
56
45 days of the date of disapproval, or the City Council may withdraw its approval of
the outline development plan.
E. The final development plan shall include all those items required by the preliminary
development plan and, in addition, the following information:
1. The proposed names of all streets, public ways, and places dedicated for
public use; and the location, width, dimensions, and specifications of all
streets, alleys, sidewalks, and walkways.
2. The type and location of all permanent monuments at block and lot corners
and elsewhere within the development.
3. All radii, arcs, chords, points of tangency, and central angles for curved
streets and the radii of all rounded curves.
4. The location, size, grade, and specifications of all proposed sewers, pumping
stations, manholes, and other necessary appurtenances.
5. The location, size, grade, and specifications of all proposed water and gas
mains; and the location, size, and specifications of all fire hydrants.
6. The location and character of all proposed electric transmission lines.
7. The certification of the engineer or architect preparing the documents with
his or her license number and seal and the date of preparation.
8. Certificate of approval for construction of water, electric, and gas service
from the respective utility companies accompanied by a plat showing any
easements required.
9. Three sets of improvement plans and profile. All plans and drawings are to
be submitted on twenty-four inch 24" x 36"plan and profile paper. Note:
Any plans or profiles for recording in the Office of the County Recorder shall
be 11" x 17".
10. Three copies of all easement agreements for utility or other purposes.
11. Three copies of a proposed resolution to be adopted by the City Council
accepting lands to be dedicated for public use.
12. Three copies of any agreement to be entered into between the applicant
and the City of Muscatine providing for the grading of streets and
installation of sewer system and other utilities or other improvements as
may be required.
13. Three (3) copies of any deed restrictions or covenants required by the City
Council under Section 10-10-7(A) of this Ordinance, or any other conditions
imposed by the City Council under Section 10-10-7 of this Ordinance.
57
14. Three copies of a proposed resolution to be adopted by the City Council
approving and accepting the final development plan.
10-10-11 Building Permits
Upon approval of the final development plan, the Building Official shall issue building permits in
accordance with all applicable State and local codes, regulations, and ordinances for buildings
and structures in the area covered by the approved final development plan.
10-10-12 Failure to Begin Planned Development
A. If no construction has begun or no use established in the planned development within
one year from the approval of the final development plan, the final development plan
shall lapse and be of no further effect. In its discretion and for good cause, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may extend for six additional months the period for the
beginning of the construction or the establishment of a use.
B. If a final development plan lapses under the provisions of this Section, the Community
Development Director shall remove the planned development from the Zoning Map and
shall file a notice of revocation of the recorded final development plan. The zoning
regulations applicable before the final development was approved shall then be revised
and in effect.
10-10-13 Changes in Final Development Plan
No changes shall be made in the approved final development plan during the construction of
the planned development, except under authorization by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
No amendments shall be made in the approved final development plan, unless they are shown
to be required by change in conditions that have occurred since the final development plan was
approved or by changes in the development policy of the community.
10-10-14 Enforcement
A. At least once every six months following the approval of the final development plan, the
Community Development Director shall review all of the building permits issued for the
planned development and examine the construction which has taken place on the site.
The construction and provision of all of the common open spaces and public and
recreational facilities which are shown on the final development plan must proceed at
the same rate as the construction of dwelling units.
B. If the Community Development Director finds that the final development plan has not
been followed, he or she shall forward this information to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, which may recommend to the City Council revocation of approval of the
final development plan.
58
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 11 – C-1 Neighborhood & General Commercial District
Sections
10-11-1 Permissive Uses
10-11-2 Conditional Uses
10-11-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-11-4 Site Plan Review
10-11-1 Permissive Uses
A. Any retail business establishment such as Large Scale Retail Development; appliance
store; auto accessory store; bakery with baking limited to goods for retail sale on the
premises; book or stationery store; restaurant, cafeteria, bar, or tavern, but not
drive-in establishments; camera or photographic supply shop; candy or ice cream
store; delicatessen; drug store; fabric shop; floor covering store; florist shop;
furniture store, including incidental upholstering; gift shop; grocery store; clothing
store; tire sales and service; hardware or paint store; variety store; and other uses of
a similar character, except there shall be no slaughtering of animals or poultry nor
commercial fish cleaning and processing on the premises.
B. Personal service uses such as a bank or other financial enterprise; barber or beauty
shop; business or professional office; funeral home; theater, but not drive-in
theater; photographic or art studio; laundry or dry cleaning receiving station; selfservice
laundry or cleaning establishment; messenger, taxicab, newspaper, or
telegraphic branch station; medical or dental clinic, but not animal clinic;
dressmaking; tailoring; shoe repair; repair of household appliances and bicycles;
catering; and other uses of a similar character.
C. General service and repair establishments, such as plumbing and heating; printing
and painting; and upholstering.
D. Residence when located on the second story of a building or above.
E. Place of worship and religious, education, instructional, and institutional service.
F. Office or office building.
G. Indoor recreation facility.
H. Public park or playground.
I. Bus terminal.
J. Private club, fraternity, sorority, or lodge.
59
10-11-2 Conditional Uses
A. Automobile service station or automobile repair shop.
B. Drive-in establishments, including drive-in restaurants and drive-in theaters.
C. Used car sales.
D. Farm store or feed store, including accessory storage of liquid or solid fertilizer.
E. Electrical distribution substation, pipeline pumping station, or water tower.
F. Hotel or motel.
G. Mobile home, boat, or farm implement sales.
H. Veterinarian clinic, animal hospital, or kennel.
I. Any other use that is determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment to be of the
same general character as the permissive uses, in accordance with Section 10-31-1
of this City Code.
10-11-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height: 45 feet, except for as provided for in Title 10, Chapter 26
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: 20 feet
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: 6 feet
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: 20 feet
E. Minimum Frontage: None
F. Minimum Lot Area: None
G. Minimum Lot Area per Family:
1. Single Family: N/A
2. Two Family: N/A
3. Multiple: 1,000 Square Feet
10-11-4 Site Plan Review
Refer to Section 10-2-7(I)
60
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 12 – C-2 Central Commercial District
Sections
10-12-1 Permissive Uses
10-12-2 Conditional Uses
10-12-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-12-4 Site Plan Review
10-12-1 Permissive Uses
A. Any permissive use in the C-1 District.
B. Printing or newspaper publishing plant.
C. Hotel or motel.
D. Laundry.
E. Auto service station or automobile repair shop.
F. Wholesale merchandising or storage warehouse.
G. Public parking lot, customer, and other accessory parking area.
H. Private club, fraternity, sorority, or lodge.
10-12-2 Conditional Uses
A. Electrical distribution substation and pipeline pumping station.
B. Manufacture or assembly of wood or paper products.
C. Any other use that is determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment to be of the
same general character as the foregoing permissive uses, in accordance with Section
10-31-1 of the City Code.
10-12-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. There shall be a maximum floor area ratio of 4:1 with buildings not to exceed eight
(8) stories, except that where a building is set back from one (1) or more lot lines, the
floor area of such building or buildings may be increased by two (2) square feet of
additional floor area for each square foot of open area provided. Maximum floor
areas may be further increased by one (1) square foot of open space that is
landscaped and planted and not paved.
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: None
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: None
61
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: None
E. Minimum Frontage: None
F. Minimum Lot Area: None
G. Minimum Lot Area per Family:
1. Single Family: None
2. Two Family: None
3. Multiple: None
10-12-4 Site Plan Review
Refer to Section 10-2-7(I)
62
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 13 – C-3 Planned Commercial District
Sections
10-13-1 Permitted Uses
10-13-2 Requirements of Plan
10-13-1 Permitted Uses
A. A building or premises on tracts of land may be used only for:
1. Retail sale of merchandise;
2. Services, banks, and financial institutions
3. Restaurants;
4. General and professional offices;
5. Service stations;
6. Recreation, except outdoor theaters;
7. Parking areas; and
8. Other similar facilities.
B. Before land is used or a building erected or used for any of the above purposes, a
preliminary plan and a final plan shall be approved by the City Council, upon
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, for all contiguous
property within this District in any one location.
C. The City Council shall have 30 days to consider and approve or reject a preliminary
plan, with or without modifications, although this period may be extended by
agreement of the parties concerned.
D. Final plans will be approved when in accordance with approved preliminary plans.
E. From time to time, the proponents may make changes in the approved final plan, so
long as such changes have been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
or upon denial of approval by said Commission, with the approval of the Council.
F. What constitutes a "minor" change will be determined in the sole discretion of the
Commission.
G. No building or occupancy permits shall be issued for any building or use that is not in
accordance with an approved final plan.
63
10-13-2 Requirements of Plan
A. The preliminary plan shall:
1. Be drawn to scale.
.
2. Show boundaries of property to be developed.
3. Show the proposed size, location, use, and arrangement of stalls and the
number of cars, entrance and exit driveways, and their relationship to
existing and proposed streets.
4. Indicate location, type, use, and size of structures on adjacent properties
within 200 feet of the proposed development.
5. Provide for the dedication of any rights-of-way for the widening, extension,
or connection of major streets as shown on the adopted Comprehensive Plan
and/or Capital Improvement Plan.
6. Indicate the stages, if any, which will be followed in construction.
B. The final plan shall be the standard plan required to obtain a building permit, except
that it shall show the use or types of uses to be accommodated in each building or
portion thereof.
64
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 14 – M-1 Light Industrial District
Sections
10-14-1 Permissive Uses
10-14-2 Conditional Uses
10-14-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-14-4 Note Applicable Criteria for Permissive and Conditional Uses
10-14-5 Site Plan Review
10-14-1 Permissive Uses (See Section 10-14-4)
A. Any use permitted in the C-2 District, as long as the users are not offensive due to
emission of noise, odor, dust, gas, smoke, or vibration, except that no dwelling other
than that for a resident watchman or caretaker employed on the premises shall be
permitted, with the exception of a single-family dwelling located on a lot two acres
or more in size.
B. The manufacturing, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from the
following prepared material: canvas, cellophane, cloth, fiber, glass, leather, paper,
plastic, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, rubber, textiles, wood, and yarn.
C. The manufacturing or assembly of bolts, nuts, screws, and rivets; boats; ornamental
iron products; firearms; electrical appliances; electronic instruments and devices;
tools, dies, machinery, and hardware products; medical and dental equipment;
drafting and optical instruments; musical instruments; watches and clocks; and toys
and games.
D. The manufacturing or storage of food products, including beverage bottling, bakery
products, candy manufacturing, fruit and vegetable processing and canning; but not
packing and processing of meat and poultry products, distilling of beverages, or
slaughtering of animals.
E. The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such
products as cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and toiletries.
F. Builders or contractors plant or storage yard; building materials sales and storage
yard, including concrete mixing; and lumber yard, including millwork.
G. Open yard for storage and sale of feed, fertilizer, or fuel.
H. Automobile, truck, trailer, and garden and farm implement establishments for sales,
display, and hire, including sales lots.
I. Truck or motor freight terminals, provided that service yards or docks are located at
least 200 feet from any lot in any Residential District.
65
J. Drive-in restaurant.
K. Animal hospital, veterinary clinic, or kennel, provided that buildings or enclosures
are at least 100 feet from any lot in any Residential District.
L. Public or private open-air recreational uses, provided that such uses are not within2
00 feet of any Residential District.
M. Greenhouse or nursery.
N. Agricultural activity, except that all livestock operations or farms in excess of ten
head shall have a minimum of twenty acres.
10-14-2 Conditional Uses (See Section 10-14-4)
A. Electrical distribution substation, pipeline pumping station, or water tower.
B. Any other use that is determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment to be of the
same general character as the foregoing permissive uses.
C. Solid Waste Transfer Station.
10-14-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height: 75 feet, except for as provided for in Title 10, Chapter 26
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: 30 feet
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: None
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: None
E. Minimum Frontage: None
F. Minimum Lot Area: None
10-14-4 Note Applicable Criteria for Permissive and Conditional Uses
In the event of new construction or substantial improvements, that is, the repair,
reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value, the Permissive and Conditional Uses of this district shall comply with
the following applicable criteria:
A. Noxious fumes including dust, that is, fumes and dust which are in sufficient quantity
to be harmful to health, shall not be emitted beyond the property line.
B. Noise, including vibration, shall not cause the ambient noise level as measured at the
property line to exceed 75 decibels (dbA).
C. In such cases where new construction or substantial improvements of a
nonresidential nature are proposed adjacent to existing residential units, no direct
outside lighting shall shine onto adjacent property.
66
D. In such cases where new construction or substantial improvements of a
nonresidential nature are proposed adjacent to existing residential units, outside
trash receptacles and outside storage of equipment shall be screened from view by
fencing (at least seventy-five percent (75%) opaque) or landscaping of sufficient
height and density to provide screening at maturity or within three (3) years.
10-14-5 Site Plan Review
Refer to Section 10-2-7(I)
67
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 15 – M-2 General Industrial District
Sections
10-15-1 Permissive Uses
10-15-2 Conditional Uses
10-15-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-15-4 Site Plan Review
10-15-1 Permissive Uses
A. Any use, except the following conditional uses and except that no dwelling other
than that for a resident watchman or caretaker employed on the premises is
permitted.
10-15-2 Conditional Uses
A. Acid manufacture.
B. Auto salvage and wrecking operations, industrial and waste salvage operations, and
junkyards, provided that all operations are conducted within an area enclosed on all
sides with a solid wall of fence not less than eight feet in height, located not less
than 200 feet from any R District and 100 feet from any C District. No pile of salvage,
scrap, or other material shall be higher than eight feet.
C. Bulk manufacturing, processing, and/or storage plants.
D. Cement, lime, gypsum, or other similar manufacture.
E. Distillation, manufacture, or refining of bones, coal, or tar asphalt.
F. Explosives manufacture or storage. For the purposes of this section the term
explosives does not include first-class consumer fireworks and second-class
consumer fireworks, as those terms are defined in 2017 Iowa Acts, Senate File 489,
Section 3.
G. Fat, grease, lard, or tallow rendering or refining.
H. Fertilizer manufacture.
I. Gas manufacture and distribution.
J. Garbage, offal, or dead animal disposal.
K. Glue manufacture.
L. Packing plant, slaughter house, or stockyard.
M. Petroleum products terminal.
68
N. Sewage disposal and treatment.
O. Sanitary landfill.
P. Feed lot, livestock confinement area, provided location is not within 200 feet from
any R District.
10-15-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height: 75 feet, except for as provided for in Title 10, Chapter 26
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: 30 feet
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: None
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: None
E. Minimum Frontage: None
F. Minimum Lot Area: None
10-15-4 Site Plan Review
Refer to Section 10-2-7(I)
69
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 16 – S-1 Special Development District
Sections
10-16-1 Intent and Purpose
10-16-2 Application for Special Development District
10-16-3 Permissive Uses
10-16-4 Height and Density Regulations
10-16-5 Approval of Plans
10-16-6 Plan Requirements
10-16-7 Construction Schedule and Assurance of Completion
10-16-1 Intent and Purpose
It is the purpose of this District to provide an opportunity for modern and imaginative
architectural design, site arrangement, and city planning for certain special and unusual areas.
These areas are not extensive; they will be generally described and outlined on the Official
Zoning District Map. Within them, there should be a carefully planned combination of
residential, commercial, public, and semi-public uses, or of some of these uses.
10-16-2 Application for Special Development District
The owner or owners of land included in areas suitable for establishment of a Special
Development District, as shown on the Official Zoning District Map of the City, may petition the
Council for the establishment of the Special Development District. The application for the
establishment of this District shall indicate:
A. The area to be encompassed in said District.
B. Citation of the City's Comprehensive Plan's recommendations or comments on the area
encompassed in said District and whether the proposal varies from or conforms to the
City's Comprehensive Plan.
C. Evidence of unified ownership and control of the area applied for.
D. Evidence of financial capability of the petitioners to carry out the general type of
development contemplated for the area.
E. Evidence of applicant's proposed general use of the area.
F. In establishing a Special Development District, the Planning & Zoning Commission and
the Council shall give consideration among their factors to the criteria listed in Section
10-16-5 hereof.
70
Establishment of said Special Development District shall be by amendment of this Ordinance in
accordance with the procedures established herein.
10-16-3 Permissive Uses
A. Single-family dwelling, two family dwelling, or multi-family dwelling.
B. Public park or playground.
C. Place of worship.
D. Public or private school.
E. Rooming house or boarding house.
F. Office building or medical clinic.
G. Nursing, rest, or convalescent home.
H. Public building erected by any governmental agency.
I. Automobile parking lot or storage or parking garage.
J. Bank or financial institution.
K. Mortuary.
L. Personal service uses, including barber shop, beauty parlor, photographic or art
studio, messenger, taxicab, newspaper or telegraphic branch station, laundry or dry
cleaning receiving station, and other uses of a similar character.
M. Retail store, in connection with which there shall be no slaughtering of animals or
poultry, nor commercial fish cleaning and processing on the premises.
N. Theater, not including drive-in theaters.
O. Restaurants, cafeterias, bars, and taverns, not including drive-in establishments.
P. Automobile service station.
Q. Bowling alley or billiard parlor.
R. Dancing or music academy.
S. Display and salesroom.
T. Hotel or motel.
U. Laboratory, research, experimental, or testing.
V. Milk distributing station.
W. Radio or television broadcasting station or studio.
X. Rental agency.
71
Y. Dyeing, cleaning, laundry, printing, painting, plumbing, tinsmithing, tire sales and
service, upholstering and other general service or repair establishment of similar
character. Not more than ten percent of the lot or tract occupied by such
establishment shall be used for the open and unenclosed storage of materials or
equipment.
Z. Bakery.
AA. Bottling works.
BB. Wholesale establishment or warehouse in a completely enclosed building.
CC. Bus terminal.
10-16-4 Height and Density Regulations
Height and density limits in the S-1 District are established by setbacks and floor area ratios as
follows:
A. For residential, industrial, hotel, motel, and multi-family dwelling uses, there shall be
a maximum floor area ratio of 4:1.
B. For commercial uses in the S-1 District, there shall be a maximum floor area ratio of
4:1.
10-16-5 Approval of Plans
Before land is used or a building is erected or used in the Special Development District, a
preliminary and a final plan shall be approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission and the
Council for all contiguous property within this District in any one location. The Commission shall
have ninety (90) days to consider and approve or reject a preliminary plan with or without
modifications, although this period may be extended by agreement of the parties concerned.
The final plan shall be approved or rejected by the Commission within ninety (90) days of
submittal. Final plans will be approved when in accordance with the approved preliminary
plans. In approving plans, the Commission and the Council shall consider the following factors.
A. Those affecting the community as a whole:
1. Uses or use.
2. Intensity of use.
3. Traffic.
B. Those affecting the neighborhood:
1. Heights.
72
2. Front, side, and rear yard definitions and uses where they occur at the
development periphery.
C. Those affecting the development itself:
1. Gross commercial building areas.
2. Area ratios and the designation of the land surfaces to which they apply.
3. Spaces between buildings. Open areas, if any.
4. Width of streets in the development, if any.
5. Setbacks from such streets, if any.
6. Off-street parking and loading standards.
D. Those affecting the development procedures:
1. The order in which development will likely proceed in complex multiple use
developments.
2. Estimates of time required to complete the development and its various
stages, if any.
3. List of streets, lighting, parking, or other improvements by the City, which in
any way affect the development.
From time to time during construction, the developer may make minor technical changes in an
approved final plan, so long as such changes have been approved by the Planning & Zoning
Commission or upon denial of approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission, with the
approval of the Council. Any other changes to the approved final plan shall be accomplished by
the submission of preliminary plans and final plans of such changes, which shall be approved
under the procedures, as set forth herein, for the approval of the original preliminary plans and
the approval of the original final plans. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any building or use that is not in accordance with an approved final plan.
10-16-6 Plan Requirements
The preliminary plan shall:
A. Be drawn to scale.
B. Show boundaries of property to be developed.
C. Show existing topography with contour intervals of not less than two feet obtained
from a field survey and referred to an approved City bench mark.
D. Show the proposed size, location, use, and arrangement of the buildings and the
proposed arrangement of stalls and the number of cars, entrance and exit
driveways, and their relationship to existing and proposed street parking areas.
73
E. Show drainage plan with sufficient control grades to indicate the intent of the
developer.
F. Indicate location, type, and size of structures on adjacent properties within 200 feet
of the boundary of the Special Development District.
G. Provide for the dedication of any rights-of-way for the widening, extension, or
connection of major streets as shown in the adopted Comprehensive Plan or
adopted Capital Improvement Plan.
H. Indicate the stages, if any, which will be followed in carrying out the construction of
the project and interim use and maintenance of areas not under construction at any
given time.
I. Contain a traffic analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer who is
skilled in the science of traffic engineering, indicating the estimated traffic to be
generated by the complete development of the project with said estimates shown
for the average week, 24-hour period, and for the peak morning and evening traffic
hours. The impact of this new traffic on existing traffic in the vicinity of the project
shall be appraised and a list submitted of new street construction and new traffic
control measures required to accommodate the estimated traffic increases.
The final plan shall be the standard plot plan required to obtain a building permit, except that it
shall show the use or types of uses to be accommodated in each building or portion thereof.
10-16-7 Construction Schedule and Assurance of Completion
A. With the final plan, the proponents shall submit a construction schedule.
B. Construction shall begin within one year after approval of the final plan and shall be
completed within years after approval of the final plan, except that the Council may
extend and/or change such periods upon a showing of good and sufficient cause.
C. With the final plan, the applicant shall file a surety bond or escrow agreement to
insure the construction of the project within the period specified. No such bond or
escrow shall be acceptable, unless it is enforceable by or payable to the City in a sum
at least equal to the estimated costs of all of the site improvements (streets, drives,
walks, walls, storm and sanitary sewers, landscape planting, ornamental features not
on a building, and terraces) for the entire project.
D. Said bond or escrow shall be in a form and with surety and conditions approved by
the City Attorney.
E. In the event of default under such bond or escrow, the City shall use the sum
defaulted to construct said site improvements.
74
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 17 – S-2 Institutional - Office District
Sections
10-17-1 Permissive Uses
10-17-2 Conditional Use
10-17-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-17-4 Site Plan Review
10-17-1 Permissive Uses
A. Single and two family dwellings.
B. Bank.
C. General business office.
D. Professional office.
E. Medical or dental clinic.
F. Studio for artist, photographer, sculptor, or musician.
G. Art gallery.
H. Place of worship.
I. Hospital or sanitarium.
J. Public building.
K. Educational, religious, or philanthropic institution.
L. Nursing, rest, or convalescent home.
M. Business, dancing, music, and other similar schools and colleges.
N. Lodge, club, fraternity, or sorority.
O. Library.
P. Parking structure or lot.
Q. Laboratory and research center.
R. Private or public school.
75
10-17-2 Conditional Use
Retail Sales
As July 1, 1984, existing uses within the S-2 District Boundaries may be considered for
conversion to retail uses. Site criteria required:
A. A map indicating land uses, property owners and their mailing addresses within 200
feet of the parcel of lot(s) proposed for retail sales.
B. Yard setback requirements.
C. A floor plan of the proposed structure or conversion of an existing operation.
D. The location and direction of outside lighting.
E. The location of curb cuts, internal traffic circulation on the site, and parking lot
layout.
F. Sign location and size.
G. Visual screening from adjacent properties.
H. Location of outside storage, trash receptacles, and vending machines, including can
and bottle redeeming machines.
I. Other such information as may be requested by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
J. The intensity of projected traffic on the site of the proposed retail use should not be
significantly greater than the existing traffic intensity.
10-17-3 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A. Maximum Structure Height: 45 feet, except for as provided for in Title 10, Chapter 26
B. Minimum Front Yard Depth: 20 feet
C. Minimum Side Yard Depth: 6 feet
D. Minimum Rear Year Depth: 20 feet
E. Minimum Frontage: None
F. Minimum Lot Area: 7,000 square feet
G. Minimum Lot Area per Family:
1. Single Family: 7,000 square feet
2. Two Family: 3,000 square feet
3. Multiple: N/A
10-17-4 Site Plan Review
Refer to Section 10-2-7(I)
76
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 18 – S-3 Large Scale Mixed Use Development (MXD) District
Sections
10-18-1 Intent and Purpose
10-18-2 Permissive Uses
10-18-3 Conditional Uses
10-18-4 Approval of Development Plans
10-18-5 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
10-18-1 Intent and Purpose
It is the primary purpose of this S-3 Mixed Use Development (MXD) District to provide large
scale areas in the City within which commercial, light industrial, and residential uses can locate
with the assurance of a high permanent level of design quality, extensive site amenity, open
space and compatibility with existing land uses. Stringent site planning, aesthetically desirable
design, screening standards, buffer strips, sign requirements and other appropriate procedures
will be used to achieve the desired results of compatibility with existing uses and protection
between future residential and nonresidential land uses.
As this S-3 MXD District will be a unique setting with a wide array of land uses, it requires a site
with a minimum size of 80 acres for said designation.
10-18-2 Permissive Uses
A. Any uses permitted in the Residential Zoning Districts. Residential development shall
occur on tracts of a minimum size of five acres and an open space buffer 50 feet
wide, within which no structure is permitted, is required to separate all nonresidential
uses from residential uses.
B. Any uses permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial Zoning District, further including such
uses as research and development facilities, industrial parks, and office parks shall
occur on tracts of a minimum size of five acres. In the case of minor residential
streets, the minimum right-of-way may be 50 feet.
10-18-3 Conditional Uses
A. Those uses listed as Conditional Uses in the Residential Zoning District.
B. Those uses listed as Conditional Uses in the M-1 Light Industrial Zoning District.
77
10-18-4 Approval of Development Plans
The subdivision of any real estate within the S-3 MXD District shall be in accordance with Title
11, Subdivision Regulations, of the City Code. To facilitate the development approval process a
preliminary site plan may be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission. If Commission
approval is granted on the preliminary site plan, the developer then has the assurance that the
proposal is consistent with the intent of the S-3 MXD District. The following preliminary site
plan information shall be required, but not limited to, such criteria as:
A. Proposed facility description, including type of use, process, or service, approximate
number of employees on initial start and within five years.
B. Information on traffic generation, deliveries, employee parking, and public access to
the facility.
C. Information on required utilities, utility extensions if required, and any unique
requirements for material disposal or pre-treatment of sanitary sewage.
D. Approximate perimeter boundaries, acreage, and topographical features.
E. Proposed location, or alternative locations, of any structures, parking lots, outside
storage and landscaping. This may be in the form of a concept layout.
F. Information on proposed public improvements necessary to serve the development.
This includes the extension of public streets, sidewalks, storm and sanitary sewers,
public transit shelters or any other public amenities.
The above information shall be submitted in narrative and/or graphic format to the Community
Development Department; a meeting for the purpose of taking action on the preliminary site
plan shall then be conducted within the ten days by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Upon
approval of the preliminary site plan, the developer has the assurance that the proposal
conforms to the intent of the S-3 MXD District and the proposal shall be permitted. A final site
plan shall then be developed and approved in accordance with the Site Plan Review Criteria of
the Section 19-2-7(I).
10-18-5 Height, Area, & Setback Requirements
A minimum tract of real estate consisting of eighty acres is required for designation as the S-3
MXD District. A minimum tract of five acres is required for all residential development and
nonresidential. An open space buffer 50 feet wide, within which no structure is permitted, is
required to separate all nonresidential uses from residential uses. All other dimensional
requirements are associated with the respective uses listed in the Residential Districts and M-1
Light Industrial District. These respective Zoning District requirements shall be construed as
minimum applicable requirements for development in the S-3 District.
78
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 19 – A-P Airport District
Sections
10-19-1 Basic Intent and Purpose
10-19-2 Definitions
10-19-3 Airspace Zones
10-19-4 Height Restrictions
10-19-5 Land Use Restrictions
10-19-6 Lighting
10-19-7 Airport Zoning Map
10-19-8 Nonconforming Uses
10-19-9 Permits
10-19-10 Variances
10-19-11 Appeals
10-19-12 Conflicting Regulations
10-19-1 Basic Intent and Purpose
It is hereby found that:
A. An airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of the Muscatine
Municipal Airport and property or occupants of the land in its vicinity, and also if of
the obstructive type, in effect reduces the size of the area available for the landing,
takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of
the Muscatine Municipal Airport and the public investment therein.
B. The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and an injury
to the region served by the Muscatine Municipal Airport.
C. For the protection of the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity, and
general welfare, it is necessary to prevent the creation of airport hazards to regulate
and restrict the use of land in the vicinity of the Muscatine Municipal Airport.
D. The prevention of airport hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally
possible, by the proper exercise of the police power.
E. The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards and the
elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing
airport hazards are public purposes for which municipalities may raise and expend
public funds, as an incident to the operation of airports, to acquire lands or property
interests therein.
79
10-19-2 Definitions
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Airport" means the Muscatine Municipal Airport.
B. "Airport elevation" means the established elevation of the highest point on the
usable landing area, which elevation is established to 547.5' feet above mean sea
level.
C. "Airport hazard" means any structure or object of natural growth located on or in
the vicinity of the airport, or any use of land near such airport, which obstructs the
airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at such airport or is
otherwise hazardous to such landing or takeoff of aircraft.
.
D. "Decision height" means the height at which a decision must be made during an
instrument landing system instrument approach to either continue the approach or
to execute a missed approach procedure.
E. "Height". For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in
this Chapter and shown on the Muscatine Municipal Airport Zoning Map, the datum
shall mean sea level elevation, unless otherwise specified.
F. "Instrument runway" means a runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing air navigation facilities or area type navigation equipment for
which an instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
G. "Landing area" means the area of the airport used for the landing, taking off, or
taxiing of aircraft.
H. "Minimum descent altitude" means the lowest altitude, expressed in feet above
mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-toand
maneuvering in execution of a standard approach procedure where no
electronic glide slope is provided.
I. "Minimum enroute altitude" means the altitude in effect between radio fixes which
assures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction clearance
requirements between those fixes.
J. "Minimum obstruction clearance altitude" means the specified altitude in effect
between radio fixes on very high frequency omni-range station airways, off-airway
route, or route segments which meets obstruction clearance requirements for the
entire route segment and which assures acceptable navigational signal coverage
only within 22 miles of a VOR.
K. "Nonconforming use" means any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or
use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter or an
amendment thereto.
80
L. "Nonprecision instrument runway" means a runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance,
or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument
approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision
approach facilities are planned or indicated on a planning document having the
approval of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
M. "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or governmental entity. It includes a trustee, receiver,
assignee, or similar representative of any of them.
N. "Planned". As used in this Chapter, only those proposed future airport
developments that are so indicated on a planning document having the approval of
the FAA and the City of Muscatine.
O. "Primary surface" means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the
runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet
beyond each end of that runway, but when the runway has no specially prepared
hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that
runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of a primary
surface is:
1. 250 feet for utility runways having only visual approaches.
2. 500 feet for utility runways having nonprecision instrument approaches.
3. For other utility runways the width is:
a. 500 feet for visual runways having only visual approaches.
b. 500 feet for nonprecision instrument runways having visibility
minimums greater than three-fourths statute mile.
The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in this
subsection for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that
runway.
P. “Runway” means any existing or planned paved surface or turf covered area of the
airport which is specifically designated, or used or planned to be used for the landing
or takeoff of aircraft.
Q. “Slope” means an incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of
horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude.
Example: Slope = 3:1 (three feet horizontal to one foot vertical)
R. “Tree” means any object of natural growth.
81
S. “Utility runway” means a runway that is constructed for an intended use by
propeller 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight or less.
T. “Visual runway” means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedure with no straight in instrument approach proc indicated
on an FAA planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority.
10-19-3 Airspace Zones
In order to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, there are hereby created and established
the following airspace zones, whose locations and dimensions are described below and which
are shown on the Muscatine Municipal Airport Zoning Map, consisting of two sheets and dated
October 16, 1975, which is made a part hereof by reference and is on file in the Office of the
City Clerk. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in
the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established
and defined as follows:
A. “Primary zone” means all that land which lies directly under the primary surface.
B. “Horizontal zone” means all that land which lies directly under an imaginary
horizontal surface 150 feet above the established airport elevation, or 697.5 feet
above mean sea level, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of
5000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of existing or
planned runways designated as utility or visual and 10,000 feet for all others, and
connecting adjacent arcs by lines tangent to these arcs. The radius of the arc
specified for each of a runway will have the same arithmetical value. That value will
be the highest determined for either end of the runway. The horizontal zone does
not include the approach and transitional zones.
C. "Conical zone" means all that land which lies directly under an imaginary conical
surface extending upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal zone at
a slope of twenty to one for horizontal distance of 4,000 feet as measured radially
outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface. The conical zone does not
include the precision instrument approach zones and transitional zones.
D. "Approach zone" means all that land which lies directly under an imaginary
approach surface centered on the extended centerline at each end of a runway. The
inner edge of the approach surface is at the same width and elevation as, and
coincides, with the end of the primary surface. The approach surface is applied to
each end of each runway based upon the type of approach available or planned for
that runway end.
1. The inner edge of the approach surface is:
a. 250 feet wide for visual utility runways.
b. 500 feet wide for visual runways other than utility runways and
nonprecision instrument runways.
82
c. 1000 feet for precision instrument runways.
2. The outer edge of the approach zone is:
a. 1,250 feet for visual utility runways.
b. 1,500 feet for visual runways other than utility runways.
c. 4,000 feet for nonprecision instrument runways.
d. 16,000 feet for precision instrument runways.
3. The approach zone extends for a horizontal distance of:
a. 5,000 feet at a slope of twenty to one for all visual runways.
b. 10,000 feet at a slope of thirty-four to one for nonprecision
instrument runways.
c. 10,000 feet at a slope of fifty to one and then 12,000 feet at a slope
of forty to one , and then restricted to 500 feet above airport
elevation for 28,000 feet for precision instrument runways.
E. "Transitional zone" means all that land which lies directly under an imaginary
surface extending upward and outward at ninety degree (90°) angles to the runway
centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven to one from the
sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces.
Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surface which
project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of
5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at right
angles to the runway centerline. The transitional surface for the precision approach
extends upwards and outward at a slope of seven to one until it intersects a plane
500 feet above the airport elevation, at which time it becomes a plane 500 feet
above the airport elevation.
F. No structure shall be erected that raises the published minimum descent altitude or
decision height for an instrument approach to any runway, nor shall any structure be
erected that causes the minimum obstruction clearance altitude or minimum
enroute altitude to be increased on any Federal airway.
G. The airspace zones mas illustrates the various airspace zones at the Muscatine
Municipal Airport.
83
84
10-19-4 Height Restrictions
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, and except as necessary and incidental to airport
operations, no structure or tree shall be constructed, altered, maintained, or allowed to grow in
any airspace zone created in Section 10-19-3 so as to project above any of the imaginary
airspace surfaces described in said Section 10-19-3 hereof. Where an area is covered by more
than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitations shall prevail.
10-19-5 Land Use Restrictions
A. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in Section 10-19-4, no use
shall be made of any land in any of the airspace zones defined in Section 10-19-3
which creates or causes interference with the operations of radio or electronic
facilities of the airport or with radio or electronic communications between the
airport and aircraft, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impairs
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the landing, taking off,
or maneuvering of aircraft using or intending to use the Muscatine Municipal
Airport.
B. The primary zone shall contain no buildings or temporary structures and shall be
restricted to those uses which will not create, attract, or bring together an assembly
of persons thereon. Permissive uses include agricultural activities, light outdoor
recreation (nonspectator), and auto parking.
C. The following uses are specifically prohibited under the approach zones:
1. Theaters, fairgrounds, and auditoriums.
2. Gas and oil facilities.
3. Trash dumps and incinerators.
4. Poultry and mink farms.
D. Subject to all times to the restrictions set forth in Sections 10-19-4 and 10-19-5(A),
(B) and (C), the land in the airspace zones are subject to the regulations and
requirements of the zoning district in which they are situated, as shown on the
District Map of the City of Muscatine, as described in Section 10-2-2 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
85
10-19-6 Lighting
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10-19-5, the owner of any structure over
two hundred feet (200') above ground level must install on the structure lighting in
accordance with FAA Advisory Circular 70-7460-ID and amendments. Additionally,
any structure constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance and exceeding
nine hundred forty-nine feet (949') above ground level must install on that structure
high intensity white obstruction lights in accordance with Chapter 6 of FAA Advisory
Circular 70-7460-ID and amendments.
B. Any permit or variance may be so conditioned as to require the owner of the
structure or growth in question to permit the City of Muscatine at its own expense
to install, operate, and maintain thereto such markers or lights as may be necessary
to indicate to pilots the presence of an airspace hazard.
10-19-7 Airport Zoning Map
The several zones herein established are shown on the Muscatine Municipal Airport Zoning
Map, consisting of two (2) sheets and dated October 16, 1975, made a part hereof by reference
and on file in the Office of the City Clerk, which map, together with such amendments thereto
as may from time to time be made, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone
boundaries, and other information thereon, shall be and the same is hereby adopted as part of
this Chapter.
10-19-8 Nonconforming Uses
A. Regulations Not Retroactive. The regulations provided in this Chapter shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any
structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
Chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use.
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alterations,
or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun
prior to the effective date of this Chapter, and is diligently prosecuted.
B. Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this Section, the
owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit
the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the appropriate official who may be charged with the
duty of determining the necessity of lighting and marking to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport
hazards.
86
10-19-9 Permits
A. Future Uses. No material changes shall be made in the use of land and no tree or
structure shall be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established in any zone
hereby created, unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted
by the Community Development Director.
1. However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than seventy-five feet (75')
of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal
and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a
horizontal distance of four thousand, two hundred feet (4,200') from each
end of the runway, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain,
land contour, or topographic features, would extend the height limits
prescribed for the respective zone.
2. Nothing contained in this foregoing exception shall be construed as
permitting or intending to permit any construction or growth of any
structure or tree in excess of any of the height limitations established by this
Chapter.
B. Existing Uses. Before any existing use or structure may be replaced, substantially
altered or repaired, or rebuilt within any zone established herein, a permit must be
secured authorizing such replacement, change, or repair. No permit shall be granted
that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a
nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation
than it was on the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto, or
than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except when indicated, all
applications for such permit shall be granted.
C. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the Community
Development Director determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been
abandoned or more than sixty-five percent (65%) torn down, physically
deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure
or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning
regulations.
10-19-10 Variances
A. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, permit the
growth of any tree, or use his property not in accordance with the regulations
prescribed in this Chapter, may apply to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for a
variance from such regulations. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly
found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and relief granted would not be contrary
to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the
spirit of this Chapter.
87
B. No application for variance to the requirements of this Chapter may be considered
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, unless a copy of the application has been
submitted to the Airport Manager of the Muscatine Municipal Airport for an opinion
as to the aeronautical effects of such a variance.
10-19-11 Appeals
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision by the Community
Development Director made in the administration of this Chapter may appeal to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment by complying with the provisions of Section 10-31-2(B) of the Zoning
Ordinance.
10-19-12 Conflicting Regulations
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this
Chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with
respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more
stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
88
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 20 – Garage, Accessory Building, & Accessory Use Regulations
Sections
10-20-1 General Provisions
10-20-2 Size Regulations
10-20-3 Placement & Setback Regulations
10-20-4 Home Occupations
10-20-1 General Provisions
A. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main
building has commenced.
B. No accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being
used.
C. The use of a temporary construction shed or road wagon for the storage of tools,
material, and equipment by a contractor during building construction is permitted.
D. In residential districts, accessory buildings and uses are limited to the following:
1. Garages;
2. Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, ornamental gate, barbecue
oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to residential uses;
3. Home occupation that is allowed by this chapter; and
4. A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area twenty-five
percent (25%) of the ground floor area of the main building.
E. In commercial districts, accessory buildings and uses are limited to the following:
1. Parking lots and garages conforming with the requirements of Title 10,
Chapter 27.
2. Use of not more than forty percent (40%) of the floor area of a building for
incidental storage or allowed light industrial activity.
F. In the AG District, accessory buildings and uses are limited to dwellings for persons
employed on the premises, including mobile homes, provided such mobile homes are
occupied by persons employed on the premises and do not exceed one per farm tract.
G. In all other zoning districts, accessory buildings may be used for any use allowed by the
zoning district in which they are located.
89
10-20-2 Size Regulations
A. For parcels that are less than 20,000 square feet in size the maximum cumulative size
for garages (attached or detached) and/or any other accessory building in all residential
zoning districts is 1,440 square feet.
B. For parcels of at least 20,000 square feet in size the maximum cumulative size for
garages (attached or detached) and/or any other accessory building in all residential
zoning districts is the lessor of the following:
1. 2,500 square feet, or;
2. 7.2% of the total parcel size.
C. No accessory building placed in the rear yard may exceed 40% of the size of the rear
yard.
D. In residential zoning districts the cumulative size of any accessory buildings, not
including attached garages, located in the rear yard may not exceed 40% of the size of
the rear yard.
10-20-3 Placement & Setback Regulations
A. Except for as enumerated in this Section accessory buildings must conform to the
setbacks established for the zoning district in which they are located.
90
B. No accessory building may be erected in
front of a main building, unless the
accessory building or garage is attached to
the main building by a continuous
structural wall.
C. Any accessory building or use closer than
10 feet to a main building and which must
be in the side or rear yard, shall be
considered as part of the main building
and shall be provided with the side and
rear yards required for the main building.
D. An accessory building or use more than 10
feet from a main building may be erected
within 4 feet of a side or rear lot line, but
must be located at least 60 feet from the
front lot line when entry is from an alley
or street at the rear, and 4 feet behind the
front building line of the main building
when entry is from the street at the front.
E. Where a garage door is parallel to the
alley and is entered from an alley, it
must be 10 feet from the alley line,
except for any exception enumerated
in this Section.
F. For every 25 square feet that an
accessory building exceeds 1,440
square feet in size an additional 1 foot
of setback of the accessory building is
required in addition to what is
required by the zoning district in
which the accessory building is
located.
G. An accessory building may be
constructed within a required rear
yard if all of the following conditions
are met:
1. The rear yard abuts an alley.
91
2. 50% of parcels on the block and located on the same side of the alley as the
subject parcel, contain an existing accessory building within the required rear
yard setback.
3. Any new accessory building that is constructed within the required rear yard
shall not be located nearer to the alley right-of-way than the average
distance to alley right-of-way of the nearest two accessory buildings located
on the same side of the alley as the subject parcel.
10-20-4 Home Occupations
A. Intent
This Section allows for home-based business activity, not otherwise permitted by Title 10 in
residential districts, that is clearly subordinate and compatible with residential land uses, and
will not negatively impact the character of the residential area.
B. Operating Standards
1. Accessory Use Only
a. Home occupations shall be clearly incidental and accessory to the use of the
residence as a dwelling.
b. Not more than 500 square feet or 25 percent of the dwelling unit floor area,
whichever is greater, shall be used to conduct the home occupation.
c. Interior alterations are allowed as long as the alterations do not result in elimination
of either the kitchen, dining area, bathrooms, living room, or all of the bedrooms in
the unit
92
2. Prohibited Activities, Equipment, and Materials
The following uses and activities are prohibited as part of any home occupation:
a. Use of equipment or machinery that is not customarily incidental to domestic
use (e.g., cement mixers, tractors, and paint booths).
b. Equipment, machinery, or processes that create noise, smoke, glare, fumes,
odor or vibration (e.g., assembly requiring power tools, carpentry) offensive
to a reasonable person at the property line.
c. Uses that involve activities or use of equipment or materials on more than an
intermittent basis so as to change the fire safety or occupancy classification
of the premises (e.g., welding).
d. Activities that create visual or audible electrical interference in any radio or
television off the subject property or cause fluctuation in line voltage off the
subject property.
e. Use or storage of chemicals or processes that are not customarily associated
with domestic use. This includes any chemicals and pharmaceuticals of a
type or in volumes not normally found in a domestic residence without a
home occupation.
f. The home occupation shall not exceed the limitations imposed by the
provisions of all applicable building, fire, health, safety, and housing codes
and shall conform with all applicable requirements for business and
occupational licensing.
g. The electrical service for the home occupation shall not exceed 200 amps
h. Automobile repair or auto body shops. More than 2 vehicles per year which
are not registered at the residence and are rebuilt, repaired, or
reconstructed shall constitute an automobile repair or auto body shop.
i. Escort services, meaning a person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or
profit, accompanies other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments
or places of amusement or consorts with others about any place of public
resort or within any private quarters.
j. Tattoo and body piercing
k. Kennels or any other forms of boarding animals for compensation are
prohibited.
3. Exterior Evidence of Use Prohibited
93
To ensure that dwellings in which a home occupation is occurring remain compatible
with surrounding residential use, the following regulations shall apply:
a. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal
dwelling.
b. Incidental storage in a garage or any activities associated with the home
occupation shall not displace any required parking in currently usable garage
c. The home shall not require any alteration not customarily associated with
residential use.
d. Home occupation activities shall not be visible from the public rights-of-way
or neighboring properties.
e. Outdoor storage is prohibited.
f. The residence shall not be used as a storage facility for a business conducted
elsewhere.
g. No home occupation shall produce quantities or types of refuse not
customarily associated with a residential use.
h. Any signage shall be in compliance Chapter 21 of Title 10.
i. There shall be no exterior lighting which would indicate that the dwelling is
being utilized in whole or in part of any purpose other than residential.
4. Vehicles, Parking, and Traffic
a. The home occupation shall not generate excessive vehicular traffic or parking in the
area of the principal structure. Parking shall be restricted to existing on-street and
on-site parking associated with the principal structures.
b. Not more than two vehicles, externally identifiable as being associated with the
home occupation, shall be parked at the location, in manner that is viable off the
property, at any one time as the result of operating home occupations.
5. Customers
The owner of a home occupation shall not allow more than 5clients or customers in the
dwelling unit or on the premises during any period of 60 consecutive minutes nor more
than 12 in any given 24-hour period.
6. Delivery or pick-up of items
Shipment and delivery of products, merchandise or supplies shall be limited to
between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and shall regularly occur only in single rear axle
straight trucks or smaller vehicles normally used to serve residential neighborhoods.
94
7. Employees
a. No persons, other than residents of the household shall engage in the home
occupation at the home.
b. The home occupation may have other employees who are not working at the
residence, but work at other offsite locations.
c. Dispatch centers, where employees come to the site to be dispatched to other
locations, are not allowed as home occupations.
8. Hours of Operation
No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 PM and 7:00 AM
unless said occupation is contained entirely within the principal building and will not
require any on-street parking facilities.
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 21 – Sign Regulations
10-21-1 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, safety, and welfare through a
comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and
nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements, including the following specific purposes:
A. To balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate avenues for both
commercial and non-commercial messages.
B. To promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrians and motorists from injury
and property damage caused by, or which may be fully or partially attributable to,
cluttered, distracting, and/or illegible signage.
C. To protect the aesthetic beauty of the City’s natural and built environment.
D. To prevent property damage, personal injury, and litter from signs which are improperly
constructed, poorly maintained, or of flimsy materials.
95
E. To protect property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by preserving and
enhancing the appearance of the streetscape.
F. To provide consistent sign design standards.
G. To provide an improved visual environment for the citizens of and visitors to the City.
H. To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
10-21-2 Applicability
A. Applicability
This Chapter applies to all signs, of whatever nature and wherever located, within the
City.
B. Interpretations
Any classification of signs in this Chapter that permits speech by reason of the type of
sign, identity of the sign user, or otherwise, shall also be interpreted to allow noncommercial
speech on the sign. No part of this Chapter shall be construed to favor
commercial speech over non-commercial speech. To the extent any provision of this
Chapter is ambiguous, the term shall be interpreted not to regulate on the basis of the
content of the message.
C. Exemptions
The following types of signs are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, except for
those contained in Section 10-21-4, Section 10-21-5, and Section 10-21-7(A).
1. Street and Residence Identification Signs
Street identification and residence identification signs.
2. Governmental Signs
Signs installed by the City, County, or a Federal or State governmental agency for the
protection of public health, safety, and general welfare, including, but not limited to,
the following:
i. Emergency and warning signs necessary for public safety or civil defense;
ii. Traffic signs erected and maintained by an authorized public agency;
iii. Signs showing the location of public facilities.
3. Traffic control devices on private property that are erected and maintained in
compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted in this state
and if not adopted by this state with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
adopted by the Federal Highway Administration.
4. Where a federal, state or local law requires a property owner to post a sign on the
96
owner’s property to warn of a danger or to prohibit access to the property either
generally or specifically, the owner must comply with the federal, state or local law to
exercise that authority by posting a sign on the property.
5. Gravestones or cemetery markers.
6. Internal Signs
Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are
located, or from any public right-of-way, including signs within an enclosed mall or
shopping center.
10-21-3 Permit Required for Permanent Signs
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected or constructed within the
City, any permanent sign or awning without having first secured a permit therefor from the
Community Development Department. A permit fee, as designated in the City Code for each
sign or awning shall be charged to the applicant securing the required permit. Said fees may be
subject to change from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
10-21-4 General Restrictions Applying to All Signs
A. Location Restrictions
Except where specifically authorized in this Chapter, signs are prohibited in the following
locations:
1. Any sign, not owned by the City of Muscatine, located within a City right-of-way, except
as may otherwise be permitted by in this Chapter.
2. Any sign located within, on, or projecting over a property line which borders a public or
private street, highway, alley, lane, avenue, road, sidewalk, or other right-of-way, except
as may otherwise be permitted by this Chapter.
3. Any sign attached to any public utility pole, structure or street light, tree, fence, fire
hydrant, bridge, curb, sidewalk, park bench, statue, memorial, or other location on
public property, except those signs approved as part of a special event permit on City
property or banner signs permitted by the City on light poles in certain zones within the
City.
4. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit a person from holding a sign while
located on City property so long as the person holding the sign is located on public
property determined to be a traditional public forum and does not block ingress and
97
egress from buildings or create a safety hazard by impeding travel on sidewalks, bike
and vehicle lanes, and/or trails. Such signs must be held at all times and shall not be self
supporting.
.
5. Any sign, which by reason of its location, will obstruct the view of any authorized traffic
sign, signal, or other traffic control device or which by reason of shape, color, or position
interferes with or could be confused with any such authorized traffic signal or device.
6. Any sign, which by reason of its location, will obstruct the view of any street or railroad
track to the extent it makes it dangerous to use the street or railroad track or otherwise
presents a safety hazard.
7. Any sign which is placed so as to prevent or inhibit free ingress to or egress from any
door, window, or any exit way required by the Building Code.
B. Feature Restrictions
The following sign features are prohibited:
1. No sign may be lighted so as to impair the vision of any motor vehicle driver.
2. Any sign which emits sound, odor, smoke, laser or hologram lights, or other visible
matter, including any sign that uses motion picture projection.
3. No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device.
C. Vehicle Signs
Vehicle signs are prohibited. Vehicle signs are defined as a commercial sign of more than 4
square feet that is attached or applied to a vehicle or trailer, which is parked in location visible
from the public right of way, and by means of any of the following which proves a violation:
1. There is no current, lawful license plate affixed to the vehicle on which the sign is
displayed; or
2. The vehicle qualified as a junk or obsolete moter vehicle as defined in
Section 7-12-1(B) of the City Code; or
3. The vehicle on which the sign is displayed is not parked in a lawful or authorized
location; or
4. The vehicle is on blocks or other supports, or
5. The vehicle is parked in a manner that is distinct or different from the predetermined
parking area design.
10-21-5 General Criteria and Regulations Applying to All Signs
98
A. Sign Message.
Any permitted sign may contain, in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful
non-commercial message, a message that does not advertise, identify or otherwise direct
attention to a product or business but instead conveys an opinion, idea, concept or similar
message, so long as the sign complies with the size, height, area, location, and other
requirements of this Chapter.
B. Sign Measurement Criteria.
1. Sign Area Measurement
Sign area is measured as follows:
i. Sign copy mounted, affixed, or painted on a background panel or surface
distinctively painted, textured, or constructed as a background for the sign copy,
is measured as that area contained within the sum of the smallest rectangle(s)
that will enclose both the sign copy and the background.
Figure 1: Sign Area Measurement
Figure 2: Sign Area Measurement
99
ii. Sign copy mounted as individual letters or graphics against a wall, fascia,
mansard, or parapet of a building or surface of another structure, that has not
been painted, textured or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background
for the sign copy, is measured as a sum of the smallest rectangle(s) that will
enclose each word and each graphic in the total sign.
iii. Two-face signs, are
measured as follows
if the interior angle
between the two
sign faces is 45
degrees or less, the
sign area is of one
sign face only. If the
angle between the
two sign faces is
greater than 45
degrees, the sign
area is the sum of the
areas of the two sign faces.
iv. Multi-face signs, signs with three or more
faces are measured as follows, the sum of
the area of all the faces, divided by two.
v. Spherical, free-form, sculptural or other
non-planar sign area is measured as 50
percent of the sum of the areas using only
the four vertical sides of the smallest foursided
polyhedron that will encompass the
sign structure.
Figure 4: Non-Planar Sign Area
Figure 3: Sign Area Measurement
100
2. Sign Height Measurement.
Sign height is measured as follows:
i. Freestanding Signs
Sign height is measured as the vertical
distance from the average elevation of the
finished grade within an eight-foot radius
from all sides of the sign at the base of a sign
to the top of the sign, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounding or landscaping solely for
the purpose of locating the sign.
a. If natural grade at the base of a
sign is higher than the grade of
the adjacent road, sign height
shall be measured from the base
of the sign.
b. If natural grade at the base of a
sign is lower than the grade of an
adjacent road, the height of the
sign shall be measured from the
top of curb elevation.
ii. Building Mounted Signs
The height of wall, fascia,
mansard, parapet, or other
building mounted signs is the
vertical distance measured
from the base of the wall on
which the sign is located to the
top of the sign or sign
structure.
Figure 5: Sign Face Height Measurement
Figure 6: Height Measurement
101
C. Structure and Installation.
1. Raceway Cabinets
Raceway cabinets, where used as an element of building mounted signs, shall match
the building color at the location of the building where the sign is located. Where a
raceway cabinet provides a contrast background to sign copy, the colored area is
counted in the aggregate sign area permitted for the site or business.
2. Electrical Service
When electrical service is provided to freestanding signs or a landscape wall sign, all
such electrical service is required to be underground and concealed. Electrical service
to building mounted signs, including conduit, housings, and wire, shall be concealed
or, when necessary, painted to match the surface of the structure upon which they
are mounted. A building permit (electrical) shall be issued prior to installation of any
new signs requiring electrical service.
3. Durable Materials
All permanent signs permitted by this Chapter shall be constructed of durable
materials capable of withstanding continuous exposure to the elements and the
conditions of an urban environment.
D. Maintenance
All signs, whether or not in existence prior to adoption of this Chapter, shall be maintained.
Maintenance of a sign shall include periodic cleaning; replacement of flickering, burned out
or broken light bulbs or fixtures, repair or replacement of any faded, peeled, cracked, or;
otherwise damaged or broken parts of a sign; and any other activity necessary to restore the
sign so that it continues to comply with the requirements and contents of the sign permit
issued for its installation and provisions of this Chapter.
E. Obsolete Signs
Sign structures permitted as on-premises commercial signs may remain in place after the
business vacates the premises, provided the sign is left non-illuminated and sign copy is
removed by covering the sign face or replacing the sign face with a blank sign face, within 30
days after the business vacates the premises, and provided that the sign remains in
compliance with the maintenance provision of Section 10-21-5(D). After 30 days such signs
102
shall be classified as off-premises commercial signs (billboards) and subject to all restrictions
and regulations applicable to off-premises commercial signs.
F. Unused Sign Support Structures
Any vacant and/or unused sign support structures, angle irons, sign poles, or other remnants
of old signs which are not currently in use, do not meet the criteria for a permitted obsolete
sign as set forth in Section 10-21-5(E), or proposed for immediate reuse evidenced by a Sign
Permit application for a permitted sign, shall be removed.
G. Nonconforming Uses
All nonconforming uses at the effective date of the passage of this Chapter are entitled to
maintain sign(s) until said sign(s) are changed, altered, or replaced at which time they shall be
brought into conformance with all regulations set out herein.
H. Violation
It shall be unlawful for any owner of record, lessor, lessee, manager, agent, or other person
having lawful possession or control over a building, structure, or parcel of land to fail to
maintain the property and all signs in compliance with this Chapter. Any person who
violates any of the provisions contained herein shall be guilty of a municipal infraction, and
each day that the violation is permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense.
10-21-6 Regulations and Criteria Applying to Permanent Signs.
Table 1: Overview of allowed types of signs by zoning district (This table is illustrative only)
103
A. Regulations Applying to All Permanent Signs.
1. For parcels with less than 120 feet of frontage along a public street the sum total
size of all permanent signs on single parcel shall not exceed 360 square feet.
2. For parcels with more than 120 feet of frontage along a public street the sum
total size of all permanent signs on a single parcel shall not exceed 360 square
feet plus an additional 1 square foot for each additional 2 linear feet of frontage
beyond 120 feet.
3. No single sign shall exceed 400 square feet.
4. Regardless of parcel size, a billboards may be up to, but cannot exceed, 400
square feet.
5. In AG districts a total of 32 square feet of permanent signs are allowed.
6. All signs which are affixed on building walls and/or canopies, shall not extend
higher than 35 feet above curb level, the maximum structure height allowed in
the zoning district in which it is located, or 5 feet above building height,
whichever is lower.
7. Billboards are only permitted in the M-2 Districts.
8. Churches, schools, and other permitted non-residential uses in residential zoning
districts, shall be permitted to erect one bulletin board sign in addition to other
signage permitted in this chapter. The bulletin board sign may contain
illuminated changeable letter or electronic message center not to exceed 18
square feet in area.
9. Signs in the S-3 Mixed-Use Development District, and the S-1 Special
Development District shall be permitted through the process of Site Plan Review
approval. The existing sign regulations contained herein for the respective uses
in the residential, commercial, and light industrial zoning districts shall be
construed as the guide in reviewing proposed signs in the Site Plan Review
process. Disputes as to sign size or location in the S-3 Mixed Use Development
District, or the S-1 Special Development District, may be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
B. Signs, Awnings, or Canopies Projecting into Public Right-of-Way.
1. Any new sign, canopy, or awning which will overhang public right of way shall
require consent of City Council prior to installation.
2. No signs shall be permitted to encroach on or hang over Iowa Department of
Transportation right-of-way.
104
3. Overhanging signs, canopies, and awnings which overhang public right-ofways
as of September 16, 1981, and which otherwise conform to all
applicable provisions of this Ordinance may continue to be maintained,
provided the owner(s) of said signs, awnings, or canopies shall agree in
writing to indemnify the City of Muscatine from any and all claims or suits for
damages caused by the signs, awnings, or canopies on forms provided by the
City. Further, the owner(s) shall provide the City of Muscatine with proof of
public liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000).
C. Permanent Signs in Residential Districts.
Permanent signs in residential zoning districts are allowed as follows:
1. Signs identifying platted subdivisions of more than two parcels, or apartment
complexes of more than five dwelling units are subject to all the following
criteria:
i. No single entrance to a subdivision shall have more than one
identification sign.
ii. An apartment complex of more than five dwelling shall have more than
one identification sign anywhere along each public street that adjoining
the apartment complex.
iii. The sign(s) must be a ground sign.
iv. The sign(s) cannot exceed 8 feet in height.
v. The sign(s) cannot exceed 24 square feet.
vi. The sign(s) shall not count towards the maximum allowed signage on an
individual parcel.
2. Parcels of at least 20,000 square feet may have signs meeting the following
criteria:
i. No more than 12 square feet of signage for parcels that are being used
for residential purpose, and no more than 24 square feet parcels that
contain an allowed non-residential use, such as a school, place of
worship, etc.
ii. Only wall or ground signs are permitted.
iii. Ground signs shall not exceed 5 feet in height.
iv. Ground signs are only permitted on parcels that contain an allowed nonresidential
use.
3. Parcel of less than 20,000 square feet may have signs meeting the following
criteria:
105
i. No more than 12 square feet of signage for parcels that are being used
for residential purpose, and no more than 24 square feet parcels that
contain an allowed non-residential use, such as a school, place of
worship, etc.
ii. Only wall signs are permitted.
D. Wall Signs
1. Definition
A wall sign is a sign securely affixed to or painted on a wall the front, side, or
rear wall of any building.
2. Size and Height Regulations
No single wall sign shall exceed 20% of the total square foot area of the face
of the building upon which it is placed.
3. Placement
No wall sign shall extend more than 12 inches beyond the building.
E. Ground Signs
1. Definition
A free-standing sign, generally having a low profile where the base of the sign
structure is on the ground and a maximum of 12 inches above the lowest
point of the ground adjacent to the sign such that the sign has the
appearance of a solid base.
2. Size and Height Regulations
i. No ground sign shall be at any point over 11 feet above the ground
level.
ii. The maximum width shall be 14 feet.
3. Placement
i. No ground sign shall be located within 10 feet of any parcel line.
ii. No ground sign, when erected on a lot fronting on intersecting
streets, shall be erected within 50 feet of the intersection of the
streets.
F. Post Signs
1. Definition
Any permanent sign supported by one or more upright(s) or brace in or upon
the ground and not attached to any building or wall, but not including a
ground sign or billboard.
106
2. Size and Height Regulations
i. The maximum square foot area for each face of a post sign shall not
exceed 2 square feet for each lineal foot of the longest dimension of
the parcel upon which it is located.
ii. No post sign shall exceed 35 feet in
height.
4. Regulations Relating to the Area Beneath the
Bottom of Post Signs
i. No post sign may be extended
downward nearer than 5 feet to the
ground or pavement.
ii. Post signs constructed within 10 feet of
any property line must maintain at least
10 feet of vertical clearance from the
ground or pavement to the lowest edge
of the sign.
iii. The area beneath a post sign shall not be
used for storage, nor shall any sign
(permanent or temporary) or structure be
located there.
iv. Landscaping is permitted beneath the
bottom of post signs, provided it does not
exceed a height of 3 feet and at least 5
feet of vertical clearance is maintained
between the bottom of the post sign and
the top of any landscaping.
G. Roof Signs
1. Definition
Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon the roof of any building.
2. Size and Height Regulations
No single roof sign shall, in size, exceed 20% of the total square foot area of
the face of the building upon which it is placed.
Figure 7: Post Sign
Requirements
Figure 7: Post Sign
Requirements
107
H. Projecting Signs
1. Definition
Any sign affixed to a building in such a manner
that which is not substantially parallel to the
surface or plane of the supporting wall and its
leading edge extends more than 12 inches
beyond the surface of such building. Awnings
and canopies are not considered projecting
signs.
2. Size and Height Regulations
i. Projecting signs may extend from the
building into a yard, provided that if the
projecting sign is within 10 feet of any
property line at its closest point, a
minimum of 10 feet of vertical clearance
must be maintained from ground level to
the lowest edge of the sign.
ii. No single projecting sign shall, in size,
exceed 20% of the total square foot
area of the face of the building upon
which it is placed.
I. Awning/Canopy Signs
1. Definition
A sign incorporated into or attached to an awning or canopy.
2. Size and Height Regulations
No single awning/canopy sign shall exceed 20% of the total square foot area
of the face of the building on which it is placed.
3. Placement of Signs below Canopy or Awning
Signs may be constructed below a canopy or awning, provided that;
i. The sign does not extend further than the outer edge of the canopy
or awning,
ii. The sign does not exceed 18 inches in height,
iii. A vertical clearance of 7 feet is maintained from the lowest point of
the sign to the ground or pavement.
Figure 8: Projecting Signs
108
4. Canopy and Awning Regulations
i. All canopies and awnings shall be constructed on private property
only and may be cantilevered over public rights-of-way, with approval
by City Council in accordance with Section 10-21-6(B).
ii. All canopies and awnings shall be made of stoutly constructed
materials capable of withstanding imposed loads.
iii. All canopies and awnings shall provide a minimum of 7 feet of vertical
clearance from the bottom edge of the canopy or awning to grade.
J. Marquee Signs
1. Definition
Any sign which forms part of, or is integrated into, a marquee and which does
not extend horizontally beyond the limits of such marquee. A marquee is defined
as a permanent canopy structure constructed of rigid materials that are attached
to and supported by the building and that projects over the entrance to a
building.
2. Size and Height Regulations
i. A sign installed on or as part of a marquee shall not extend more than 3
feet above nor 1 foot below such marquee.
ii. No single marque sign shall, in size, exceed 20% of the total square foot
area of the face of the building on which it is placed.
3. Marquee Regulations
i. Marquees shall not extend more than 8 feet into a front yard.
ii. Marquees shall be a minimum of 10 feet above the ground at its lowest
level.
K. Billboards
1. Definition
A sign that meets any one or more of the following criteria:
i. a permanent structure sign that is used for the display of off-site
commercial messages; or
ii. an outdoor sign on which display space is made available to parties, other
than the owner or operator of the sign or occupant of the parcel, in
exchange for a rent, fee or other consideration;
2. Size and Height Regulations
i. No billboard shall exceed 400 square feet in area.
ii. No billboard shall exceed 25 feet in height above grade.
109
3. Placement
i. Allowed only in the M-2 zoning district.
ii. No billboard shall be located within 400 feet of another billboard also
located on that same parcel.
iii. No billboard, when erected on a lot fronting on intersecting streets
shall be erected within 50 feet of the intersection of the streets.
4. Billboards Located in Vicinity of State Highway
State law requires that any billboard placed in a location that is visible from a
primary state highway and that is within 660 feet of Iowa Department of
Transportation right-of-way obtain a permit from the Iowa Department of
Transportation prior to erection of the billboard; additionally, the following
regulations apply:
i. When a permit is required from the Iowa Department of
Transportation it must be obtained prior to the issuance of a sign
permit by the City of Muscatine.
ii. When City of Muscatine and Iowa Department of Transportation
regulations or rules regarding billboards conflict, the more restrictive
regulation or rule shall apply.
L. Electronic Message Centers
1. Definition
A variable-message sign that utilizes computer generated messages or some
other electronic means of changing copy. These signs include displays using
incandescent lamps, LEDs, LCDs, or similar technology.
2. Applicability
Electronic Message Centers (“EMCs”) are all a component of a defined type
of sign, such as wall signs, ground signs, pole signs, roof signs, or projecting
signs. An EMC must comply with both the regulations that are specific to
EMCs contained in this section and also with the regulations applicable to the
specific type of sign form that it takes. Where regulations conflict, the most
restrictive regulation shall apply.
3. Size Regulations
i. In the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Zoning Districts, and the portions of the
S-1 and S-3 that are designated by their adopted development plans
for single or two family home, no EMC display area shall exceed 18
square feet in area.
110
ii. In the R-5, R-6, S-2, and C-2 Zoning Districts, and the portions of the S-
1 and S-3 that are designated by their adopted development plans for
multi-family home, no EMC display area shall exceed 25 square feet in
area.
3. Message Change Regulations
i. In all residential districts, S-1 and S-2 Districts, and C-2 Districts
message changes shall not occur more frequently than once every 4
seconds.
ii. In all other zoning districts changes shall not occur more frequently
than once every 2 seconds.
iii. Each change of message shall be accomplished in one second or less.
iv. Traveling messages (e.g., moving messages, animated messages, fullmotion
video, scrolling text messages) are prohibited.
4. Illumination Standard
EMCs shall not operate at an intensity level of more than 0.3 foot-candles
over ambient light as measured at a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
5. Additional Regulations
i. The use of EMCs shall be restricted to non-commercial messages, onpremises
advertising, and/or the promotion of not-for-profit
community-wide events or activities.
ii. In residential districts or, parcels where the front yard is adjacent to
or across the street from a residential district, EMCs shall:
a. Be turned off between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m.
b. Set back from all property lines a minimum of 25 feet, or the same
distance as the principal structure; whichever is less.
c. Shall be restricted to red or amber alpha numeric displays on a
dark background.
M. Large Scale Commercial Developments
In Large Scale Commercial Developments, the following sign regulations apply:
1. “Large Scale Commercial Development” is defined as: A property of 20 acres
or more including the main lot and subdivided lot(s), which is used primarily
for allowed commercial uses. The Large Scale Commercial Development can
include one or multiple owners for the entire property or any individual
subdivided lot.
111
2. The total surface area in square feet of any sign(s) on a building shall not be
more than three times the number of lineal feet in the length of the longest
elevation of the building, measured from exterior face of building wall to
exterior face of building wall directly across the plane of the building
elevation, not including building setbacks, nor protrusions, nor canopies, nor
the like appurtenances of the building. Signs may be erected on each wall of
the building and shall not exceed one-fifth (1/5) of the total square foot area
of the face of the building upon which they are placed, but in no event shall
the total square footage of all such signs on a building exceed the total sign
surface area as defined above.
3. All signs shall be affixed on the building walls and/or canopies and shall not
extend outward therefrom more than twelve (12) inches nor project higher
than thirty-five (35) feet above curb level or five feet above building height,
whichever is lower.
4. One post sign for each public road frontage adjacent to the property, each of
which may identify the name of the Large Scale Commercial Development
(and may also identify the name and services or merchandise of each or any
of the retail stores, offices, cinemas and restaurants located in the
development), may be erected in addition to the signs affixed to the building
walls as permitted elsewhere in this chapter. Such signs shall:
a. Have a total surface area of not more than 500 square feet
on each side;
b. Not project higher than 35 feet above grade at the sign;
may be erected so that the sign begins directly at grade
level;
Notwithstanding subparagraphs (a) and (b) above, such signs may not be
located within 10 feet of any parcel line; provided, however, that should the
sign height be 3 feet or less in height measured from the ground elevation at
the base of sign, no setback from property line is required.
5. Ground Signs for Large Scale Commercial Developments shall comply with all
requirements of this chapter with the exception that not more than one
ground sign is allowed per street frontage as otherwise permitted in this
chapter. Additional ground signs may be allowed at public access points into
Large Scale Commercial Developments, subject to the approval of the Site
Plan Review Committee.
112
10-21-7 Temporary Signs
A. Definition
“Temporary sign” shall mean any sign or sign structure which is not permanently
affixed or installed, and is intended to be displayed for a limited period only.
Examples of such signs include, but are not limited to, the following: banners, flags,
pennants, propellers, valances, balloons, and sandwich boards.
B. General Temporary Sign Regulations
The following shall apply to all temporary signs:
1. Temporary signs are allowed only in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
2. The City may remove or cause to be removed any temporary or portable sign
erected or displayed upon, or projecting into public property.
3. Temporary signs shall not be placed within public rights-of-way, including but
limited to, roadways, bicycle lanes, street shoulders, curbs, sidewalks, and trails.
4. Temporary signs shall not be attached to utility poles or trees.
5. All temporary signs and related supports, including decorative covers, must be
maintained in a graffiti-free and clean like-new condition. Temporary signs shall
be repaired or replaced if they become damaged, defaced, torn, frayed, or
faded.
6. No off-premise advertising is permitted.
C. Duration of Display
1. Generally
The purpose of temporary signs is to display messages for a temporary
duration. Temporary signs shall not be used as subterfuge to circumvent the
regulations that apply to permanent signs or to add permanent signage to a
parcel in addition that which is permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
2. Duration of Display
Temporary signs shall be removed when any of the following criteria is met:
i. A commercial message is obsolete, misleading, or constitutes offpremises
advertising, (e.g. a “for rent” or “for sale” sign in front of a
building which is not for rent or for sale, or a sign that advertise a
business, product, or service that is no long available on the parcel
upon which the temporary sign is located.)
ii. The sign falls into disrepair.
113
iii. The number days for which a particular sign is allowed has lapsed, as
set forth in the following schedule:
a. Yard/Site Signs:
i. Definition: For purposes of this section, Yard/Site
signs shall mean a temporary sign constructed of
paper, vinyl, plastic, wood, metal or other
comparable material, and designed or intended to
be displayed for a short period of time and which is
not attached to a building or other permanent
structure.
ii. Paper or cardboard faced sign: Sign must be
removed within 2 days of placement.
iii. Cloth, fabric, canvas, vinyl sign face or comparable
material: Sign must be removed with 45 days of
placement.
iv. Laminated paper, plastic lined polyethylene bags,
and comparable material: Sign must be removed
within 3 months of placement.
v. Corrugates plastic sign face: Sign must be removed
within 4 months of placement.
vi. Wood or metal signs: Sign must be removed
within 9 months of placement.
b. Banners:.
i. Definition. For purposes of this section, Banners
are defined as any sign of lightweight fabric or
similar material that is attached to a building or
other structure erected for a purpose other than
holding or displaying the banner.
ii. Cloth, fabric, canvas, vinyl sign face or comparable
material: Sign must be removed with 45 days of
placement.
114
c. Window Signs.
i. Signs placed on the inside of windows: not limited.
ii. Signs placed on the outside of windows: Sign
must be removed with 30 days of placement.
D. Frequency of Display
A temporary sign shall not be placed upon a parcel, if within the previous 27 days, a
temporary sign was placed on the subject parcel.
E. Registration
1. All temporary signs, not located within a residential zoning district, shall be
registered with the Community Development Department.
2. The following information shall be provided with the registration of any
temporary sign:
i. Parcel number;
ii. Name and contact information the party responsible for placing the
temporary sign;
iii. Size of temporary sign;
iv. Date of the most recent prior placement, if any, of a temporary sign
on the property.
F. Size Regulations
1. In all residential zoning districts no temporary sign shall exceed 12 square
feet.
2. In all non-residential zoning districts no temporary sign shall exceed 32
square feet.
G. Height Regulations
1. Temporary signs exceeding six feet in height shall be set back at least ten feet
from the nearest property line.
2. The highest point of temporary signs attached to the building shall not
exceed the height of the lowest portion of the roofline on the wall face upon
which it is attached.
H. Number of Temporary Signs Permitted
1. One per street frontage.
115
I. Situations Which Allow for Additional Temporary Signs
1. Elections
In addition to any temporary signs permitted elsewhere in this Chapter, four
additional temporary signs per street frontage may be placed on a parcel for
a period of 70 days prior to and five days after an election. Registration, as is
required by Section 10-21-7(E), of signs allowed permitted by this section is
not required. Any additional signs must comply with all other applicable
regulations contained within this Chapter.
2. Parcel is for Sale or Rent
In addition to any temporary signs permitted elsewhere in this Chapter, one
additional temporary sign per street frontage may be placed when the owner
of the parcel consents and that property is being offered for sale or rent
and the sale or rental of the parcel is being marketed actively through
demonstrable means other than signage on the property such as a listing on
the multiple listing service; advertising in a local newspaper of general
circulation; advertising on a website which is also advertising the sale or
rental of other real estate in the Muscatine area and for a period of 15 days
following the date on which a contract of sale has been executed by a person
purchasing the property. Registration, as is required by Section 10-xxx-7(E),
of signs allowed permitted by this section is not required. Any additional
signs must comply with other all applicable regulations contained within this
chapter, except that for as long as the parcel is actively for a sale or rent any
metal or wood sign may remain displayed indefinitely.
J. Interim Signs
1. Definition
Interim signs are temporary business advertising signs intended to provide
interim signage while the permanent signage is being fabricated, repaired or
prepared for installation.
2. Size Regulations
The maximum size of interim signs shall be the same as the size of
permanent signs permitted by this Chapter.
3. Placement
i. The allowed location of interim signs shall be the same as for
permanent signs permitted by this Chapter.
ii. The maximum number of signs shall be the same number of
permanent signs permitted by this Chapter.
116
4. Allowed Duration of Display
Interim signs shall be removed within 3 months or upon installation of new
signs, whichever comes first.
117
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 22 – Fence Regulations
Sections
10-22-1 Regulations for Fences in Residential Districts
10-22-2 Regulations for Fences in Non-Residential Districts
10-22-3 Sight Triangle
10-22-4 Fencing Required Around Outdoor Pools
10-22-1 Regulations for Fences in Residential Districts
Fences in residential districts shall comply with the following regulations:
I. Definitions
For the purposes of this section only, the following terms are defined:
1. Lot Lines: The property lines along the edge of a lot.
2. Street Lot Lines: A lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. Street lot line
does not include lot lines that abut an alley.
3. Corner Lot: A lot which has street lot lines that intersect.
4. Through Lot: A lot which has street lot lines that do not intersect. A lot with three
street lot lines can be both a corner and through lot.
5. Building Line: A line running parallel to a lot line, that is the same distance from the
lot line as the closest portion of the main building on the lot, extended the full width
of the lot.
6. Front Lot Line
a. On a lot only abutting one street, the front lot line is the full length of a lot
line that abuts a street.
b. On a corner lot, the front lot line is the shortest of the lot lines that abut a
street, regardless of the location of the building's architectural main
entrance; if the lot is square then the front lot line shall face the building's
architectural main entrance.
c. On a through lot, the front lot line is the street lot line which faces the
building's architectural main entrance.
d. On a lot that is both a corner lot and through lot, the shortest street lot line
shall be deemed to be the front lot line, if two street lot lines are the same
length and shorter than any other street lot lines, the front lot line is the is
the street lot line which faces the building's architectural main entrance.
118
7. Front Yard: The area extending across the full width of the lot extending from the
front building line of the main building to the front lot line.
8. Rear Lot Line: A lot line that is opposite a front lot line.
9. Rear Yard: The area extending the full width of the lot between the rear building
line and the rear lot line, exclusive of any area that meets the definition of a street
side yard or rear side yard.
10. Side Lot Line: A lot line that is neither a front, rear, or street lot line.
11. Side Yard: Areas between a side building lot line and the main building, and which
are between the front and rear building lines.
12. Street Side Lot Line: A lot line that is neither a front or rear lot line, and is a street
lot line.
13. Street Side Yard: The street side yard shall be any area behind the front building
line, that is between any side street lot line and the main building, and which does
not meet the definition of a street rear yard.
14. Street Rear Yard:
a. When the rear lot line is also a street lot line, the street side rear yard shall
be the area between the rear building line and the rear lot line, exclusive of
any area located between a side building line and a side lot line that is a
street lot line.
b. When the rear lot line is not a street lot line, the street side rear yard shall be
the area behind the front building line, that is between the side street lot
line, on the street which the rear lot line of the adjoining lot is parallel to, the
side building line.
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4
119
J. The maximum allowed height of fences are as
follows:
1. Any area of the lot that is between the
main building and a side building line; and
is also between the main building and
either the front or rear building line: 6 feet.
2. Rear Yards: 6 feet.
3. Side Yards: 6 feet.
4. Front Yards:
a. All portions of a front yard that are
more than 25 feet from the front
lot line: 6 feet
b. Portion of front yards that are less
than 25 feet from the front lot line:
i. Fences that are more than 25%
opaque: 3 feet.
ii. Fences that are less than 25%
opaque: 6 feet.
5. Street Side Yards:
a. All portions of a street side yard
that are more than 25 feet from the
street side lot line: 6 feet
b. Portion of street side yards that are
less than 6 feet from the street side
lot line:
i. Fences that are more than
25% opaque: 6 feet.
ii. Fences that are less than
25% opaque: 3 feet.
c. Portion of street side yards that are
more than 6 feet, but less than 25
feet, from the street side lot line:
i. Fences that are more than
25% opaque: 4.5 feet (54
inches).
Examples of Fences that are less than 25% opaque
120
ii. Fences that are less
than 25% opaque: 6
feet.
All portions of a street
side yard that are
located between the
main building and the
side building line: 6
feet.
6. Street Rear Yards:
d. All portions of street rear yards
that are more than 6 feet from
the street rear lot line: 6 feet
e. Portion of street rear yards
that are less than 6 feet from
the street rear lot line:
i. Fences that are more
than 25% opaque: 3
feet.
ii. Fences that are less
than 25% opaque: 6
feet.
f. All portions of a street rear
yard that are located between
the main building and the rear
building line: 6 feet
K. All fencing must be at least 2 feet behind
any improved portion of a public street,
sidewalk, or alley.
L. No fence shall contain barbed wire, razor
wire, electrical current or charge of
electricity, or similar hazardous materials
or devices except in and those parcels in
which the keeping of livestock is
permitted.
Examples of Fences that are more than 25% opaque
121
122
10-22-2 Regulations for Fences in Non-Residential Districts
Fences in non-residential districts shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Barbed wire or similar materials are allowed, if located on top of a fence or wall that is
at least 6 feet in height.
B. No fence shall contain razor wire, broken glass or similar hazardous materials or devices.
10-22-3 Sight Triangle
All fences located with sight distance triangles as defined in Title 10, Chapter 28 must comply
with the height restrictions contained within Title 10 Chapter 28.
10-22-4 Fencing Required Around Outdoor Pools
A swimming pool, or other contained body of water of more
than 24 inches or more in depth at any point and is intended
for swimming, shall be enclosed by a fence or wall meeting
the following criteria:
A. Be entirely enclosed by at least a four-foot wall, fence or
other barrier as measured on the exterior side of the wall,
fence or barrier.
B. Have no openings in the wall, fence or barrier through
which a spherical object 4 inches in diameter can pass.
Figure A.
C. Have a vertical clearance between grade and the bottom
of the wall, fence or barrier of less than 2 inches, as
measured from the side of the wall, fence or barrier that
faces away from the pool.
When a wall, fence or barrier is composed of vertical and
horizontal members and the distance between the tops
of the horizontal members is greater than or equal to 45
inches, spacing between vertical members shall not be
greater than 4 inches. Figure B.
D. When a wall, fence or barrier is composed of vertical and
horizontal members and the distance between the tops of
the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the
horizontal members shall be located on the swimming
pool side of the wall, fence or barrier. Spacing between
the vertical members shall not be greater than 1¾ inches.
Figure C.
Figure A
Figure B
Figure C
123
E. Where there are decorative cutouts on any vertical
member, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed
1¾ inches.
F. When a wall, fence or barrier is composed of diagonal
members, the openings formed by the diagonal
members shall not be greater than 1¾ inches.
G. Mesh size for chain link fences shall not be greater than
a 2¼ inch square, unless the fence is provided with slats
fastened at the top or bottom which reduce the size of
the openings to 1¾ inches. Figure D.
H. Gates for the enclosure shall:
1. Be self-closing and self-latching.
2. The latch shall be located:
i. At least 54 inches above the underlying ground or;
ii. Be located on the pool side of the gate with a release mechanism at least
3 inches below the top of the gate and no opening greater than ½ inch
within 24 inches of the release mechanism.
3. Open outward from the pool.
I. The wall, fence or barrier shall not contain openings, handholds or footholds accessible
from the exterior side of the enclosure that can be used to climb the wall, fence or
barrier.
J. Solid barriers which do not have opening(s) shall not contain indentations or protrusions
except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
K. When an aboveground pool structure is used as barrier or where the barrier is mounted
on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the
ladder or steps shall be:
i. Capable of being secured, locked, or removed to prevent access, without
creating any openings that would allow the passage of a 4 inch sphere,
or;
ii. Surrounded by a wall, fence or barrier that meets all requirements
contained within this Chapter.
Figure D
124
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 23 – Mobile Home Regulations
Sections
10-23-1 General Provisions
10-23-2 Mobile Home Court Standards
10-23-1 General Provisions
Regulations regarding mobile homes shall be as follows:
A. All inhabited mobile homes shall be located in a mobile home court which has received
a conditional use permit and which conforms with the requirements of this chapter.
B. No mobile home outside of an approved mobile home court shall be connected to
utilities, except those mobile homes being offered for sale and not inhabited.
10-23-2 Mobile Home Court Standards
Mobile home courts shall meet the following minimum standards:
A. Each lot provided for the occupancy of a single mobile home unit shall have an area of
not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet and a width of not less than forty-five
feet (45’).
B. No court shall be permitted an average density of mobile home lots of more than nine
(9) per acre.
C. Each mobile home court shall provide an area of not less than ten (10) acres.
D. Each lot shall have provisions for at least two (2) frame ties and two (2) over-the-top
tiedowns equal to or better than the specifications outlined in Booklet TR-75 published
by the Department of Defense.
E. All mobile home courts shall provide lots sufficient in size that no mobile home or any
structure, addition, or appurtenance thereto is located less than ten feet (10’) from the
nearest adjacent court boundary.
F. Space between mobile homes may be used for the parking of motor vehicles if the
space is clearly designated and the vehicle is parked at least ten feet (10’) from the
nearest adjacent buildings.
G. Each mobile home site shall abut or face a clear unoccupied space, driveway, roadway,
or street of not less than twenty feet (20’) in width, which shall have unobstructed
access to a public highway, street, or alley.
H. The mobile home court shall be surrounded by a landscaped strip of open space fifty
feet (50’) wide along the street frontage of a major street and twenty-five feet (25’)
wide along all other lot lines or street frontage.
125
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 24 – Nonconforming Use Regulations
Sections
10-24-1 Nonconforming Use of Buildings
10-24-2 New Structures
10-24-3 Abandonment
10-24-4 Rebuilding or Restoration
10-24-5 Discontinuance
10-24-6 Change in Use
10-24-7 Alterations to Nonconforming Uses
10-24-8 Existence of a Nonconforming Use
10-24-9 Intermittent Use
10-24-1 Nonconforming Use of Buildings
A. The lawful use of a building existing at the effective date of this Ordinance may be
continued, although such does not conform to the provisions hereof, provided no
structural alterations are made.
B. A nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of
the same or of a more restricted classification.
C. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a
conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use.
10-24-2 New Structures
No new structures shall be erected nor shall any additional area of land be utilized other than
that which is lawfully occupied and used at the time this Ordinance takes effect.
10-23-3 Abandonment
A nonconforming building, structure, or use shall be deemed abandoned if the building,
structure, or use is discontinued for a period of one year. Said building, structure, or property
shall not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use and shall be used only in
conformity to and with these regulations. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned:
A. When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; or
B. When the characteristic equipment and the furnishings of the nonconforming use have
been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar equipment
within one year; or
C. When a nonconforming use is replaced by a conforming use; or
126
D. When a nonconforming use has been changed to another use under proper permit from
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
10-24-4 Rebuilding or Restoration
A. If a nonconforming building or use is damaged by fire, explosion, or other catastrophe to
such an extent that the cost of restoration would be less than 50% of the assessed value
of the building at the time of the catastrophe, such building or use may be rebuilt or
restored and used again as previously.
B. Such rebuilding or restoration shall be completed within twelve months after such
catastrophe, and the building as restored shall not be greater in volume or floor space
than the original nonconforming structure.
C. If a nonconforming building or use is damaged to such an extent that the cost of
restoration would exceed 50% of said value, such building or use shall not be restored
and may be replaced only by a conforming building and use.
10-24-5 Discontinuance
If a nonconforming building, structure, or use is abandoned for one year after the adoption of
this Ordinance, it shall not return to its nonconforming state, but must be brought into
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
10-24-6 Change in Use
A. Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to revert to a
nonconforming use.
B. A nonconforming use may be changed to a use of the same or more conforming
classification and such use thereafter shall not be changed to a less conforming
classification.
10-24-7 Alterations to Nonconforming Uses
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in appropriate circumstances and with
appropriate safeguards, permit a nonconforming use to be changed to another
nonconforming use, provided such changed use is more in conformity with the spirit and
intent of this Ordinance than the prior use and is not more injurious, obnoxious, or
offensive to the neighborhood.
B. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in appropriate circumstances and with
appropriate safeguards, permit an expansion of a nonconforming use if such expansion
would not be injurious, obnoxious, or offensive to the neighborhood and would not
constitute an expansion of more than fifty 50% of the previous gross floor area.
127
10-24-8 Existence of a Nonconforming Use
Whether a nonconforming use exists shall be a question of fact and shall be decided by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment after public notice and hearing and in accordance with the rules of
the Board.
10-24-9 Intermittent Use
The casual intermittent, temporary, or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to
establish the existence of a nonconforming use on the part of a lot or tract shall not be
construed to establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract.
128
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 25 – Cemetery Development Standards
Sections
10-25-1 New Cemeteries
10-25-2 Existing Cemeteries (as of December 4, 1986,)
10-25-1 New Cemeteries
A. An irrevocable permanent care and maintenance trust fund shall be established for all
interment of the dead in burial plots, mausoleums and columbariums in accordance
with the laws and regulations of the State of Iowa for perpetual care as presently set
forth and as hereafter amended.
B. An initial site plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council prior to any site development. The Site Plan
Review Process as adopted and amended shall be construed as the guide in developing
a site plan for review.
C. Any alteration or modification of the initially approved site plan shall require
resubmission under the Site Plan Review Process.
D. No mausoleum or columbarium shall be located within three hundred feet of any
cemetery property line or public street.
E. A sign is permitted indicating the name of the cemetery, it shall not exceed 25 square
feet. Any other sign for incidental and accessory uses shall be face mounted on a
building or structure and in total shall not exceed twenty-five square feet. Internal signs
not visible from the property line directing cemetery traffic, posting of cemetery rules,
and designating areas within a cemetery are permitted.
F. No above ground monument or structure shall be placed within 50 feet of any property
line or public streets.
G. Outside storage or display shall be screened from view of adjacent property and public
streets by landscaping or fencing at least 75% opaque. This includes, but is not limited
to, trash bins and vaults or headstones for sale or future use.
H. No burial plots or facilities are permitted on areas designated as flood plain by the
City’s Federal Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
I. Assurances must be provided that water supplies of surrounding properties will not be
adversely affected by cemetery operations.
129
10-25-2 Existing Cemeteries, as of December 4, 1986
A. An irrevocable permanent care and maintenance trust fund shall be established for all
interment of the dead in burial plots, mausoleums and columbariums in accordance
with the laws and regulations of the State of Iowa for perpetual care as presently set
forth and as hereafter amended.
B. An initial site plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council prior to any site development. The Site Plan Review
Process as adopted and amended shall be construed as the guide in developing a site
plan for review. Any alteration or modification of the initially approved site plan shall
require resubmission under the Site Plan Review Process.
C. No mausoleum or columbarium shall be located within 200 feet of any cemetery
property line or public street.
D. All existing signs shall continue to be permitted. In the event any existing sign visible
from adjacent property or public street is to be changed or replaced, it shall comply with
all other local regulations as well as the provisions of 10-25-1(E).
E. Subsurface grave site interments in development areas may continue in accordance
with the pattern established by existing burials. Undeveloped areas abutting adjacent
residential lots are subject to a setback provision of 25 feet from said property line. The
use of the first 25 feet of undeveloped areas adjacent to public streets shall be
restricted to flush mounted subsurface gravesite interments only.
F. Proposed outside storage or display shall be screened from view of adjacent property
and public streets by landscaping or fencing at least 75% opaque. This includes but is not
limited to, trash bins, and vaults or headstones for sale or future use.
G. Subject to applicable property line and public street setback requirements as set out in
10-25-2(C), a crematory shall be a permissive use within Memorial Park Cemetery.
130
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 26 – Additional Height, Yard, and Density Regulations
Sections
10-26-1 Exceptions to Height Limits
10-26-2 Additional Yard Requirements
10-26-3 Exceptions to Yard Requirements
10-26-4 Exceptions to Lot Area and Width Requirements
10-26-1 Exceptions to Height Limits
Height limits may be exceeded in the following instances:
A. Public, semi-public, or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, agricultural
buildings, or schools when permitted in a district may be erected to a height not
exceeding sixty feet (60') and churches and temples may be erected to a height not
exceeding seventy-five feet (75'), if the building is set back from each yard line at least
one foot (1') for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
B. Church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or
scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator
bulkheads, stacks, conveyors, and flag poles may be erected to such height as may be
authorized by the City Council.
C. The height of towers, transmission equipment, and wireless supports structures as
defined in Section 10-30-2 shall be regulated by Chapter 30
131
10-26-2 Additional Yard Requirements
The following additional yard requirements must also be
observed:
A. Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half
of the alley width may be considered as a portion
of the required yard. For the purpose of side yard
regulations, a two-family dwelling or multi-family
dwelling shall be considered as one building
occupying one lot.
B. Where the R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 Districts abut the
R-1 or R-2 District, a minimum side yard shall be ten
feet.
C. On a lot fronting on two nonintersecting streets, a
front yard must be provided on both streets.
D. On corner lots, there must be a front yard on both
streets. On corner lots that are lots of record, the
buildable width cannot be reduced to less than 28
feet, except that there shall be a yard along the side
street of such a lot of at least five feet.
E. Where a frontage is divided among districts with
different front yard requirements, the deepest front
yard required shall apply to the entire frontage.
F. In the C-1, M-1, and S-1 Districts, there may be more
than one building on a lot, provided that:
1. The lot is under, and will be retained under,
single ownership, whether a private
individual or corporation.
2. A site plan is provided to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval prior
to obtaining a building permit.
3. All separate buildings and uses are interrelated and part of a cohesive
development plan.
4. The applicable street and utility standards apply.
Illustration 26-2D
Illustration 26-2A
132
G. There may be two or more related multifamily,
hotel, motel, or institutional
buildings on a lot; provided that:
1. The required yards be maintained
around the group of buildings,
and
2. Buildings that are parallel or that
are within 45° of being parallel be
separated by a horizontal
distance that is at least equal to
the height of the highest building.
H. No part of an existing building that
violates yard regulations when damaged
by any cause whatsoever to the extent of
more than 65% of the fair market value of the building immediately prior to damage
shall be restored, except in conformity with the yard regulations of this Ordinance.
I. Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a
street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, then the depth of front or side
yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building.
J. The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, places of worship, community
buildings, and other public and semipublic buildings in residential districts shall be 25
feet, except where a side yard is adjacent to a commercial or industrial district, in which
case the width of that yard shall be as required in the district in which the building is
located.
10-26-3 Exceptions to Yard Requirements
The following exceptions may be made to the yard requirements:
A. Where, on the effective date of this Ordinance, f40% or more of a frontage was
occupied by two or more buildings, then the front yard is established in the following
manner:
1. Where the building furthermost from the street provides a front yard not more
than ten feet deeper than the building closest to the street, then the front yard
for the frontage is and remains an average of the then existing front yards.
2. Where subsection 1 is not the case and a lot is within 100 feet of a building on
each side, then the front yard is a line drawn from the closest front corners of
these two adjacent buildings.
Illustration 26-2G
133
3. Where neither subsections 1 nor 2 is the case, and the lot is within 100 feet of an
existing building on one side only, then the front yard is the same as that of the
existing adjacent building.
B. Sills, belt courses, window air-conditioning units, chimneys, cornices, and ornamental
features may project into a required yard a distance not to exceed two feet
C. Filling station pumps and pump islands may occupy required yards, provided, however,
that they are not less than fifteen feet from all lot lines.
D. Signs in accordance with Chapter 10-21.
E. Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers,
and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard for a distance of not
more than five feet, when so placed as to not obstruct light and ventilation.
F. Open, unenclosed, or screened porches (not glassed in) may extend ten feet into a front
yard.
G. Terraces which do not extend above the level of the ground (first) floor may project into
a required yard, provided these projections be distant at least two feet from the
adjacent side lot line.
H. No side yards are required where dwellings are erected above commercial and industrial
structures, except such side yard as may be required for a commercial or industrial
building on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district.
I. Accessory buildings and uses may be located in a rear yard, but may not occupy more
than 40% of a rear yard.
J. On corner lots, the minimum buildable width of 28 feet for main buildings is reduced to
twenty-two feet for accessory buildings.
K. Satellite receiving dishes shall be erected and maintained behind the building line in
residential districts and shall be located not nearer than four feet to any side or rear lot
line.
10-26-4 Exceptions to Lot Area and Width Requirements
The minimum lot area and lot width requirements established above may be modified as
follows:
A. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance has less area or
frontage than herein required in the district in which it is located, said lot may
nevertheless be used for any use permitted in the district in which it is located.
B. The number of permitted dwelling units for multi-family dwellings may be increased in
the following instances, with the percentages in sections 1 through 5 to be applied
individually and not cumulatively:
134
1. By five percent if a landscaped buffer area not used for off-street parking, with a
minimum depth of ten feet or a masonry wall six feet in height is provided on all
lot lines that are also district boundaries with a less restricted zoning district.
2. By ten percent if the project provides at least two off-street parking spaces for
each dwelling unit.
3. By five percent if all of the required parking spaces are enclosed or in an
underground structure.
4. By ten percent (if the project includes a club, tennis court, swimming pool, or
other major recreation facility occupying at least two-tenths (0.2) of a square
foot of land area for each square foot of floor area in the buildings.
C. Existing buildings that are in violation of lot area requirements may be remodeled or
repaired, but may not be reconstructed or structurally altered unless made to conform
to existing yard requirements for that district.
D. Lot area per family requirements shall not apply to dormitories, fraternities, sororities,
nursing homes, or other similar group quarters where no cooking facilities are provided
in individual rooms or apartments.
135
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 27 – Off-Street Parking & Loading Regulations
Sections
10-27-1 Rules for Computing Required Off-Street Parking
10-27-2 Minimum Number of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
10-27-3 Reduction in the Number of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
10-27-4 Accessible Parking Regulations
10-27-5 Off-Street Loading Requirements
10-27-6 Shared Use of Required Parking Spaces
10-27-7 Location of Required Parking Spaces
10-27-8 Standards for All Parking Lots, Garages, Drive Lanes, and Driveways
10-27-9 Minimum Off-Street Parking Space Dimensions
10-27-10 Minimum Parking Aisle Width
10-27-11 Stormwater Management
10-27-12 Landscaping Standards
10-27-13 Standards for Required Trees and Shrubs
10-27-14 Bicycle Parking
10-27-1 Rules for Computing Required Off-Street Parking
In computing the number of required off-street parking spaces or loading spaces, the following
rules shall apply:
A. Floor area shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use, excluding any floor or
portion thereof used for parking, as herein defined.
B. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be the nearest
whole number.
C. In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately or be the subject of a
shared parking agreement under the provision of Section 10-27-6.
D. Whenever an existing building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number
of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, and parking
spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement of change.
136
10-27-2 Minimum Number of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required is determined by the use of a parcel
and are as follows:
A. Single-Family Residential: 2 per dwelling unit
B. Duplex: 2 per dwelling unit
C. Multi-Family Residential
1. Efficiencies & One Bedroom: 1 per unit
2. Two Bedroom Unit and all Dwelling Units in the Mixed Use – Downtown District
with at least Two Bedrooms: 1½ per unit
3. Three Bedroom or More Units: 2 per unit
4. All Multi-Family Residential Dwelling Units Located in Areas Zoned for Single-
Family Dwelling Units: 2 per unit.
D. Boarding House: 1 per 2 tenants
E. Place of Worship: 1 per 4 fixed seats, 1 per 8 feet of bench length, or 1 per every 28
square feet in areas where no permanent seats are maintained in the main auditorium
(sanctuary or place of worship)
F. Elementary and Middle School: 2 per classroom, plus 1 per employee
G. High School or College: 10 per classroom, plus 1 per employee
H. Ballet, Martial Arts, Dance & Gymnastics School/Academy/Studio or other like
establishment: 1 per 80 square feet of activity area
I. Public Building: 1 per 330 square feet of gross floor area
J. Office (Non-medical): 1 per 330 square feet of gross floor area
K. Medical Office: 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area
L. Hospital: 2 per bed
M. Nursing Home: 1 per 4 beds
N. Industrial: 2 per each 3 employees on maximum shift, plus 1 per vehicle use in
connection therewith
O. Warehouse: 1 per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area
P. Mini-Storage Warehousing: 3 plus 1 per 100 storage units
Q. Eating & Drinking Establishment: 1 per 66 square feet of seating floor plus 1 each for
each 440 square feet of non-seating floor area
R. Drive-Through Food Restaurant: 1 per 66 square feet of seating floor plus 1 each for
each 440 square feet of non-seating floor area plus, 5 stacking spaces per drive-through,
including service window and menu board areas
S. Movie Theater: 1 per 4.5 seats
T. Bowling Alley: 4 per lane, plus one per employee on the largest shift
137
U. Recreation Center: 1 per 4 persons at maximum capacity
V. Golf Course: 3 parking spaces per green, plus fifty percent (50%) of the spaces otherwise
required for any accessory use (e.g., bars, restaurants).
W. Furniture and/or Major Appliance Stores: 1 per 660 square feet of gross floor area
X. Motor Vehicle (Including Boats) Sales, Display, and Rental: 1 space for every 330
square feet of floor used for indoor display and 1 parking space for each 660 square feet
of for all indoor space not used for display. Parking spaces used for the display and
storage of vehicles for sale or rent shall not be used to meet the requirements of this
Section.
Y. Transportation or Trucking Yards: Parking for customers and employees shall be
calculated by the individual component uses such as but not limited to offices for the
dispatch areas, warehouses for transshipment or warehouse type areas.
Z. Beauty and Barber Shops: 1 per employee plus 1 per 1.5 hairdresser/barber station
AA. Funeral Homes, Chapels, Crematoriums, Mortuaries: 1 per 4 persons at maximum
capacity
BB. Day Care/Child-Care Facilities: 1 per employee plus 1 off-street passenger drop off/pick
up space per 10 students
CC. Hotel/Motel: 1 per guest room
DD. All Nonresidential Uses within the Mixed Use - Downtown District: No off-street
parking required
EE. All Other nonresidential Uses: 1 per 330 square feet of gross floor area
10-27-3 Reduction in the Number of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
A. The Site Plan Review Committee, in accordance with the site plan review process
contained in Section 10-2-7(I), may authorize adjustments be made to the required
number of off-street parking spaces as established by Section 10-27-2 based on the
following criteria:
1. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced by up to 50%
when the applicant for a development can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Site Plan Review Committee, that the use of alternative modes of transportation,
including transit, bicycles, and walking, and/or special characteristics of the
customer, client, user, employee or resident population will reduce expected
vehicle use and parking space demand for this development, as compared to offstreet
parking space requirements contained in Section 10-27-2 and such a
reduction in the number of required off street parking spaces will not adversely
impact the surrounding area.
138
2. Costs associated with providing the required off-street parking spaces shall not be
used as a justification for a reduction in the number of required off-street parking
spaces.
10-27-4 Accessible Parking Regulations
All parking facilities shall comply with 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design and all other
applicable Federal or State code/regulations.
A. A. Except as noted in Section 10-27-4(B), Section 10-27-4(C) and 10-27-4(D), the
B. required number of accessible parking spaces is as indicated in the following
C. table.
D.
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of Total
1,001 & over 20, plus 1 each for each 100 over 1,000
B. For outpatient, medical offices and treatment
facilities, 10% of total parking spaces, not including
those that are restricted for the use of employees,
shall be handicap accessible.
C. For facilities that specialize in treatment or services
for persons with mobility impairments, 20% of total
parking spaces, not including those that are restricted
for the use of employees, shall be handicap accessible.
D. For residential facilities:
1. Where at least one parking space is provided
for each residential dwelling unit, at least one
accessible space shall be provided for each
residential unit that are required by the
American with Disabilities Act to provide
mobility features complying with Sections
809.2 through 809.4 of the 2010 ADA
Standards for Accessible Design.
139
2. Where the total number of parking spaces provided for each unit exceed
one per residential unit, 2% but no less than one accessible space shall be
provided in addition to any space required by Section 10-27-4(D)(1).
.
3. Where parking spaces are provided for persons other than residents,
accessible spaces in a number that is in accordance with Section 10-27-
4(A) shall be provided.
E. Individual accessible parking spaces shall have an additional five-foot-wide,
diagonally striped aisle abutting the passenger side of the space. If such spaces
are provided in adjacent pairs, then one five-foot aisle may be shared between
the two spaces.
F. One in every six accessible parking spaces, but not less than one, shall be served
by a van accessible space, which is an accessible parking space with a loading
area of at least eight feet wide.
G. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle.
H. Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the building or facility
entrance and shall comply with Americans with Disabilities Accessibility
Guidelines accessible route requirements.
I. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible route.
J. Parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding
1:48 in all directions.
K. Each accessible parking space must be accompanied by a sign with the
international symbol of accessibility mounted at five feet above the ground.
Signage for van accessible spaces shall include the written designation “van
accessible”.
L. Persons with disabilities parking spaces and access loading zones for persons
with disabilities that serve a particular building shall be located on the shortest
accessible route to the nearest accessible entrance with a minimum four-footwide
sidewalk, said sidewalk shall comply with all relevant ADA standards. In
parking facilities that do not serve a particular building, accessible parking spaces
shall be located on the shortest route to an accessible pedestrian entrance to the
parking facility. Where buildings have multiple accessible entrances with
adjacent parking, accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located near
the accessible entrances.
140
10-27-5 Off-Street Loading Requirements
A. On the same premises with every building or part thereof, erected and occupied
for commercial, industrial or other similar use involving the receipt or
distribution of vehicles, material or merchandise, there shall be provided and
maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading or unloading services
in order to avoid undue interference with street or parking areas.
B. All nonresidential uses within the C-2 Central Commercial District are exempt
from the requirements of this Section.
C. Off-street loading space areas shall not be construed, as, or counted towards,
the supplying of area required as off-street parking space area.
D. The loading and unloading space, unless completely and adequately provided for
within a building, shall be a minimum area of 10 feet by 25 feet with 14 foot
height clearance.
E. The minimum number off-street loading spaces required are as indicated in the
following table:
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Number of Loading Spaces Required
0 to 2,000 None
2,000 to 20,000 1
20,000 to 100,000 1 space plus 1 space for each 20,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
area in excess of 20,000 sq. ft.
100,000 to 500,000 5 spaces plus 1 space for each 40,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
area in excess of 100,000 sq. ft.
Over 500,000 15 spaces plus 1 space for each 80,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
area in excess of 500,000 sq. ft.
F. In all cases where the off-street loading space is located in a manner that a truck
must back directly from a major street into a loading space, a maneuvering space
of not less than 50 feet shall be provided on the subject parcel.
G. All off-street loading spaces shall be paved and shall be screened from any front
yard area, unless the front yard is across the street from a parcel located in
either the M-1 or M-2 District, either by the building existing on the lot or by a
planting screen or fence.
H. The minimum number of loading spaces may be reduced by up to 50% when the
applicant for a development can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Site Plan
Review Committee, that the special characteristics of the customer, client, user,
employee or resident population will reduce expected loading space demand for
141
this development, as compared to the off-street loading space requirements
contained in Section 10-27-5.
10-27-6 Shared Use of Required Parking Spaces
A. One parking area may contain required spaces for several different uses but, except as
otherwise provided in this section, the required space assigned to one use may not be
credited to any other use.
B. To the extent developments that wish to make joint use of the same parking spaces
operate at different times, the same spaces may be credited to both uses. For example,
if a parking lot is used in connection with an office building on Monday through Friday,
but is 90% vacant on the weekends, another development that operates only on
weekends could be credited with 90% of the spaces on that lot. Similarly, if a church
parking lot is generally occupied only to 50% of capacity on days other than Sunday,
another development could make use of 50% of the church's spaces on those other
days.
C. Joint use parking agreements between adjoining properties, or in planned
developments on the same property, shall identify:
1. The number of vehicle spaces provided for each land use activity(ies);
2. The dates and times when said activities are conducted;
3. Subsequently be recorded with the County Recorder’s Office prior to
occupancy or use of said property or facilities.
10-27-7 Location of Required Parking Spaces
All parking spaces required herein shall be located as follows:
A. The parking spaces required for residential buildings or uses shall be located on the
same lot with the building or use served and located behind the front building line.
B. The parking spaces required for any other building or use may be located on an area
within 300 feet of said building and two or more owners of buildings may join together
in providing the required parking spaces. Where the required parking spaces are not
located on the same lot with the building or use served, the usage of the lot or tract
upon which said parking spaces are provided shall be restricted by an instrument of
record describing the premises for which said parking is provided and assuring the
retention of such parking so long as required by this Ordinance.
C. In residential districts vehicles may be parked in the portion of any driveway located in
front of the front line of the main building; however, parking in this area may not be
used to satisfy requirements for a minimum number of off street parking spaces.
142
10-27-8 Standards for All Parking Lots, Garages, Drive Lanes, and Driveways
All areas intended for vehicular use, including but not limited to parking lots, garages, drive
lanes, and driveways shall conform to the following improvement and maintenance standards:
A. All parking areas, drives, lanes, aisles, loading spaces and any other outdoor spaces
that accommodate vehicles shall be hard surfaced with materials such as Portland
Concrete Cement or Asphaltic concrete (Asphalt), and shall be maintained so as to
provide a durable pavement surface free of dust, weeds, and standing water.
B. Portland Concrete Cement or Asphaltic concrete (Asphalt) hard surfacing shall meet
all the following standards and shall be constructed to have the minimum pavement
structural number as follows:
1. Areas subjected to only automobile loading: 2.5
2. Areas subjected to truck loading: 3.0.
C. Gravel, crushed stone, dirt, chip seal, oil, sand or other such surfacing materials shall
not be permitted.
D. Other type of types of hard surfacing, that are not specifically prohibited, which
create a durable pavement surface free of dust, weeds, and standing water, may be
permitted if the material and specifications are approved in advance by the City of
Muscatine.
E. Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm water so that water will
not flow onto adjoining property or adjacent sidewalks in a quantity or manner that
would be detrimental thereto, or inconvenient to persons using the sidewalk.
F. A structurally sound wall or other abutment approved by the City Engineer to ensure
safety shall be installed around each side of the parking lot wherever necessary to
prevent the washing of soil to and from adjoining property, and a wall or screen of
such height and character as are necessary for adequate screening of the parking lot
from adjacent property shall also be provided to meet requirements of the City
Engineer.
G. The location and width of entrances and exits to and from the lot or garage shall be
as determined by the City Engineer, but there shall not be more than one entrance
and one exit, or one combined entrance or exit, along any one street, unless the
same is deemed necessary by the City Council for the alleviation of traffic congestion
and interference of traffic movement along such street.
H. The location of each parking space and the location and direction of movement
along the driveways providing access thereto shall be indicated by painting upon the
surface, by raised directional signs, or by markers or other similar measures placed
in the surfacing, where required by the City Engineer.
143
F. Wherever the parking lots or garages are to be used during darkness, a system of
lighting shall be installed to provide an adequate standard of illumination over the
entire parking lot.
G. Light fixtures provided for any off-street parking area adjacent to a residential use or
residentially zoned lot shall shield the source of light from sight and prevent the
spillover of direct light onto the residential use, while still providing security to
motorists, pedestrians and bicyclists.
H. A sign, the size and character of which shall be approved by the Site Plan Review
Committee, shall be installed showing the ownership of the lot or garage and the
permitted use thereof. If the lot or garage is so operated that a charge is made for
the use of the parking facilities, the rates for parking shall be legibly shown upon the
sign.
I. A temporary shelter for the use of parking lot attendants may be maintained on the
lot, provided the location, construction, and design of the same shall first be
approved by the Site Plan Review Committee.
J. The parking lot or garage shall be maintained in a manner to keep it as free as
practicable from dust, paper, and other loose particles, and snow and ice shall be
promptly removed by the operator. All adjacent sidewalks shall be kept free from
dirt, ice, sleet, and snow and in a safe condition for use by pedestrians. All signs,
markers, or any other methods used to indicate direction of traffic movement and
location of parking spaces shall be maintained in a neat and legible condition.
Likewise, any walls, trees, and shrubbery, as well as surfacing of the parking lot or
garage, shall be maintained in good condition throughout its use for parking
purposes and the City Engineer shall have the authority to prohibit the use of the
area for parking purposes, unless and until proper maintenance, repair, or
rehabilitation is completed.
144
10-27-9 Minimum Off-Street Parking Space Dimensions
A. Width: 9.5 Feet
B. Length: 18 Feet
10-27-10 Minimum Parking Aisle Width
The minimum width of drive aisles providing access to
parking spaces shall be as follows:
A. Two Way Traffic: 24’
B. One-Way Traffic - 90° Parking Angle: 24’
C. One-Way Traffic - 75° Parking Angle: 18’
D. One-Way Traffic - 60° Parking Angle: 14’ 6”
E. One-Way Traffic - 45° Parking Angle: 12’ 8”
F. One-Way Traffic - 30° Parking Angle: 11’
10-27-11 Stormwater Management
Stormwater from parking lots shall drain to approved stormwater quality management practices. These
practices are structural stormwater controls used to capture and treat a volume of stormwater runoff.
A. These stormwater management practices shall be constructed in accordance with the
most current version of the Iowa Stormwater Management Manual and must be reviewed
and approved by the Public Works Department before construction.
B. Stormwater management practices shall be designed and built to accommodate the
runoff for the entire parking lot at an event rainfall depth of 1.25”.
C. Stormwater management practices may be located in landscaped islands or landscaped
buffers required by this Chapter.
D. Stormwater management practices shall be maintained in good working order.
10-27-12 Landscaping Standards
The landscaping requirements in this section are intended to maximize the natural areas
retained in any parking lot in order to optimize natural infiltration of rainwater, intercept and
manage stormwater runoff, and provide an aesthetic setting for development. In order to
accomplish these goals the following standards shall apply:
Figure B
145
A. Landscaped Islands
1. Landscaped islands meeting all the criteria set forth in this chapter
shall be constructed in the portions of parking areas, containing 15 or
more parking spaces, that are between any public street and a line
drawn parallel the nearest face of the main building. Parking areas for
large truck and semis do not require landscaped islands. If there is no
structure on a parcel, landscaped islands shall be required in the
entire parking lot.
2. Such islands shall be located:
a. At the ends of each parking aisle;
b. As intermediate islands in long rows of spaces, in a manner
so that no more than fifteen parking spaces are directly
adjacent to one another;
c. As separation between pedestrian walkways and parking
spaces.
3. The minimum size for a landscaped island shall be 100 square
feet. If two required landscaped in adjoining row of parking are
combined the minimum size shall be 100 square feet.
4. A minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted
on each required parking lot island.
Figure C
146
B. Screening Parking Lots from Residential Properties
To ensure that adjacent residents are not unreasonably disturbed, either by day
or by night, by vehicle operations, parking areas adjacent to any residentially
zoned property shall be screened from view by a solid wall or fence with a
minimum height of 6 feet.
C. Landscaped Buffers along Streets
1. Parking lots shall be visually screened from all abutting streets by a
landscaped buffer area at least 6 feet in width.
2. A minimum of one tree and 6 shrubs shall be planted in the
landscaped buffer per 25 linear feet of street frontage.
3. All fractional amounts of required trees or shrubs shall be rounded up
to the next whole number. For example, 2.15 trees rounds up to three
trees.
4. Where existing conditions or other provisions of this Ordinance make
it impracticable to meet the requirements of Section 10-27-12(C), the
Site Plan Review Committee may approve a modification to the width
or location of the landscaped buffer area, or the spacing or number of
trees in the landscaped buffer area, so long as there is no net loss of
planted area or number of trees required if at all possible.
10-27-13 Standards for Required Trees and Shrubs
A. Required Size
All trees and shrubs that are required by this chapter shall meet the following
requirements.
147
1. Deciduous trees shall be planted at 3 inches in caliper.
2. Evergreen trees shall be coniferous species planted at six feet in height.
3. Shrubs shall be either deciduous species planted at 2½ feet in height or evergreen
species planted at 2 ½ feet in spread.
B. Required Maintenance
All planting required by this Chapter shall be maintained to continue its effectiveness. If it
deteriorates or dies, it shall be repaired or replaced no later than the next planting season.
C. Permitted Tree Varieties
Any tree or shrub planted in a landscaped parking lot island or in landscaped buffer yard
that is required by Section 10-27-12 shall be of one of the following approved varieties.
1. Ornamental Pears: Cleveland Select or Red Spire
2. Japanese Tree Lilac
3. Maple, Sugar
4. Maple, Black
5. Maple, Red
6. Hackberry
7. Honey Locust, seedless thornless
8. Gingko, male only
9. London Plane Tree
10. Oak, Swamp White
11. Oak, Burr
12. Oak, Red
13. Oak, Scarlet
14. Oak, English
15. Linden, American
16. Linden, Little Leaf
17. Zelkova
18. Beech
19. Elm, Princeton
20. Tulip Tree
21. Iron Wood
22. Narrow vase shaped Crab Apples: Adirondack and Marilee
23. Any other variety not listed, but which has been approved for
planting in the right-of-way by the City of Muscatine.
D. A tree may be planted in lieu of any shrub required by this chapter. Trees
planted in lieu of a required shrub need not be three inces in caliper.
148
10-27-14 Bicycle Parking
A. Minimum Number of Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
For all nonresidential uses and multifamily residential developments
containing more than 4 dwelling units, a minimum number of bicycle rack(s)
are required as indicated in the following table.
Minimum Required Number
Motor Vehicle Parking Spaces Minimum Number of Bicycle Racks
0-5 None
5-40 1
41-60 2
61-80 3
81-100 4
Over 100
5 or 5% of the minimum number of
motor vehicle space, whichever is
greater
B. Location
1. All required bicycle parking racks shall be located within a 100-
foot diameter of the primary building entrance.
2. All required bicycle racks shall be located in highly visible and
well-lit areas to minimize theft and vandalism.
3. A minimum of four feet from the required bicycle rack dimension
shall be provided for pedestrian clearance when a bicycle rack is
placed within a sidewalk or pedestrian right-of-way.
4. Bicycle parking facilities shall not interfere with accessible paths
of travel or accessible parking as required by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.
149
C. Layout and Design
1. Each bicycle rack shall be designed to accommodate two bike
parking spaces using the allowed bike rack designs below.
2. Bicycle racks shall be designed to accommodate U-shaped locking
devices. The bicycle frame and one wheel can be locked to the
rack with a high security, U-shaped shackle lock if both wheels are
left on the bicycle.
3. The bicycle racks shall be constructed of durable materials to
withstand permanent exposure to the elements, such as powdercoated
metal or stainless steel.
4. All bicycle parking spaces must be hard-surfaced and dust free.
5. All bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to the ground using a
concrete footing and tamper-proof spike anchors.
6. In cases where bicycle racks are not visible from the primary
street, signage shall be used to direct cyclists safely to bicycle
parking areas.
150
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 28 – Sight Distance Triangle Regulations
Sections
10-28-1 Sight Distance Triangle Requirement
10-28-2 Sight Distance Triangle Dimensions
10-28-3 Vertical Clear Zone
10-28-1 Sight Distance Triangle Requirement
Where property abuts the intersection of two streets or the intersection of an alley and a
street, an unobstructed view shall be provided and maintained at all times within the sight
distance triangle and vertical clear zone as described in this chapter.
10-28-2 Sight Distance Triangle Dimensions
The sight distance triangle is the horizontal area at the intersection of two streets. Two sides of
the triangle are measured 30 feet from the corner intersection along the curb and gutter flow
line, or if no curb exists, from the edge of pavement. Where an intersection has rounded
corners, the sides will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection.
151
10-28-3 Vertical Clear Zone
The vertical clear zone is the area above a sight distance triangle in which obstructions shall be
minimized to provide a clear view.
A. Height
The vertical clear zone is measured vertically from the curb and gutter flow line, or if no
curb exists, from the edge of pavement. The clear zone is the area between a height of
three feet and seven feet.
B. Obstruction Prohibited
The vertical clear zone shall be free of obstructions, including but not limited to fences,
walls, landscaping, signs, structures, tree canopies or parked vehicles.
C. Exemption of Certain Point Obstructions
Certain objects are considered point obstructions and are permitted because a driver
can move slightly and be able to see around them. The following objects are permitted
with in the vertical clear zone.
1. Poles with a diameter of less than one foot that support an approved sign, flag or
similar devices.
2. Official traffic control devices.
3. Utility equipment, such as but not limited to poles, transformers, distribution
equipment, etc.
4. Mailboxes.
5. Trees that are devoid of branches between three and seven feet from the ground
and that are spaced in manner that minimizes visual obstruction.
6. Any obstruction that was permitted by City Code on the date that it was installed.
152
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 29 – Keeping of Animals in Residential Districts
Sections
10-29-1 Applicability
10-29-2 Definitions
10-29-3 Regulations Applying to Parcels Under 2 Acres in Size
10-29-4 Regulations Applying to Parcels More than 2 Acres but Less than 20 Acres in Size
10-29-5 Regulations Applying to Parcels More 20 Acres in Size
10-29-6 Keeping of Hives or Colonies of Bees
10-29-1 Applicability
A. The raising and keeping of any animals within a residential zoned district shall comply
with the regulations contained within this chapter.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting a type or species of animal that
is prohibited elsewhere in the City Code.
10-29-2 Definitions
A. Domestic Companion Animal: A domestic animal customarily kept, and cared for, by
the occupants of a dwelling for personal pleasure, and which are not raised for food or
fur, or monetary gain. Typically, this includes dogs, cats, birds and other small mammals
and reptiles, but not fowl, herd animals, goats, horses, other farm type animals, or types
of animals prohibited elsewhere in City Code.
B. Small Farm Type Animal: Small sized animals or fowl normally raised on a farm, or as
part of commercial agricultural or animal husbandry operation, or normally used for
purposes related to agricultural production, including but not limited to, chickens,
guinea hens, geese, ducks, turkeys, pigeons, mink, and other animals or fowl of similar
size and type, whose mature weight is less than 30 pounds. Young or miniature large
animals are not included in this definition and are considered large animals. The
category does not include domestic companion animals.
C. Medium Farm Type Animal: Medium sized animals or fowl normally raised on a farm,
or as part of commercial agricultural or animal husbandry operation, or normally used
for purposes related to agricultural production, including but not limited to, sheep,
goats, or similar medium sized animals whose mature weight is between 30 and 500
pounds. The category does not include domestic companion animals.
153
D. Large Farm Type Animal: Includes, but not limited to, horses, donkeys, burros, llamas,
bovines, bison, camels, ostriches, emu, and other animals or livestock of similar size and
type, whose mature weight exceeds 500 pounds.
10-29-3 Regulations Applying to Parcels Under 2 Acres in Size
A. Keeping of domestic companion animals of a type and in a manner that is in compliance
with all relevant sections of City Code is permitted.
B. All pens, cages or any other structure related to the keeping of domestic companion
animals shall be maintained in a sanitary manner free from noxious odor, and conditions
shall limit noise and the attraction of insects and rodents so as not to cause a nuisance
to occupants of nearby buildings or properties. Furthermore, domestic companion
animals shall not be kept in a manner that is injurious or unhealthful to the animals
being kept on the property.
C. Keeping of small farm type animals, medium farm type animals, or large farm type
animals is prohibited.
D. Kennels or any other forms of boarding animals for compensation are prohibited.
10-29-4 Regulations Applying to Parcels More than 2 Acres but Less
than 20 Acres in Size
A. Keeping of domestic companion animals of a type and in a manner that is in compliance
with all relevant sections of City Code is permitted.
B. Maximum number of farm type of animals permitted:
1. Small farm type animals: Maximum of 4 small farm type animals per acre.
2. Medium farm type animals: Maximum of 2 medium farm type animals per acre.
3. Large farm type animals: Maximum of 1 large farm type animal per acre.
E. Keeping of roosters, peacocks, turkey gobblers or guinea fowl is not permitted.
F. Any accessory structure related to the keeping of farm type animals shall comply with all
of the following:
1. Any accessory structure associated with the keeping of small, medium, or
large type farm animals, other than swine, shall be set back 60 feet from the
nearest parcel line.
2. Not more than one animal shelter building for the housing of livestock or
small animals or fowl shall be permitted on one parcel.
G. All pens, stalls, quarters, or any other structure related to the keeping of animals as well
as any grazing areas shall be maintained in a sanitary manner free from noxious odor,
and conditions shall limit noise and the attraction of insects and rodents so as not to
154
cause a nuisance to occupants of nearby buildings or properties. Furthermore, farm
animals shall not be kept in a manner that is injurious or unhealthful to the animals
being kept on the property.
H. Kennels or any other forms of boarding animals for compensation are prohibited.
I. Services offered in exchange for compensation that are related to or make use of farm
type animals are prohibited.
J. Keeping of swine prohibited.
10-29-5 Regulations Applying to Parcels More than 20 acres in Size
A. Keeping of domestic companion animals of a type and in a manner that is in compliance
with all relevant sections of City Code is permitted.
B. All farm type animals are permitted.
C. Feed lots, livestock confinement areas, or confined animal feeding operations are
prohibited.
D. Any accessory structure related to the keeping of farm type animals shall comply with all
of the following:
1. Any accessory structure associated with the keeping of less than 60 small, 20
medium, or less than 10 large type farm animals, other than swine, shall be
set back 60 feet from the nearest parcel line.
2. Any accessory structure associated with the keeping of 60 or more small
type farm animals, 20 or more medium type farm animals, or 10 or large type
farm animals, or any number of swine shall maintain a 200 feet setback from
the nearest parcel line.
E. All pens, stalls, quarters, or any other structure related to the keeping of animals as well
as any grazing areas shall be maintained in a sanitary manner free from noxious odor,
and conditions shall limit noise and the attraction of insects and rodents so as not to
cause a nuisance to occupants of nearby buildings or properties. Furthermore, farm
animals shall not be kept in a manner that is injurious or unhealthful to the animals
being kept on the property.
F. Kennels or any other forms of boarding animals for compensation are prohibited.
G. Services offered in exchange for compensation that are related to or make use of farm
type animals are prohibited
155
10-29-6 Keeping of Hives or Colonies of Bees
Keeping of hives or colonies of bees is permitted subject to the following:
A. No more than 2 hives per acre are permitted.
B. Hives or colonies of bees shall be kept in a manner inaccessible to the general public.
C. Hives or colonies of bees shall be kept in a manner so that bee movements to and from
the hive do not interfere with the ordinary movements of persons on adjacent
properties or the public right-of-way.
D. Hives shall be located at least 60 feet from the nearest property line. The front of any
beehive shall face away from the property line of the residential property closest to the
beehive.
E. A supply of fresh water shall be maintained in a location readily accessible to all bee
colonies on the site throughout the day to prevent bees from congregating at
neighboring swimming pools or other sources of water on nearby properties.
F. In the event a hive exhibits unusual aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting
to sting without due provocation or exhibits unusual disposition toward swarming, the
beekeeper shall promptly re-queen the colony. Queens shall be selected from European
stock bred for gentleness and non-swarming characteristics.
G. No Africanized bees may be kept on a property under the regulations of this section.
156
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 30 – Wireless Technology Siting Ordinance
Sections
10-30-1 Purpose
10-30-2 Definitions
10-30-3 Application Review for All Applications
10-30-4 Application Review for Applications Identified As Eligible Facilities Requests
10-30-5 Application Review for Applications Identified For New Tower Construction
10-30-6 Application Review for Applications Identified for the Initial Placement or Installation of
Transmission Equipment on Wireless Support Structures, Modification of an Existing
Tower or Existing Base Station That Constitutes a Substantial Change, or Other Requests
for Construction or Placement of Transmission Equipment That Do Not Constitute
Eligible Facilities Requests
10-30-7 Proprietary Leasing of City Owned or Controlled Property
10-30-8 Utility Poles
10-30-9 Conditional Use Permits
10-30-10 New Tower Regulations
10-30-1 Purpose
This Chapter implements Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of
2012 (“Spectrum Act”), as interpreted by the Federal Communications Commission’s (“FCC” or
“Commission”) Acceleration of Broadband Deployment Report & Order and Iowa Code Chapter
8C.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish general and specific guidelines for the regulation of
wireless communication facilities and communication towers. In order to preserve and promote
the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the City, this section is established
to:
A. Protect the City’s visual environment from the potential adverse visual effects of the
wireless communication facilities and communication towers, through careful design
and location standards.
B. Prevent harm to adjoining public or private property by improper placement of wireless
communication facilities.
C. Encourage collocation of wireless communication facilities on existing structures.
D. Streamline and expedite any existing permitting procedures in accordance with the
intent of any Federal and State laws.
157
10-30-2 Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms used have the following meanings:
A. Applicant. Any person engaged in the business of providing wireless
telecommunications services or the wireless telecommunications infrastructure
required for wireless telecommunications services and who submits an Application.
B. Application. A request submitted by an Applicant to the City of Muscatine’s Community
Development Department for the following:
1. An Eligible Facilities Request,
2. To construct a new Tower,
3. For the initial placement of Transmission Equipment on a Wireless Support
Structure,
4. For the modification of an existing Tower or existing Base Station that constitutes a
Substantial Change to an existing Tower or existing Base Station, or
5. Any other request to construct or place Transmission Equipment that does not meet
the definition of an Eligible Facilities Request.
C. Base Station. A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or
authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications
network. The term does not encompass a Tower as defined herein or any equipment
associated with a Tower. Base Station includes, without limitation:
1. Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and
fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
2. Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
3. Any structure other than a Tower that, at the time the relevant Application is filed
with the City of Muscatine under this section, supports or houses equipment
described in paragraphs (C)(1)-(C)(2) that has been reviewed and approved under
the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory
review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of
providing that support.
4. The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant Application is
filed with the City of Muscatine under this section, does not support or house
equipment described in (C)(1)-(C)(2) of this section.
158
D. Collocation. The mounting or installation of Transmission Equipment on an eligible
support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency
signals for communications purposes.
E. Electric Utility. Any owner or operator of electric transmission or distribution facilities
subject to the regulation and enforcement activities of the Iowa utilities board relating
to safety standards.
F. Eligible Facilities Request. Any request for modification of an existing Tower or Base
Station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such Tower or
Base Station, involving:
1. Collocation of new Transmission Equipment;
2. Removal of Transmission Equipment; or
3. Replacement of Transmission Equipment.
G. Eligible Support Structure. Any Tower or Base Station as defined in this section,
provided that it is existing at the time the relevant Application is filed with the City of
Muscatine under this section.
H. Wireless Support Structure. A structure that exists at the time an Application is
submitted and is capable of supporting the attachment or installation of Transmission
Equipment in compliance with applicable codes, including but not limited to water
towers, buildings, and other structures, whether within or outside the public right-ofway.
“Wireless Support Structure” does not include a Tower or existing Base Station.
I. Existing. A constructed Tower or Base Station is existing for purposes of this section if it
has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under
another State or local regulatory review process, provided that a Tower that has not
been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but
was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this section.
J. Initial Placement or Installation. The first-time Transmission Equipment is placed or
installed on a Wireless Support Structure.
K. Site. For Towers not in the public right-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or
owned property surrounding the Tower and any access or utility easements currently
related to the site, and, for other Eligible Support Structures other than towers, that
area in proximity to the structure and to other Transmission Equipment already
deployed on the ground.
L. Substantial Change. A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an
Eligible Support Structure if it meets any of the following criteria:
1. For Towers other than Towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of
the Tower by more than 10% or by the height of one additional antenna array with
separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty feet, whichever
159
is greater; for other Eligible Support Structures, it increases the height of the
structure by more than 10% or more than ten feet, whichever is greater;
2. For Towers other than Towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an
appurtenance to the body of the Tower that would protrude from the edge of the
Tower more than twenty feet, or more than the width of the Tower structure at the
level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other Eligible Support
Structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that
would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;
3. For any Eligible Support Structure, it involves installation of more than the standard
number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed
four cabinets; or, for Towers in the public rights-of-way and Base Stations, it involves
installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting
ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of
ground cabinets that are more than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any
other ground cabinets associated with the structure;
4. It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current Site;
5. It would defeat the concealment elements of the Eligible Support Structure; or
6. It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the
construction or modification of the Eligible Support Structure or Base Station
equipment, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any modification
that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds
identified in paragraphs (L)(1)-(L)(3) of this section.
7. Height shall be measured from the original support structure in cases where
deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings’ rooftops.
Otherwise, height shall be measured from the dimensions of the Tower or Base
Station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that
were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act, Pub. L. No. 112-96, Tit. VI.
M. Transmission Equipment. Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed
or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power
supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services
including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as
unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
N. Tower. Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCClicensed
or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that
are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to,
private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and
fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated Site.
160
O. Utility Pole. A structure owned or operated by a public utility, municipality, or Electric
Utility that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cable, or wires for
telephone, cable television, or electricity, or to provide lighting.
P. FCC. Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
10-30-3 Application Review for All Applications
A. Application
Applicant shall complete an Application form and indicate whether their Application and
intended use is for:
1. An Eligible Facilities Request, construction of a new Tower;
2. For the initial placement of Transmission Equipment on a Wireless Support
Structure
3. For the modification of an existing Tower or existing Base Station that constitutes a
Substantial Change to an existing Tower or existing Base Station; or
4. Any other request to construct or place Transmission Equipment that does not
meet the definition of an Eligible Facilities Request.
B. Zoning and Land Use.
The City of Muscatine exercises zoning, land use, planning, and permitting authority
within the City’s territorial boundaries with regard to the siting of Transmission
Equipment, subject to the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 8C and federal law.
C. Application Fee.
The Application fee, including all City of Muscatine and third party fees for review or
technical consultation, shall be reasonably related to actual and direct administrative
costs according to Iowa law and are as follows:
1. $50 for Eligible Facilities Request
2. $100 for New Tower
3. $100 for Initial Placement or Installation of Transmission on a Wireless Support
Structure
4. $100 for Modification of an Existing Tower that Constitutes a Substantial
Modification
5. $100 for any other Application to construct or place Transmission Equipment
D. Duration of Approval
The duration of the approval shall not be limited, except that construction of the
approved structure or facilities shall be commenced within two years of final approval,
including the disposition of any appeals, and diligently pursued to completion.
161
E. Limitation of Information
The information requested for an Application shall not include information about, or
evaluate an Applicant’s business decisions with respect to, the Applicant’s designed
service, customer demand for service, or quality of the Applicant’s service to or from a
particular area or Site.
F. Limitation of Review for Other Potential Locations or Collocation
The City of Muscatine’s review will not:
1. Include evaluating the availability of other potential locations for the placement or
construction of a Tower or Transmission Equipment; or
2. Require Applicants to establish other options for Collocation instead of the
construction of a new Tower or modification of an existing Tower or existing Base
Station that constitutes a Substantial Change to an existing Tower or existing Base
Station.
G. Transmission Equipment and Technology
Application review shall not dictate the type of Transmission Equipment or technology
to be used by the Applicant or discriminate between different types of infrastructure or
technology.
H. Radio Frequency and Environmental Impacts
The City of Muscatine shall not:
1. Deny an Application, in whole or in part, based on perceived or alleged
environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, as provided in 47 U.S.C.
§332(c)(7)(B)(iv);
2. Establish or enforce regulations or procedures for radio frequency signal strength
or the adequacy of service quality;
3. Impose environmental testing, sampling or monitoring requirements or other
compliance measures for radio frequency emissions from Transmission Equipment
that are categorically excluded under FCC rules for radio frequency emissions
pursuant to 47.C.F.R. §1.1307(b)(1).
I. Removal
The City of Muscatine shall not require the removal of existing Towers, Base Stations, or
Transmission Equipment, wherever located, as a condition to approval of an Application.
J. Emergency Power Systems
The City of Muscatine shall not prohibit the placement of emergency power systems
that comply with Federal and State environmental requirements.
162
K. Zoning for Airports and Airspace
The City of Muscatine can administer and enforce airport zoning pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 329 for the protection of navigable airspace.
L. Surety Requirements
The City of Muscatine shall not impose surety requirements, including bonds, escrow,
deposits, letters of credit, or any other type of financial surety, to ensure that
abandoned or unused Towers or Transmission Equipment can be removed, unless
requirements are competitively neutral, nondiscriminatory, reasonable in amount, and
commensurate with the historical record for local facilities and structures that are
abandoned.
M. Tower Space
The City of Muscatine shall not condition the approval of an Application on the
Applicant’s agreement to
1. Provide space on or near the Tower, Base Station, or Wireless Support Structure
for the City of Muscatine or local governmental or nongovernmental services at
less than the market rate for such space, or
2. Provide other services via the structure or facilities at less than the market rate for
such services.
N. Historic Properties and Districts
The City of Muscatine may administer and enforce zoning regulations to approve or
deny applications for proposed alterations to exterior features of designated local
historic landmarks. Applicants shall also comply with federal and state historic property
laws.
O. Discrimination
The City of Muscatine shall not discriminate on the basis of the ownership, including
ownership by the City, of any property, structure, or Tower when promulgating rules or
procedures for siting wireless facilities or for evaluating Applications.
P. Open Records
All records, documents, and electronic data in the possession or custody of City of
Muscatine personnel are subject to and disclosure of such records shall be consistent
with Iowa Code Chapter 22.
Q. Remedies
Applicants and the City of Muscatine may bring claims related to this ordinance to any
court of competent jurisdiction.
163
10-30-4 Application Review for Applications Identified As Eligible Facilities Requests
A. Application for Eligible Facilities Requests
For those Applications identified by Applicant and determined by the City of Muscatine
to be an Eligible Facilities Request, the Application shall be limited to the information
necessary for the City to consider whether an Application is an Eligible Facilities
Request. The Application may not require the Applicant to demonstrate a need or
business case for the proposed modification.
B. Type of Review
Upon receipt of an Application for an Eligible Facilities Request pursuant to this Chapter,
Community Development Department shall review such Application to determine
whether the Application so qualifies.
C. Timeframe for Review
Within 60 days of the date on which an Applicant submits an Application seeking
approval under this Chapter, the City of Muscatine shall approve the Application unless
it determines that the Application is not covered by this Chapter.
D. Tolling of the Timeframe for Review
The 60-day review period begins to run when the Application is filed, and may be tolled
only by mutual agreement by the City of Muscatine and the Applicant, or in cases where
the Community Development Department determines that the Application is
incomplete. The timeframe for review is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of
Applications.
1. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City of Muscatine must provide
written notice to the Applicant within 30 days of receipt of the Application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the
Application.
2. The timeframe for review begins running again when the Applicant makes a
supplemental submission in response to the City’s notice of incompleteness.
3. Following a supplemental submission, the City of Muscatine will notify the
Applicant within 10 days that the supplemental submission did not provide
the information identified in the original notice delineating missing
information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in paragraph (D) of this section.
Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing
documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of
incompleteness.
164
E. Interaction with Section 332(c)(7) of the United States Federal Code
If the City of Muscatine determines that the Applicant’s request is not an Eligible
Facilities Request, the City shall notify Applicant in writing and include the type of
Application the City determines is applicable and the basis for its determination. The
timeframes under Sections 10-30-5 and 10-30-6 will begin to run from the issuance of
the City of Muscatine’s decision that the Application is not an Eligible Facilities Request.
To the extent such information is necessary, the City of Muscatine may request
additional information from the Applicant to evaluate the Application under Sections
10-30-5 and 10-30-6, pursuant to the limitations applicable to said Sections
F. Failure to Act
In the event the City of Muscatine fails to approve or deny a request seeking approval
under this Chapter within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the
request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant does not become effective until
the Applicant notifies the Community Development Department in writing after the
review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the Application has been
deemed granted.
10-30-5 Application Review for Applications Identified for New Tower Construction
A. Application
For those Applications identified by Applicant and determined by the City of Muscatine
to construct a new Tower, the Applicant shall submit the necessary copies and
attachments of the Application to the Community Development Department and
comply with applicable City ordinances concerning land use and the appropriate
permitting processes.
B. Additional Information for Residential Districts
The City of Muscatine may request propagation maps solely for the purpose of
identifying the location of the coverage or capacity gap or need for Applications for new
Towers in any Residential District.
C. Explanation for Proposed Location
Notwithstanding paragraph 10-30-3(E) of this ordinance, the City of Muscatine may
require an Applicant to provide an explanation regarding the reason for choosing the
proposed location for construction of a new Tower and the reason the Applicant did not
choose Collocation. The explanation shall include a sworn statement from an individual
who has responsibility over placement of the Tower attesting that Collocation within the
area determined by the Applicant to meet the Applicant’s radio frequency engineering
requirements for the placement of a site would not result in the same mobile service
functionality, coverage, and capacity, is technically infeasible, or is economically
burdensome to the Applicant.
165
D. Review Process
Applications seeking approval of a new communication tower require a conditional use
permit pursuant to 10-30-9 and must comply with the new tower regulations set forth
in section 10-30-10.
E. Timeframe for Review
Within 150 days of the date on which an Applicant submits an Application seeking
approval to construct a new Tower, the City of Muscatine shall approve or deny the
Application unless, another date is specified in a written agreement between the City
and the Applicant.
F. Tolling of the Timeframe for Review
The 150-day review period begins to run when the Application is filed, and may be tolled
only by mutual agreement by the City of Muscatine and the Applicant, or in cases where
the Community Development Department determines that the Application is
incomplete. The Community Development Department shall review the Application for
conformity with applicable local zoning regulations, building permit requirements, and
consistency with this chapter. The timeframe for review is not tolled by a moratorium
on the review of Applications.
1. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City of Muscatine must provide
written notice to the Applicant within 30 days of receipt of the Application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the
Application and the City’s timeframe to review is tolled beginning the date the
notice is sent.
2. The City of Muscatine’s timeframe of 150 days for review begins running again
when the Applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the City’s
notice of incompleteness.
3. The City of Muscatine’s 150-day timeframe for review does not toll if the City
requests information regarding any of the considerations the City may not
consider as described in Section 10-30-3(F).
4. Following a supplemental submission, the City of Muscatine will notify the
Applicant within 10 days that the supplemental submission did not provide the
information identified in the original notice delineating missing information.
The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant
to the procedures identified in paragraph this chapter. Second or subsequent
notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information
that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
5. The City of Muscatine shall make its final decision to approve or disapprove the
Application in writing within the timeframe.
166
G. Failure to Act
In the event the City of Muscatine fails to approve or deny a request seeking approval
under this Section 10-30-6 within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling),
the request shall be deemed granted.
10-30-6 Application Review for Applications Identified for the Initial Placement or
Installation of Transmission Equipment on Wireless Support Structures,
Modification of an Existing Tower or Existing Base Station That Constitutes a
Substantial Change, or Other Requests for Construction or Placement of
Transmission Equipment That Do Not Constitute Eligible Facilities Requests
A. Application
For those Applications identified by Applicant and determined by the City of Muscatine
to be for the Initial Placement or Installation of Transmission Equipment on Wireless
Support Structures, modification of an existing Tower or existing Base Station that
constitutes a Substantial Change, or other requests for construction or placement of
Transmission Equipment that do not constitute an Eligible Facilities Request, the
Applicant shall submit the necessary copies and attachments of the Application to the
Community Development Department and comply with applicable local ordinances
concerning land use or regulations concerning land use and zoning and the appropriate
local permitting processes.
1. Applications for the Initial Placement or Installation of Transmission Equipment
on Existing Wireless Support Structures shall be allowed as a permitted use in
any zoning district, subject to the following:
a. Transmission equipment may be installed on approved towers subject
to all applicable provisions of this Chapter.
b. Transmission equipment may be mounted on structures, including,
but not limited to, buildings, traffic signals, streetlights, water towers,
billboards, telephone and emergency signal poles, bridges, and
parking deck structures, in any zoning district; however, no
transmission equipment may occupy, encroach, or overhang any
public right of way without express approval of the City Council.
c. Each transmission equipment and/or base station installation shall
require a separate building permit.
2. Applications for modification of an existing Tower or existing Base Station that
constitute a Substantial Change, or other requests for construction or
placement of Transmission Equipment that do not constitute Eligible Facilities
Requests, require a conditional use permit as provided in section 10-30-9 if any
of the following are met:
167
a. If the highest point of the transmission equipment and/or base
stations that it is being installed is not more than 25 feet above the
highest point of the existing smoke stack, water tower, or other
structure.
b. Transmission equipment and/or base stations arrays exceed the
maximum height requirement of the zoning district in which they are
located
B. Timeframe for Review
Within 90 days of the date on which an Applicant submits an Application seeking
approval to construct a new Tower, the City of Muscatine shall approve or deny the
Application unless, another date is specified in a written agreement between the City of
Muscatine and the Applicant. The Community Development Department shall review
the Application for conformity with applicable local zoning regulations, building permit
requirements, and consistency with Iowa Code Chapter 8C.
C. Tolling of the Timeframe for Review
The 90-day review period begins to run when the Application is filed, and may be tolled
only by mutual agreement by the City of Muscatine and the Applicant, or in cases where
the City of Muscatine determines that the Application is incomplete. The City shall
review the Application for conformity with applicable local zoning regulations, building
permit requirements, and consistency with this chapter. The timeframe for review is not
tolled by a moratorium on the review of Applications.
1. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City of Muscatine must provide
written notice to the Applicant within 30 days of receipt of the Application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the
Application and the City’s timeframe to review is tolled beginning the date the
notice is sent.
2. The City of Muscatine’s timeframe of 90 days for review begins running again
when the Applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to City’s
notice of incompleteness.
3. The City of Muscatine’s 90-day timeframe for review does not toll if the City
requests information regarding any of the considerations the City may not
consider as described in Section 10-30-3(F).
4. Following a supplemental submission, the City of Muscatine will notify the
Applicant within 10 days that the supplemental submission did not provide the
information identified in the original notice delineating missing information.
The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant
to the procedures identified this Chapter. Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were
not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
168
5. The City of Muscatine shall make its final decision to approve or disapprove the
Application in writing within the timeframe.
D. Failure to Act
In the event the City of Muscatine fails to approve or deny a request seeking approval
under this Section within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the
request shall be deemed granted.
10-30-7 Proprietary Leasing of City Owned or Controlled Property
A. Leasing of City Owned or Controlled Property
The City of Muscatine reserves all rights to leasing of City owned or controlled property
but shall offer the market rate value for use of the property.
B. Lease Term
Leases shall be for no less than twenty years, but all or a portion of the property may be
subject to release for public purposes after fifteen years.
C. Appraisal Process for Market Value Determination
If the City and Applicant cannot agree on the market rate for a lease on real property or
structures owned by the City, the City shall follow the process in Iowa Code 8C.6.
10-30-8 Utility Poles
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the City of Muscatine shall not mandate,
require, or regulate the installation, location, or use of Transmission Equipment on a Utility
Pole.
10-30-9 Conditional Use Permits
Applicants seeking approval of a new communication tower, installation of transmission
equipment on wireless support structures, modification of an existing tower or existing base
station that constitutes a substantial change, or other requests for construction or placement of
transmission equipment that do not constitute eligible facilities requests, which require a
conditional use permit as provided in this Chapter, must submit an application which includes
the following:
A. Qualification as an applicant and statement of compliance. A copy of the FCC license for
the wireless communication facility and a signed statement from the owner or operator
of said facility attesting that it will comply with FCC regulations.
B. Affidavits showing conformance with all Federal Aviation Administration lighting and
marking requirements.
C. A certificate, report or plan stamped by an Iowa licensed, professional engineer that
indicates the equipment and tower will be in compliance with applicable building code
requirements.
169
D. Elevation drawings of the proposed facility, and any other proposed structures, showing
height above ground level.
E. Information necessary to show that all applicable landscaping, screening, and other
requirements set forth in section 10-30-10 are to be met.
F. The longitude and latitude of the location of the proposed communication tower
specifying the latest North American Datum coordinate system, as well as, site address
or location.
G. The mean sea level (MSL) elevation of the site where the proposed communication
tower is to be located, as well as, the wireless communication tower height and overall
structure elevation.
H. For applicants seeking to install a new communications tower, an explanation regarding
the reason for choosing the proposed location and the reason the applicant did not
choose collocation. The explanation shall include a sworn statement from an individual
who has responsibility over placement of the tower attesting that collocation within the
area determined by the applicant to meet the applicant’s radio frequency engineering
requirements for the placement of a site would not result in the same mobile service
functionality, coverage, and capacity, is technically infeasible, or is economically
burdensome to the applicant.
10-30-10 New Tower Regulations
All new communication towers that did not exist at the time of the application shall comply
with, and are subject to, all the following regulations.
A. Collocation
New communication towers must demonstrate compliance with the following standards
in this section.
1. A tower must be designed and constructed to accommodate collocation of
additional communication antennas or providers when technically feasible and
not in conflict with the height limitations in this section.
2. New towers with a height greater than 80 feet shall be designed to
accommodate both the applicant’s antenna and comparable antenna for at
least one additional user.
B. Height and Setback Requirements
1. No tower shall exceed a height of 150 feet above grade, without approval by
City Council.
2. The height and setback requirement for towers contained within this Chapter,
supersede all other height and setback requirements contained within this
Title.
170
3. A tower shall be setback from each lot line at least one foot for each foot of
additional height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the zoning
district in which the structure is located. The additional one foot above the
zoning district height maximum is in addition to the normal building setback of
the zoning district in which the proposed tower is to be located in.
4. A tower shall be set back 300 feet from the nearest residence.
C. Fencing
1. Towers shall be enclosed by a security fence not less than six feet in height,
and the communication tower accessory structure shall be constructed in a
manner that reasonably prevents unauthorized personnel from climbing the
tower.
2. Nothing herein shall prevent security fencing which is necessary to meet other
state or federal requirements.
D. Lighting and Markings
Towers shall not be illuminated unless required to conform to FAA or other
governmental regulations.
E. Landscaping
1. Support facilities and tower bases shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens from view the tower base and any support
facilities from adjacent property or street. The plantings installed shall be of a
size and species that can achieve a height of six feet and 75% opacity within
three growing seasons.
2. In locations where the visual impact of the tower and support facilities would
be minimal, the landscape requirement may be reduced or waived by the Site
Plan Review Committee.
3. Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the property shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible. Natural growth around the
property perimeter may be considered a sufficient buffer for a proposed tower
and support facilities as determined by the Site Plan Review Committee.
F. Airport
All towers will comply with all applicable regulation contained within Title 10, Chapter
19 Airport District, Federal Aviation Administration Regulations, and all other applicable
state and federal regulations.
171
G. Removal of Abandoned Wireless Communication Facilities
1. Any wireless communication facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of twelve months is considered abandoned, and the facility owner shall
remove all portions of the facility within 90 days. If the abandoned wireless
communication facility is not removed within 90 days, the City of Muscatine
may, after 30 days’ notice to the wireless communication facility owner,
remove it and recover all costs from the facility owner, including all attorney’s
fees and court costs that may arise while collecting these costs.
2. If the owner of an abandoned wireless communication facility cannot be
located or it is no longer in business, the requirements of Subsection 1 are the
responsibility of the land-owner on whose property the facility is located.
172
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 31 – Administration
Sections
10-31-1 Conditional Uses
10-31-2 Zoning Board of Adjustment
10-31-3 Enforcement of Zoning Ordinance
10-31-4 Permits
10-31-5 Boundaries of Districts
10-31-6 Interpretations
10-31-7 Amendments of Ordinance
10-31-1 Conditional Uses
A. Application for conditional permits for uses specifically authorized for consideration in
the district use regulations shall be filed with the Community Development Director,
together with the appropriate application fee.
B. Upon the filling on an application for a conditional use, the Community Development
Director shall immediately refer the application to the Board of Adjustment for hearing
after publication of a public notice as provided by law.
C. Before authorizing the issuance of such a conditional use permit, the Board of
Adjustment may impose such conditions as will, in the Board's judgment, ensure that:
1. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public's health, safety, morals, comfort, or
general welfare.
2. The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted.
3. The conditional use will not substantially diminish and impair property values
within the neighborhood.
4. The conditional use will be compatible with and will not impede adjoining
development and the proposed character of the zoned district where it is to be
located.
5. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or other necessary facilities will
be provided.
6. Adequate off-street parking and loading are provided and ingress and egress are
so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public street.
173
7. The conditional use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located and all other applicable
regulations provided in Title 10.
8. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall find that there is a public benefit for the
conditional use.
10-31-2 Zoning Board of Adjustment
A. General Provisions
1. As set forth in Title 2, Chapter 9 a Zoning Board of Adjustment for the City of
Muscatine, Iowa shall be established.
2. The Board shall organize and adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of
City Code and with the Iowa Statutes.
3. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other
times as the Board may determine.
4. The chairman, or in his or her absence, the acting chairman, may administer
oaths and the Board may compel the attendance of witnesses.
5. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and all business of the
Board shall be transacted at such meetings.
6. The Director of the Community Development Department shall keep minutes of
its proceedings showing the vote of each item in question, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the Office of the Community Development Department and
shall be a public record.
B. Appeals to the Board
1. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved.
2. An appeal shall be taken within twenty days after the decision by filing with the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof.
3. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
4. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
5. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, given seven
days' notice to the parties in interest by publication of notice of hearing, and
174
decide the same within a reasonable time after it is submitted. Upon the
hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney.
6. The appropriate fee as established by resolution in the Schedule of Building-
Related Permits and Other Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of
Ordinances, shall be paid to the Community Development Department at the
time the notice of appeal is filed, which the Community Development
Department shall forthwith pay over to the Clerk to the credit of the General
Revenue Fund.
C. Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
1. To interpret the Ordinance, being:
a. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Community
Development Department in the enforcement of this ordinance.
b. To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district
divides a lot held in a single ownership at the time of the passage of this
Ordinance.
c. To interpret the provisions of this Ordinance in such a way as to carry out
the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the map fixing the
several districts accompanying and made a part of this Title where the
street layout on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the
map aforesaid.
2. To permit the following exceptions:
a. Use of premises for public utility.
b. Reconstruction of a nonconforming building that would otherwise be
prohibited by Section 10-19-5 where such action would not constitute
continuation of a monopoly.
c. Authorize upon appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a
strict application of the terms of this Ordinance relating to the use,
construction, or alterations of buildings or structures or the use of land
will impose upon him unusual and practical difficulties or particular
hardship, such variations of the strict application of the terms of this
Ordinance as are in harmony with its general purpose and intent, but
only when the Board is satisfied that a granting of such variation will not
merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some
demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a
variation from the Comprehensive Plan as established by this Ordinance,
and at the same time, the surrounding property will be properly
protected.
175
d. To permit the following variation, vary the yard regulations where there
is an exceptional, unique, or unusual physical condition of a lot, and
which condition, when related to the yard regulations of this Title, would
prevent a reasonable or sensible arrangement of buildings on the lot.
e. Exceptions. Interpretations, exceptions, and variations involving the
Flood Plain or Flood Channel Districts shall be referred to the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.
3. To permit the following two variations:
a. Vary the yard regulations where there is an exceptional, unique, or
unusual physical condition of a lot, and which condition, when related to
the yard regulations of this Ordinance, would prevent a reasonable or
sensible arrangement of buildings on the lot.
b. Vary the parking regulations where an applicant demonstrates
conclusively that the specific use of a building would make unnecessary
the parking spaces required by this Ordinance, but providing that such a
reduction not be more than 50% of the usual requirement.
4. To allow conditional uses pursuant to the provisions of Section 10-31-1 of the
City Code.
10-31-3 Enforcement of Zoning Ordinance
A. Duties of Community Development Director
It shall be the duty of the Community Development Director to enforce this Ordinance.
He or she shall receive applications required by this Ordinance, issue permits, and
furnish the prescribed certificates. He or she shall examine premises for which permits
have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law
are complied with. He or she shall enforce all laws relating to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment, use, occupancy, location, and
maintenance of buildings and structures, except as may be otherwise provided for. He
or she shall, when requested by the City Administrator, or when the interests of the
Municipality so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in
this Ordinance and render written reports on the same. For the purpose of enforcing
compliance with law, he or she shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
B. Records
The Community Development Director shall keep careful and comprehensive records of
minutes, of applications or permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of
reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. He or she shall retain on file copies of
all records in connection with building work so long as any part of the building or
structure to which they relate may be in existence. All such records shall be open to
176
public inspection at reasonable hours, but shall not be removed from the Community
Development Department.
C. Cooperation of Other Officials
The Community Development Director may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and cooperation of the
Engineer in fixing grades, of the Chief of Police in enforcing orders, of the Attorney in
prosecuting violations, and of other officials.
10-31-4 Permits
A. When Required
It shall not be lawful to construct, alter, repair, remove, or demolish or to commence
the construction, alteration, removal, or demolition of a building or structure, without
first filing with the Community Development Director an application in writing and
obtaining a formal permit.
B. Form
1. An application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the Community
Development Director may prescribe.
2. Such application shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or
the architect, engineer, or builder employed in connection with the proposed
work. If such application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it
shall be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner in fee, or the
person making the application that the proposed work is authorized by the
owner in fee and that the person making the application is authorized to
make such application.
3. Such application shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant
and of the owner, and, if the owner is a corporate body, of its responsible
officers.
4. Such application shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such
additional information as may be required by the Community Development
Director for an intelligent understanding of the proposed work.
5. Such application shall be accompanied by payment of such fees as the City
Council may determine from time to time.
C. Plans
Application for permits shall be accompanied by such drawings of the proposed work,
including such floor plans, sections, elevations, and structural details as Community
Development Director may require.
177
D. Plat Diagram
There shall also be filed one copy of a plat diagram in a form and size suitable for filing
permanently with the permit record, with all dimensions figured, showing accurately the
size and exact location of all proposed new construction or, in the case of demolition, of
such construction as is to be demolished and of all existing buildings.
E. Amendments
Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the filing of amendments to an application or to a
plan or other record accompanying the same at any time before the completion of the
work for which the permit was sought. Such amendments, after approval, shall be filed
with and be deemed a part of the original application.
F. Completion of Existing Buildings
Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size, or designated use of a building for which a valid permit has been issued or lawful
approval given before the effective date of this Ordinance; provided, however,
construction under such permit or approval shall have been started within six months
and the ground story framework, including structural parts of the second floor, shall
have been completed within one year and the entire building completed within two
years after the effective date of this Ordinance.
G. Action on Application
It shall be the duty of the Community Development Director to examine applications for
permits within a reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, he or she finds no
objection to the same and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with
the laws and ordinances applicable thereto, he or she shall approve such application and
issue a permit for the proposed work as soon as practicable. If his or her examination
reveals otherwise, he or she will reject such application noting his or her finding in a
report to be attached to the application and delivering a copy to the applicant.
H. Approval in Part
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent the Community Development
Director from issuing a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure
before the entire plans and detailed statements of said building or structure have been
submitted or approved, if adequate plans and detailed statements have been presented
for the same and have been found to comply with this Ordinance.
I. Condition of the Permit
1. All work performed under a permit issued by Community Development
Director shall conform to the approved application and plans and approved
amendments thereof.
2. The location of all new construction as shown on the approved plot
diagram, or an approved amendment thereof, shall be strictly adhered to. It
shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot or plot of which a
178
plot diagram has been filed and has been used as the basis for a permit,
unless a revised plot diagram showing the proposed change in conditions
shall have been filed and approved; provided that this shall not apply when
the lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or widening or other public
improvement.
J. Signature to Permit
Every permit issued by the Community Development Director under the provisions of
this Ordinance shall have his or her signature affixed thereto; but this shall not prevent
him or her from authorizing a subordinate to affix such signature.
K. Limitation
A permit under which no work is commenced within one year after issuance shall expire
by limitation.
L. Posting of Permit
1. A copy of the permit shall be kept on the premises open to public inspection
during the prosecution of the work and until the completion of the same.
2. The Community Development Director may require a certified copy of the
approved plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the
commencement of the work to the completion thereof.
3. The Community Development Director shall be given at least tweleve hours’
notice of the starting of work under a permit.
M. Revocation
The Community Development Director may revoke a permit or approval issued under
the provisions of this Ordinance in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit
or approval was based.
N. Certificate of Occupancy for a Building
1. No building shall be occupied before a Certificate of Occupancy has been
issued.
2. A Certificate of Occupancy for a new building or the reconstruction or
alteration of an existing building shall be applied for coincident with the
application for a building permit and said Certificate shall be issued with
three days after the request for the same shall have been made in writing
to the Community Development Director after the erection or alteration of
such building or part thereof shall have been completed, and in the case of
new subdivisions, when all public improvements, including sewers, streets,
and utilities, have been accepted in accordance with the provisions of this
City Code.
179
3. Pending the issuance of a regular Certificate, a temporary Certificate of
Occupancy may be issued by the Community Development Director for a
period not exceeding one year during the completion of alterations or
during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such
temporary Certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the
respective rights, duties, or obligations of the owners or of the tenants
relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter
covered by this Ordinance, and such temporary Certificate shall not be
issued, except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately
insure the safety of the occupants.
4. The process of issuing this Certificate of Occupancy shall be considered the
minimum enforcement requirement for the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Muscatine. However, if in
the case of a new subdivision, all public improvements are not acceptable
prior to request for a regular Certificate of Occupancy, the subdivider or
their agent may request a waiver from the City Council of this provision.
The developer or his agent must clearly demonstrate that due to peculiar
conditions pertaining to their subdivision, the literal enforcement of one or
more steps of this process is impractical or will exact undue hardship. The
City Council may waive the requirement for completion of the public
improvements prior to issuance of a regular Certificate of Occupancy for a
reasonable period of time until the deficiency is corrected by the
subdivider or their agent. In allowing a waiver due to a specific situation,
the City Council shall not release the performance bond and also shall
notify the bonding company of the deficiency and a reasonable period of
time for correction to the satisfaction of the City Council. (Any action taken
by the City Council under the terms of this process shall give primary
consideration to the welfare of the entire community.)
O. Content of Certificate of Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the
building or proposed use of the building complies with all the building and health laws
and ordinances and with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates
shall be kept on file in the Office of the Community Development Director and copies
shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
the building affected. (Note Subdivision Regulations, Title 11)
P. Certificate of Occupancy. No Certificate of Occupancy for any building shall be issued
before application has been made for a Building Permit.
180
10-31-5 Boundaries of Districts
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on
the District Map accompanying and made a part of this Ordinance, the following rules apply:
A. The district boundaries are either streets or alleys, unless otherwise shown, and where
the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this Ordinance
are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed
to be the boundary of the district.
B. Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the property has
been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be
construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the District Map
accompanying and made a part of this Ordinance are bounded approximately by lot
lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts, unless the
boundaries are otherwise indicated on the Map.
C. In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the Map accompanying and
made a part of this Ordinance shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the
Map.
10-31-6 Interpretations
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort,
morals, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with or
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, except
that if this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction, this Ordinance shall control.
10-31-6 Amendments of Ordinance
A. The Council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, after public
notice and hearing as provided by law and after report by the Commission, amend,
supplement, or change the boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently
established.
B. In case the Commission disapproves the proposed change or in case of a protest
against such change signed by the owners of 20% or more, either of the area of the lots
included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof
or directly opposite thereto extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed 200 feet
therefrom or 200 feet from the street frontage of opposite lots, such amendment shall
not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the
Council.
C. If no report is received from the Commission in 60 days, it may be assumed that said
Commission has approved the amendment.
181
D. Before any action shall be taken as provided by this Section, the party or parties
proposing or recommending a change in the district boundaries or district regulations
shall file with the Community Development Director a petition or application
accompanied by the appropriate fee as established by resolution in the Schedule of
Building-Related Permits and Other Requirements in Appendix D to this Code of
Ordinances to cover the approximate cost of this procedure and under no condition
shall said sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of said change to be adopted
by the City Council.
E. Change in Flood Plain or Flood Channel District boundaries shall be referred to the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.
182
Title 10 – Zoning
Chapter 32 – Definitions
Sections
10-32-1 Definitions
10-32-1 Definitions
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms are hereby defined:
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the
plural and the plural the singular; the word 'building" shall include the words "structure" and
"premises"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the words "used" or "occupied"
include the words "intended", "designed", or "arranged to be used or occupied"; the word "lot"
includes the words "plot" or "parcel"; and the word "person" includes a firm, associations,
organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. Any word
not herein defined shall be as defined in any recognized standard English dictionary.
Accessory Building:
A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to and customary in connection with the
principal building or use and which is located on the same lot with such principal building or
use.
Accessory Use:
A subordinate use which is incidental to and customary in connection with the principal
building or use and which is located on the same lot with such principal building or use.
Agricultural Activity: Agricultural activity, including forests and forest products; harvest and
management; dairy farming; livestock grazing and pasturage; truck gardening, the raising of
crops, fruit, and nursery stock; fish farms; animal kennels and fur bearing animal farms; the
harvesting, processing, packaging, packing, shipping, and selling of products produced on the
premises, and incidental farm occupations and uses such as machinery, farm equipment, and
domestic repair and construction; excluding commercial feed lots.
Alley:
A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
Ambient Noise:
The all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment for a specified period of time,
usually being a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far.
Amortization:
The established process of eliminating nonconforming uses over a period of time.
183
Apartment:
See Dwelling Unit.
Assembling:
Combining two (2) or more finished products into a single product.
Automobile Service Station:
Any land, building, structure, or premises used for the sale at retail of motor vehicle fuels, oils,
or accessories, or for servicing or lubricating motor vehicles or installing or repairing parts and
accessories; but not including the repairing or replacing of motors, bodies, or fenders of motor
vehicles or painting motor vehicles, public garages, and the open storage of rental vehicles or
trailers.
Basement:
A story having part, but not more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. A basement is
counted as a story for the purposes of height regulation if subdivided and used for dwelling
purposes other than by a janitor employed on the premises.
Bed and Breakfast Home:
Means a private residence which provides lodging and meals for guests, in which the owner
resides and in which no more than two guest families are lodged at the same time and which,
while it may advertise and accept reservations, does not hold itself out to the public to be a
restaurant, hotel or motel, does not require reservations and serves food only to overnight
guests.
Billboard:
Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or advertisements used on an outdoor
display. (See also Sign Ordinance.)
Board:
Means Zoning Board of Adjustment established in Chapter 31.
Buildable Width:
The width of the lot left to be built upon after the
side yards are provided.
Building:
Any structure having a roof supported by columns
of walls for the shelter or enclosure of persons or
property. For the purposes of this definition "roof'
shall include awning or other similar covering,
whether permanent in nature or not.
184
Building Height:
The vertical distance from the grade to
(a) the highest point of a flat roof; (b)
the deck line of a mansard roof; (c) the
average height between eaves and
ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs;
or (d) the average height between high
and low points of a shed roof.
Cellar:
That part of a building having more than one-half (½) of its height below the average grade of
the adjoining ground.
Cemetery:
Land used or intended (10 acre minimum) to be used for the burial of deceased humans. A
marker or memorial is erected at each gravesite for permanent remembrance of the deceased.
Other principal uses permitted on land used or intended for use as a cemetery include
columbariums and mausoleums; incidental uses include business designed for the benefit,
service, convenience or spiritual uplift of cemetery lot owners or persons visiting the cemetery.
Accessory uses include utility buildings, maintenance storage areas, chapels and cemetery
administration offices. Note. Interior columbariums are permitted ancillary uses within
places of worship.
Chapel:
A structure intended for use as a place of worship or nondenominational assembly or visitation.
City:
The City of Muscatine, Iowa.
Club:
Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person, or persons for
a social, educational, or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit and not primarily to
render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
Columbarium:
A building or structure designed with niches for the location of urns to hold the ashes of
cremated persons.
Commercial Feed Lot:
An area of and devoted to raising and feeding of livestock where the operation is not a part of
normal agricultural activity.
Commission:
The City Planning and Zoning Commission of Muscatine, Iowa.
185
Common Land:
Land held and/or used jointly by two (2) or more owners of other land in proximity to it. Usually
established by subdivision regulations.
Community Development Director:
The individual designated to administer the Zoning Ordinance and who is responsible for the
enforcement of the regulations imposed by said Ordinance.
Conditional Use:
The use allowed in a zoning district after a permit is granted by the Board of Adjustment
according to the provisions of Section 10-31-1.
Council:
The City Council of Muscatine, Iowa.
Condominium:
A legal form of ownership of real property, usually individual ownership of a dwelling unit in a
multi-unit development where some rights are held in common by the residents of that
development.
Court:
An open space more than one-half (1/2) surrounded by
buildings.
dBA:
A unit of measure of sound intensity as measured on the "A"
scale, such scale being that which is audible to the human ear.
Decibel:
A unit of measure in determining sound intensity.
District:
A part of the City wherein regulations of this Ordinance are
uniform.
Drive-In Use:
Any establishment designed for the general public to make use from their vehicles of the sales
or service provided on the premises.
Duplex:
A building or structure limited to two (2) individual residential units. (See Dwelling Two-Family.)
Dwelling:
Any building or portion thereof which is designated and used exclusively for residential
purposes.
Dwelling Single-Family:
A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family.
186
Dwelling Two-Family:
A building or structure limited to two (2) individual residential units. (See Duplex.)
Dwelling Multiple:
A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more families.
Dwelling Unit:
One (1) or more rooms in a dwelling occupied or intended to be occupied as separate living
quarters by a single family as defined herein.
Farm:
See Agricultural Activity.
Feedlot:
A tract of land or structure wherein any type of fowl or livestock are maintained in close
quarters for the purpose of fattening for final shipment to market.
Fence:
A structure for enclosing or screening.
Flood Channel (Floodway):
The areas shown as “Floodway Areas in Zone AE” as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for Muscatine County and Incorporated Areas, City of Muscatine Panels 19139C0185C,
192C, 225C, dated July 18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D, 175D, 187D, 188D, 189D, 193D, 281D,
282D, 301D, dated April 16, 2014, and Panels 19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E, dated November
4, 2016, which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Muscatine County.
Flood Insurance Rate Map:
The official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study,
a study initiated, funded, and published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the
purpose of evaluating in detail the existence and severity of flood hazards; providing the city
with the necessary information for adopting a flood plain management program; and
establishing actuarial flood insurance rates, which delineates both the flood hazard areas and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Plain:
The areas classified as “Zone AE or Zone A” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for
Muscatine County and Incorporated Areas, City of Muscatine, Panels 19139C0185C, 192C,
225C, dated July 18, 2011; Panels 19139C0169D, 175D, 187D, 188D, 189D, 193D, 281D, 282D,
301D, dated April 16, 2014, and Panels 19139C0179E 183E, 184E, 191E, dated November 4,
2016 which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Muscatine County.
Floodproofing:
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage
to such structures.
187
Floor Area:
The square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls and includes the total of all space
on all floors of a building. It does not include porches, garages, or space in a basement or cellar
when said basement or cellar space is used for storage or incidental uses.
Floor Area Ratio:
The floor area of the building or buildings on any lot divided by the area of the lot.
Garage, Private:
A detached accessory or portion of a main building housing the motor driven vehicles of the
occupants of the premises, but not commercial vehicles.
Garage, Public:
A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for
equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, storing, or parking motor-driven vehicles. The
term repairing shall not include an automotive body repair shop nor the rebuilding,
dismantling, or storage of wrecked or junked vehicles.
Garage, Storage:
Any building or premises used for housing only motor-driven vehicles, other than trucks and
commercial vehicles.
Grade:
The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building.
Group Home:
Any premises, privately or publicly sponsored, where board and
supervision are given to persons not related by blood or marriage to the
owner or primary occupant thereof, for the purpose of social
rehabilitation and/or long-term sheltered care.
Historic Site:
A site, building, or structure which has local, state, or national historical
significance, as determined by the appropriate authority.
Home Occupation:
An occupation or business activity which results in a product or service and is conducted in
whole or in part in a dwelling unit, and is subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling unit.
Hospital:
An establishment providing physical or mental health service, inpatient or overnight
accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured. Hospital includes
sanitariums.
Hotel:
A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation, and which is
open to transient guests in contradistinction to a boarding house or lodging house as herein
188
defined.
Institution:
A nonprofit establishment for public use.
Junk:
Any worn out, cast off, or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction or has
been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use.
Junk Yard:
The use of land, whether inside or outside a structure, for the keeping or abandonment of junk.
(Also see salvage.)
Landscaped Area:
An area that is permanently devoted and maintained to the growing of shrubbery, grass, and
other plant material.
Large Scale Retail Development:
A property of twenty (20) acres or more including the main lot and subdivided lot(s), which is
used primarily for purposes as defined in Section 10-11-1(A), (B), (F), and (G); and Section 10-
11-2(A), (B), (F), (G), (H), and (I). The Large Scale Retail Development can be one or multiple
owners for the entire property or any individual subdivided lot.
Lot:
A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Ordinance,
including one (1) main building together with its accessory buildings, open spaces, and parking
spaces required by this Ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon an improved road or
street.
Lot Area:
The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
189
Lot, Corner:
A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersections.
Lot, Depth:
The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, Double Frontage:
A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting roads, as distinguished from a corner lot.,
also known as a through lot
Lot, Interior:
A lot other than a corner lot or double frontage lot.
Lot, Through:
A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting roads, as distinguished from a corner lot.,
also known as a Double Frontage Lot.
Lot of Record:
A lot or parcel of land the plat or deed of which has been recorded prior to the adoption of this
Ordinance.
Mausoleum:
A building or structure designed with vaults to hold many caskets or crematory urns.
Mobile Home (House Trailer):
A transportable manufactured structure built on a chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities.
190
Modular Building:
A prefabricated transportable building manufactured in whole or in part off the site, designed
to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular
structure. The term is intended to apply to major assemblies and does not include
prefabricated panels, trusses, or sub-elements which are to be incorporated into a structure at
the site.
Motel, Motor Court, Motor Lodge, or Tourist Court:
Any building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some or all of
which have a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building with garage or
parking space conveniently located on the lot, and designed, used, or intended wholly or in part
for the accommodation of automobile transients.
Nonconforming Use:
The use of any building, structure, or land existing at the time of the enactment of this
Ordinance, or any amendments thereto, which does not conform in whole or in part to the
provisions of this Ordinance or its amendments.
Noxious Fumes:
Fumes which are in sufficient quantity to be harmful to health.
Nursery School (Child Care):
Any land, building, structure, or premises used for educational instruction and/or supplemental
parental care for four (4) or more children, either on an hourly or daily basis, with or without
compensation.
Nursing Home:
A home for the aged or infirm in which three (3) or more persons not of the immediate family
are received, kept, or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not
including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and
treatment of the sick and injured.
Office:
The building, room, or series of rooms in which the affairs of a business, profession, or branch
of government are conducted.
One Hundred (100 Year) Frequency Flood:
A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one
hundred (100) years, as determined by the Flood Insurance Study for Muscatine County,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Open Area:
That part of a lot on which no part of a building or structure extends above the following
elevations:
A. Two feet (2') above the highest curb elevation of the street or streets that bound
the lot;
191
B. One foot (1') above the adjacent curb elevation for each one and one-fourth foot (1
1/4') the building or structure is set back from the street lot line, except that no
portion of the structure shall exceed twelve feet (12') above the adjacent curb
elevation. This provision shall apply to walls or structures that do not extend more
than four feet (4') above the adjacent curb elevation.
Parking Area (Lot):
An open area, other than the street, intended and used for the temporary parking of motor
vehicles.
Parking Space:
A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one (1) automobile less than
nine feet and six inches (9'6”) wide and eighteen feet (18') long, together with a driveway
connecting the parking space with a street, road, or alley and permitting ingress and egress of
that automobile without the necessity of moving any other automobile.
Premises:
A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
Processing:
To prepare a product for sale by either a special treatment or to change it through a series of
steps, but not the original manufacture of a component part.
Salvage or Junk Yard:
Any land, building, or other structure used for the storage, collection, processing, or conversion
of any worn out, cast off, or discarded metal, paper, glass, or other material which is ready for
destruction, or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. This
includes, but is not limited to, such things as automobiles, machinery, farm implements,
household appliances, and construction materials. (Also see Junk Yard.)
Satellite Receiving Dish:
An apparatus that allows microwaves to reflect back to an antenna, also commonly referred to
as an earth station.
Setback:
The distance between any street line and the nearest point to which any building or structure
can be erected. All measurements shall be to the outside edge of the ground floor wall nearest
the lot line or street line.
192
Sign:
A sign is any structure or part thereof or device attached thereto or painted or represented
thereon, which shall be used to attract attention to any object, product, place, activity, person,
institution, organization, or business; or which shall display or include any letter, word, model,
banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of,
an announcement, direction, or advertisement. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the word
“sign” does not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, or political unit,
or other political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious, or like
campaign, drive, moment, or event. (See Sign Ordinance.)
Sign, Advertising:
A sign which directs attention to a business or commodity, service, or entertainment
conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than on the premises. (See Sign Ordinance.).
Sign, Area:
Sign area is measured as follows:
A. Sign copy mounted, affixed, or painted on a background panel or surface
distinctively painted, textured, or constructed as a background for the sign copy, is
measured as that area contained within the sum of the smallest rectangle(s) that will
enclose both the sign copy and the background.
193
B. Sign copy mounted as individual letters or graphics against a wall, fascia, mansard,
or parapet of a building or surface of another structure, that has not been painted,
textured or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for the sign copy,
is measured as a sum of the smallest rectangle(s) that will enclose each word and
each graphic in the total sign.
C. Two-face signs, are measured as follows if the interior angle between the and two
sign faces is 45 degrees or less, the sign area is of one sign face only. If the angle
between the any two sign faces is greater than 45 degrees, the sign area is the sum
of the areas of the two sign faces.
D. Multi-face signs, signs with three or more faces are measured as follows, the sum of
the area of all the faces, divided by two.
194
E. Spherical, free-form, sculptural or other non-planar sign area is measured as 50
percent of the sum of the areas using only the four vertical sides of the smallest
four-sided polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure.
Sign, Electronic Message Center:
A light emitting diode (LED) sign that is controlled via electronic communication. An electronic
message center (EMC) sign has information created on a computer using a software program
that allows the user to display static or moving messages consisting of text, graphics, video
graphics, and animation, including the use of multiple colors on a contrasting background.
Unless otherwise provided herein, EMC’s shall not be permitted to change pages or images
more frequently than once every two (2) seconds. The use of EMC’s shall be restricted to onsite
advertising and/or the promotion of not-for-profit communitywide events or activities.
Historic Consideration: The use of Electronic Message Center Signs within any Historic District
as approved for listing to the National Register of Historic Places by the National Park Service is
prohibited.
Sign, Ground:
Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained for the purpose of displaying outdoor advertising
by means of posters, pictures, pictorial, and reading matter when such sign is supported by two
(2) or more uprights, posts, or braces placed upon or affixed in the ground and not attached to
any part of a building.
Sign, Marquee:
Any sign affixed to a marquee over the entrance to a building and supported from the building.
195
Sign, Portable:
A sign, banner, sandwich board, mannequin, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas,
plastic, blackboard, cardboard, wall board, metal, or other light material as well as any vehicle
or trailer, one of the major uses of which is as a fixed or mobile advertising display. Such
described signs shall be deemed portable if they are capable of being carried or moved and not
affixed in a permanent manner to the ground, a structure, or other supporting device.
Sign, Post:
Any permanent sign supported by one or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground and
not attached to any building or wall, but not including a ground sign or billboard.
Sign, Pylon:
A sign which may identify the name of a Large Scale Retail Development (and may also identify
the name and services or merchandise of each or any of the retail stores, offices, cinemas and
restaurants located in the development), which must be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of Section 10-21-7(D).
Sign, Roof:
Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon the roof of any building.
Sign, Wall:
Any painted sign or poster on any surface or plane that may be affixed to the front, side, or rear
wall of any building.
Solid Waste Transfer Station:
A site with a permanent enclosed structure for receiving solid waste for the purpose of
reducing its volume for transport to other destinations. Activities include, but are not limited to,
the sorting and compacting of materials, shredding, and the temporary storage of said
materials while awaiting transport to a landfill or recycling destination. Ancillary site activities
may include the composting of yard waste material.
Standard Shrub:
A standard shrub is any bush or small evergreen tree occupying a space of at least eighteen
cubic feet.
Standard Tree:
A standard tree is a tree with a minimum caliber of three inches 0f a variety normally capable of
attaining a 25 feet height when the tree is twenty years old.
Street:
A public way at least 60 feet in width which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property.
Street Center Line:
The street center line is a line halfway between the street lines.
Street Line:
A dividing line between a lot and a contiguous street.
196
Structural Alteration:
Any change, except those required by law or ordinance, which would prolong the life of the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or
girders, not including openings in bearing walls as permitted by other Ordinances.
Structure:
Anything constructed or installed or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel
of land. It includes a movable structure while it is located on land which can be used for
housing, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes, either temporarily or
permanently. Structure also includes fences, billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines,
transmission lines, tracks, and advertising signs, whether located on a rock, tree, separate
structure, or part of another structure.
Tourist Home:
An establishment used for dwelling purpose in which rooms, with or without meals, are offered
to transient guests for compensation.
Townhouse:
A building that has one-family dwelling units erected in a row as a single building on adjoining
lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by a masonry party wall or walls
extending from the basement floor to the roof along the dividing lot line, and each such
building being separated from any other building by space on all sides.
Yard:
An open space, other than a court on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
Yard, Front:
A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the main building to the
front line of the lot or to the designated street line in cases where the present property line
extends to the center line of the abutting street. On corner lots, the front yard shall face the
shortest street dimension of the lot, except that if the lot is square or almost square, i.e., has
dimensions in a ratio of from 3:2 to 3:3, then the front yard may face either street.
Yard, Rear:
A yard extending the full width of the lot between a principal building and the rear lot line.
Yard, Side:
A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front yard
line to the rear yard line.
Yard Width and Depth:
The shortest horizontal distance from a lot line to the main building.
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SUBJECT
Plats, Filing, Approval Process
CHAPTER
1
Minimum Standards 2
Documents to be Submitted with Final Plat 3
Enforcement 4
Title 11 – Subdivision Regulations
Chapter 1 – Plats, Filing, Approval Process
SECTIONS:
11-1-1 General Procedure
11-1-2 iling Requirements
11-1-3 Requirements of Preliminary Plat
11-1-4 Preliminary Approval of Plat
11-1-5 Final Plat Requirements
11-1-1 General Procedure. The City of Muscatine hereby adopts the following rules and
regulations governing the subdivisions of land within its jurisdiction, pursuant to the Code of
Iowa, Chapter 409, as amended, and to the City Code of the City of Muscatine, Iowa, as
amended. No subdivision of land within the City of Muscatine or within two (2) miles of the
Corporate Limits of the City shall be authorized until it has been submitted to and approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
No subdivision plat or replat of land located within the City or within two (2) miles thereof
shall be recorded until it shall have been approved in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter and the Code of Iowa, Section 409.14, and by resolution of the Council. Said
approved plat and accompanying certificates and documents shall not be considered valid
until they are filed and/or recorded in the County Recorder's, Auditor's, and Assessor's
Offices. The provisions of this Chapter shall be construed to be in conformance with Chapter
409 of the Code of Iowa and restrictions set forth in Section 409.14 of said Code are hereby
specifically adopted and incorporated by reference within this Chapter.
11-1-2 Filing Requirements.
A.
1. Any tract, lot, or parcel of land within the Corporate Limits of the City of
Muscatine which shall hereafter be divided into three (3) or more parts shall
be considered a subdivision. This includes resubdivision and the division of a
parcel of land held in common and subsequently divided into parts among
several owners, with or without a structure, on which a separate business
without shared amenities, such as parking, is to be conducted or a separate
dwelling erected or used. All such subdivisions shall conform to the applicable
requirements set forth in this Chapter. This includes resubdivision or lease of
a parcel on which a separate business is to be conducted.
2. Any tract, lot, or parcel of land of record at the time of the adoption of this
Ordinance which is located outside the Corporate Limits and which shall
hereafter be subdivided into three (3) or more parts for the purpose of
making an addition, subdivision, or residential lots shall, pursuant to Section
409.14 of the Code of Iowa, be approved by the City Council.
The plats of any subdivision located outside the Corporate Limits of the City, but
within two (2) miles of the Corporate Limits, shall be examined by the City Council
and the City Planning and Zoning Commission, with a view to ascertaining whether
the same conform to the City Ordinances relating to plats and whether streets,
alleys, boulevards, parks, and public places conform to the general plat of the City
and are conducive to an orderly development thereof, and do not conflict or interfere
with rights-of-way or extensions of streets or alleys already established, or otherwise
interfere with the carrying out of the Comprehensive City Plan. If such plats shall
conform to the Statutes of the State and Ordinances of the City and if they shall fall
within the general plan for the City and the extensions thereof, regard being had for
public streets, alleys, parks, sewer connections, water service, and service of other
utilities, then it shall be the duty of the Council and the Planning and Zoning
Commission to endorse their approval upon the plat; provided that the City Council
may require, as a condition of approval of such plats, that the owner of the land bring
all streets to a grade and standard acceptable to the Council and comply with
such other improvements as the Council may deem requisite for the protection of the
public interest.
All newly constructed roadways providing access to lots within two (2) miles of the
Corporate Limits shall be in conformance with the county right-of-way width of sixtysix
feet (66') and shall be improved as required by the City Council; the minimum
improvements shall provide a twenty-four foot (24') wide roadway surface and shall
be constructed with a surface material having an equivalent to a Structural Number
(SN) of 4.0, and in accordance with the rural street standards as defined in Title 12,
Chapter 2. The City Council may require street and roadway improvements in
addition to the minimums as provided in this Section. Also, the City Council may
require other improvements as it deems requisite for the protection of the public
interest. The approval of any such plat, whether or not such approval requires
complete compliance with the provisions of this Title, shall not be construed as
requiring the City to maintain any of the improvements required to be installed in the
subdivision.
B. The subdivider shall prepare and file in the Office of the Planning Administrator four
(4) copies of the preliminary plat conforming in detail to the requirements set forth
herein of any tract, lot, or parcel of land that is subdivided into three (3) or more
parts for the purpose of making an addition to the City or a subdivision thereof.
C. Prior to the City Council approval of a final subdivision plat, the developer shall file a
duly completed and executed bond, escrow agreement, or other collateral certified
by the City Attorney as valid and enforceable by the City. This guarantee shall be in
an amount determined by the City Engineer to be satisfactory for securing and
making the installation of all public improvements required by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council.
D. An application for approval of a subdivision plat shall be filed with the Planning
Administrator and accompanied with the required plats and with a filing fee, as
established by resolution in Section 5-15-2 in this City Code.
11-1-3 Requirements of Preliminary Plat. Such preliminary plat shall contain the following
information:
A. The scale used on the drawings.
B. The title under which the proposed addition or subdivision is to be known and
recorded.
C. The dimensions of all platted lots and unplatted areas and contours of a two foot (2')
interval.
D. An application for approval of a subdivision plat shall be filed with the Planning
Administrator and accompanied with the required plats and with a filing fee, as
specified in the City Code.
E. The location of all property lines, watercourses, streets, alleys, public grounds, and
similar features adjoining the platted area.
F. The location and dimensions of all areas to be reserved for future use as school sites,
parks, playgrounds, or similar features and which are to be dedicated to the public
for such use.
G. The location and size of existing storm or sanitary sewers, water mains, or field
drains within or readily accessible to the platted area.
H. The location and character of all existing easements and those proposed to be
provided by the owner for utility purposes.
I. The location, dimensions, and present use of existing buildings within the platted
area.
J. The bearing and distance from some monumented block or lot corner within the
platted area to some corner of a congressional division within the City.
K. A legal description of the area being platted, together with the name or names of the
owners and the name and seal of the registered land surveyor making the plat.
L. All elevations shown on the plat, profiles, and cross sections shall be referred to City
datum.
M. A general location map showing the proposed subdivision site in relation to the City
of Muscatine.
N. No strip of land shall be reserved by the subdivider, unless the tract is of sufficient
size and shape to be of some practical use or service, as determined by the
Commission and the Council.
O. Suitable public right-of-way for bicycle/pedestrian paths shall be carefully considered
and required on the preliminary plat when they are compared with the
Comprehensive Plan or designated as a part of the Running River Trail system as it
may be amended from time to time. All such paths indicated on the final plat shall be
installed by the City at such time as funds are available to the City for construction of
the paths. All right-of-ways for bicycle/pedestrian paths shall be not less than twenty
(20) feet wide.
11-1-4 Preliminary Approval of Plat. Upon the filing of a preliminary plat with the Planning
Administrator, the Planning Administrator shall refer one (1) copy of such plat and
accompanying papers to the City Engineer, one (1) copy to the Building and Zoning
Administrator, and one (1) copy to the Planning Commission at its first regular meeting.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application and preliminary plat of the
subdivision to determine if it conforms to the minimum standards and requirements outlined
in Chapter 2 and shall approve or reject the plat within thirty-five (35) days of the initial
Commission review. In the event of a large subdivision which is to be developed in a phased
sequence over a period of time, the Commission shall refer the overall preliminary plat to
the City Council for review and appropriate action.
The approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and if
appropriate by the City Council, shall not constitute final acceptance of the subdivision by
the City. The owner shall, within one (1) year following the preliminary approval of the
subdivision plat, prepare and file a final plat and other required construction plans and
documents.
One (1) copy of the approved preliminary plat shall be retained in the Office of the Planning
Administrator and one (1) copy in the Office of the City Engineer. One (1) copy shall be
given to the subdivider and its receipt shall be authorization for the subdivider to proceed
with the preparation of plans and specifications for the minimum improvements required in
these regulations and with the preparation of the final plat.
11-1-5 Final Plat Requirements.
A. The final plat shall contain all information required to be shown on the preliminary
plat and, in addition, the following information:
1. The proposed names of all streets, public ways, and places dedicated for
public use, lot numbers, dimensions, and areas.
2. The type and location of all permanent monuments at block and lot corners
and elsewhere within the platted area.
3. All radii, arcs, chords, points of tangency, and central angles for curved
streets and the radii of all rounded curves shall be shown on the plat.
4. The certification of the engineer and/or land surveyor preparing the plat with
his license number, and seal, signature, and the date of survey.
5. Certificate of approval for construction of water, electric, and gas service from
the respective utility companies, accompanied by a plat showing the
easements required.
6. The subdivider shall file with the City two (2) sets of improvement plans and
profile, one (1) set reproducible. All plans and drawings are to be submitted
on eighteen inch by twenty-four inch (18" x 24") plan and profile paper.
NOTE: The maximum size sheet for the final plat for recording purposes under
the Code of Iowa, Section 409.31., is eighteen inches by twenty-four inches
(18" x 24").
7. Building setback lines and dimensions.
8. In addition to showing the sanitary sewer line, all stub-in laterals to individual
lots shall be indicated and a notation on depth shall also be made on the plat.
B. The subdivider shall file with the Planning Administrator, not less than seven (7)
days prior to consideration by the Planning Commission of the final plat, the
following:
1. Four (4) copies of the final plat.
2. One (1) reproducible copy of the final plat shall be submitted.
3. All utility easements must be indicated, with signature block with approval
signatures from the respective utility interests.
4. Two (2) copies of any agreement to be entered into between the subdivider
and the City of Muscatine providing for the grading of streets and the
installation of sewer systems and other utilities or improvements as may be
required.
5. Two (2) copies of a proposed resolution to be adopted by the City Council
accepting lands to be dedicated for public use.
6. Two (2) copies of a proposed resolution to be adopted by the City Council
accepting the final plat.
7. The appropriate bond or other collateral approved by the City Attorney and
City Engineer to cover the estimated public improvements.
C. Before submitting the final plat for approval, the owner or subdivider of the land
being platted shall cause monuments to be placed within the platted area as follows:
1. One inch (1") galvanized iron pipe monuments, not less than thirty inches
(30") in length and driven six inches (6") below the ground surface, shall be
placed at each block corner, each end of curves, and each angle or change in
direction along lot lines.
2. One-half inch (1/2") iron rods, not less than twenty-four inches (24") in
length, shall be placed at each lot corner and left flush with the ground
surface. Equivalent material may be used upon approval of the City Engineer.
3. Each monument shall have the registration number of the land surveyor in
charge.
D. Upon the filing of the final plat, the Planning Administrator shall immediately refer
one (1) copy of the final plat and accompanying papers to the City Engineer and one
(1) copy to the Building and Zoning Administrator, and report to the Planning
Commission.
Title 11 – Subdivision Regulations
Chapter 2 – Minimum Standards: Improvements
SECTIONS:
11-2-1 Minimum Standards; Requirements
11-2-2 Improvements
11-2-1 Minimum Standards; Requirements. In this Section, the phrase "the subdivider shall
provide" means the subdivider shall install the facility referred to at his expense and at no
cost to the City. All facilities must be installed in accordance with these regulations prior to
occupancy of the buildings. No subdivision plat shall be approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, unless it conforms to minimum standards and requirements established
by this Chapter.
A. Acreage Addition. Whenever an area is divided into lots containing one (1) or more
acres and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided,
consideration shall be given to the street and lot arrangement so that additional
streets can be opened which will permit of a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
B. Erosion Control. The submitted plan shall be reviewed by the Muscatine County Soil
Conservation District. The appropriate recommendations of the Soil Conservation
District shall be incorporated into the plan along with a time schedule indicating
when ground cover or plantings will be installed.
C. Blocks. No block shall be longer than one thousand feet (1,000') between street
lines, nor less than two hundred twenty feet (220') nor wider than three hundred feet
(300'), except for special reasons where deemed necessary. In its discretion and
for good cause, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City
Council may require that a public walkway not less than ten feet (10') wide be
installed near the center of the block and that such walkway be dedicated to and
properly maintained by the City of Muscatine.
D. Lots. All subdivided lots shall conform to the dimensions specified in the appropriate
Zoning District. The Commission shall not approve a subdivision plat which attempts
to create lots which do not meet minimum standards as specified in the Zoning
Ordinance.
Corner lots shall have extra width to permit the maintenance of building lines on
both front and side streets. The dimensions shall conform to the front yard
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the specific district.
Lots at street intersections shall have a radius of at least fifteen feet (15') at the
street corner.
All lots shall abut an improved public street prior to the issuing of a building permit
or if a proper performance bond is submitted for street and other public
improvements, a building permit may be issued; however, a Certificate of Occupancy
will not be issued until the public improvements are completed.
E. Building setback lines shall be established as required by the Zoning Ordinance and
indicated on the final-plat.
11-2-2 Improvements. A performance bond or other security which will insure to the City
that the subdivision public improvements will be completed by the subdivider within two (2)
years after City Council acceptance of the plat, and a maintenance bond from the subdivider
or his contractor, which will insure "to the City that said improvements will be maintained in
good and suitable condition for a period of two (2) years after City Council acceptance of the
construction, shall be filed with the City through the City Planning Administrator. The
subdivider shall file a duly completed and executed bond or other security certified by the
City Attorney as valid and enforceable by the City. The amount of the bond or other security,
as determined by the City Engineer, shall be in an amount satisfactory for securing andmaking
the installation of all the required public improvements. This guarantee shall be
retained by the City until the improvements have been satisfactorily completed and accepted
by the City.
It is the responsibility of the subdivider to obtain or insure that liability insurance for both
personal injury and property damage are in effect for contractors.
The design standards for rural residential subdivisions as defined in Title 12, Chapter 2,
shall apply where appropriate. The following improvements are required of all other City
subdividers:
A. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed, or caused to be installed, on both sides of
streets, places and cul-de-sacs. The subdivider shall install sidewalks according to
specifications prescribed by the City and set at the grade established by the City
Engineer.
B. Street Improvements To be Made Upon Approval of Final Plat.
1. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed by the subdivider on both sides of all
streets.
2. Minimum right-of-way width for residential streets shall be sixty feet (60').
3. Streets shall be filled or excavated to the grade approved by the City and set
by the City Engineer. All streets shall be graded the full platted width and
pavement shall be constructed of seven inches (7") of Portland cement
concrete pavement or equal. All streets determined by the City Engineer to be
local roads or sub- collector streets shall be not less than thirty-one feet (31')
or nine and one-half meters (9.5m) in width from back of curb to back of
curb. All streets determined by the City Engineer to be collector streets shall
be not less than forty-four feet (44') or thirteen and one-half meters (13.5m)
in width from back of curb to back of curb. All street improvements shall be in
accordance with City specifications.
Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be reviewed individually by the
City Engineer for a determination of the thickness of the Portland cement
concrete.
4. Inspection and testing of street improvements shall be performed under the
direction of the City Engineer or a qualified engineer and a testing laboratory
selected by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall bear this expense.
C. Storm Sewers.
1. Storm Sewers. The plans for installation of a storm drainage system shall be
prepared by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer. Design shall
be based on a ten (10) year frequency storm.
2. Storm sewers, if practicable, shall be placed in either the parkway adjacent to
the street or where necessary, provided the proper easements are granted.
3. Minimum size of all storm sewers shall be twelve inches (12") reinforced
concrete pipe.
D. Sanitary Sewers.
1. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete public sanitary
sewer system to each lot within the subdivision. In areas where a public
sanitary sewer outlet is not available, that is not within one thousand feet
(1,000'), the subdivider shall, or his assigns shall, provide a private sanitary
disposal system in accordance with the State of Iowa Department of
Environmental Quality and local sanitary disposal codes.
2. The provision of a public sanitary sewer system by the subdivider shall consist
of all necessary laterals, pumping stations, manholes, and other
appurtenances to provide for the discharge of disposal for the platted area.
3. All public sanitary sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with
plans and specifications of the City and at sewer grades as established by the
City.
4. The subdivider shall furnish a "Sewage Treatment Agreement" from the Iowa
Department of Environmental Quality for the City to execute.
5. The installation of such sewers shall be under the supervision and inspection
of the City Engineer and the subdivider may be required to pay a reasonable
charge for such engineering and inspection service.
6. Prior to acceptance of the installed sanitary and storm sewer line by the City
the developer shall be responsible for televising the line and furnishing a VHS
video to the Engineering Department for review.
E. Utilities. All gas, water, electrical, cable television, telephone, or maintenance of any
associated structures shall be placed underground. The subdivider shall install, or
cause to be installed, all necessary water mains, hydrants, gas mains, and electrical
transmission lines and shall make said utilities available to each lot within the
subdivision.
F. Water Supply. The subdivider shall install, or cause to be installed, a common deep
well or install the Municipal Water distribution system by extension for all affected
subdivision proposals. Subdivisions involving eight (8) or more lots require the
developer to obtain approved well permits from the Iowa Department of Water, Air
and Waste Management prior to final plat approval. Subdivisions involving less than
eight (8) lots require the developer to submit well plans, specifications, and layout
information along with the final plat for review during the approval process. Affected
subdivisions located south of Hershey Avenue and County Road G-28, between the
Mississippi River and the bluffs to the west, commonly referred to as Muscatine
Island, shall also have the option of extending Municipal Water service or drilling
common deep wells which penetrate alluvial matter and clay strata to the point of
bedrock in complying with the requirements of the approval process.
Title 11 – Subdivision Regulations
Chapter 3 – Documents to be Submitted with Final Plat
SECTIONS:
11-3-1 Required Documents
11-3-2 Document Format
11-3-1 Required Documents. Documents to be submitted with final plat. Upon approval of
the subdivision, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to record the subdivision at
the County Court House. When the final plat is submitted to the Council, it shall be
accompanied by the following instruments, which will be current within thirty (30) days prior
to the date of the Council's approval:
A. An attorney's legal opinion placing the fee title, free from unbonded encumbrance, in
the owner, provided it may show a mortgage or encumbrance if the plat is
accompanied by a consent to such platting by the holder of the mortgage or
encumbrance of all streets, easements, and other areas to be conveyed or dedicated
to the City of Muscatine within which such land is located.
B. A certificate from the County Recorder placing fee title in the owner and certifying
that the land is free from encumbrances or free from encumbrances other than those
provided for in an encumbrance bond duly prepared, executed, and recorded by the
owner, as required by the Code of Iowa, provided it may show a mortgage or
encumbrance if the plat is accompanied by a consent to such platting by the holder of
the mortgage or encumbrance of all streets, easements, and other areas to be
conveyed or dedicated to the City of Muscatine within which such land is located.
C. A certificate by the owner of the property and spouse, if any, that the subdivision as
it appears on the plat is with free consent and is in accordance with the desire of said
owner and spouse, dedicating the streets and other public property shown on the
plat, establishing the setbacks, declaring the limitations on easements, and providing
for any restrictive covenants needed or requested.
D. A certificate from the County Treasurer certifying that the land is free from taxes.
E. A certificate from the Clerk of the District Court certifying that the land is free from
all judgments, mechanic's and other liens, or attachments as shown in the records of
that office.
F. One of the following:
1. A certificate bearing the approval of the City Engineer, stating that all
improvements and installations to the subdivision required by this Article
have been made or installed in accordance with specifications.
a. A performance bond or bonds with the City, which will insure to the
City that the subdivision improvements will be completed by the
subdivider within two (2) years after Council acceptance of the plat
and a maintenance bond or bonds from all the subdivider's contractors
with the City, which will insure to the City that said improvements will
be maintained in good and suitable condition for a period of two (2)
years after Council acceptance of the construction.
b. The term "maintain" or "maintained" shall be defined as pertaining to
the repairs which shall become necessary because of defective or
faulty workmanship or materials in the improvement completed by the
subdivider and/or his contractors.
c. The form and type of a performance bond or bonds shall be approved
by the City Attorney and the amount of any bond shall not be less than
the estimated cost of the improvements, as determined by the City
Engineer, and the amount of any performance or maintenance. If the
improvements are not completed or maintained within the specified
times, the Council may use the bond or bonds or any necessary
portion thereof to complete or maintain the improvements.
G. A certificate from a registered land surveyor, including an accurate metes and
bounds description of the addition.
H. Two (2) resolutions and a certificate for approval by the Council.
11-3-2 Document Format. The forms set out in this Section shall be used, as required, in
conjunction with final plats.
LAND SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
Each final plat submitted to the Council for approval
shall carry a certificate signed by a registered land
surveyor in substantially the following form:
I, , hereby certify that I am a registered
(Name)
land surveyor, licensed in compliance with the laws of the
State of Iowa; that this plat of ,
(Name of Addition)
an addition to the City of Muscatine, Iowa, correctly
represents a survey completed by me on ; that all of the
(Date)
monuments and pins shown thereon (will exist by as
(Date)
required by the Code of Iowa) (do exist) and that their
location, size, type, and material are accurately shown; and
that the correct metes and bounds description of said
addition is as follows:
(SEAL) (Signature)
(Registration Number)
DEDICATION CERTIFICATE OF OWNER
Each final plat submitted to the Commission and the Council for
approval shall carry a certificate of owner in substantially the
following form:
We, the undersigned, , owners of the real estate
(Names)
shown and described herein, do hereby certify that we have platted
and subdivided, and hereby lay off, plat, and subdivide, said real
estate in accordance with the within plat. We do further certify
that this plat is made and submitted with our free consent and
desires.
This subdivision shall be known and designated as
(Name of
, an addition to the City of Muscatine,
Subdivision)
Iowa. All streets and alleys shown and not heretofore dedicated,
are hereby dedicated to the public. Front yard building setback lines
are hereby established as shown on this plat, between which lines
and the property lines of the street there shall be erected or
maintained no buildings or structures.
A perpetual easement is hereby granted to any local public utility
or municipal department, their successors and assigns, within the
area shown on the plat and marked as an easement, to install,
lay, construct, renew, operate, maintain, and remove conduits,
cables, pipes, poles, and wires with all necessary braces, guys,
anchors, manholes, and other equipment for the purpose of serving
the subdivision and other property with the underground telephone,
storm sewer, cable television, electric, gas, sanitary
sewer, water, or other service as a part of the respective utility
system; (Further, as an overhead easement is hereby granted for
those overhead utilities in existence at the time of this
platting); also is granted, subject to the prior rights of the
public therein, the right to use the streets and lots with
underground service lines to serve adjacent lots and street
lights, the right to cut down and remove or trim and keep trimmed
any trees or shrubs that interfere or threaten to interfere with
any of the said public utility equipment, and the right is hereby
granted to enter upon the lots at all times for all of the
purposes aforesaid. No permanent buildings shall be placed on said
area as shown on the plat and marked "Easement", but same may be
used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping, and other purposes that do
not then or later interfere with the aforesaid uses or the rights
herein granted.
Dated at Muscatine, Iowa, this day of 19 .
(Date) (Date) (Year)
(Husband)
(Wife)
or
(Office)
(SEAL)
(Office)
STATE OF IOWA )
) ss:
County of Muscatine )
Before me, the undersigned, a Notary Public, in and for the County
and State, personally appeared and each
(Names)
separately and severally acknowledged the execution of the
foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed, for the
purpose therein expressed.
Witness my hand and notarial seal this day of ,
19 .
(Year)
(SEAL)
(Date) (Month)
(Notary Public)
OR
STATE OF IOWA )
) ss:
County of Muscatine )
Before me, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the
County and State, personally appeared
(Name)
, to me personally known, who being
(Name)
and
by me duly sworn did say that they are the
(Office)
and
respectively of said corporation executing the
(Office)
within and foregoing instrument, (no seal has been procured by the
said) (the seal affixed thereto is the seal of said) corporation;
that said instrument was signed (and sealed) on behalf of said
corporation by authority of its Board of Directors and that the
said and as such officers
(Name) (Name)
acknowledged the execution of said instrument to be the voluntary
act and deed of said corporation, by it and by them voluntarily
executed.
(SEAL)
Notary Public
TAX CERTIFICATE
The certificate reflecting the paid taxes on the subdivided property
shall be in the following form:
STATE OF IOWA ))
ss:
County of Muscatine )
, Treasurer for the County of Muscatine, State of Iowa,
(Name)
hereby certify that I have examined the records of said County, and
find that the following described real estate, to-wit:
(Name of Addition)
is free from taxes.
(SEAL)
Date Treasurer, Muscatine County
Iowa
LIEN CERTIFICATE
The certificate reflecting liens on the subdivided property shall be in
the following form:
STATE OF IOWA ))
ss:
County of Muscatine )
I , Clerk of the District Court for County of
(Name)
Muscatine, State of Iowa, hereby certify that I have examined the
records of this Court, and find that the following described real
estate, to-wit: is free from all judgments, mechanic's
(Name of Addition)
or other liens, or attachments as shown by the records of my office.
(SEAL)
Clerk of District Court
Date
ENCUMBRANCE CERTIFICATE
The certificate reflecting encumbrances on the subdivided property
shall be in the following form:
STATE OF IOWA ))
ss:
County of Muscatine )
I , Recorder for the County of Muscatine, State of
(Name)
Iowa, hereby certify that I have examined the records of said County,
and find that title in fee to the following described real estate, towit:
is found in and
(Name) (Name)
and I further find that said real estate is either free from
encumbrance or free from encumbrance other than that secured by an
encumbrance bond properly executed and filed with me on ,
(Date)
19 , and that said bond has been given instrument number or free
(Year)
from encumbrance other than that shown if the plat is accompanied by a
consent to such platting by the holder of the encumbrance and a release
from the encumbrance of all streets, easements, and other areas to be
conveyed or dedicated to the City.
(SEAL)
Recorder, Muscatine County,
Iowa
Date
ATTORNEY'S CERTIFICATE
The attorney's certificate shall be in the following form:
STATE OF IOWA ))
ss:
County of Muscatine )
, certify that I have examined the records of Muscatine
(Name)
County, Iowa, and from such examination find title in fee simple to the
real estate identified as , an Addition to the
(Name of Subdivision)
City of Muscatine, Iowa, free from encumbrance or from encumbrance
other than that secured by bond or free from encumbrance other than
that shown if the plat is accompanied by a consent to such platting by
the holder of the encumbrance and a release from the encumbrance of all
streets, easements, and other areas to be conveyed or dedicated to the
City, as of this date, to be vested in
(Name of Owner)
DATED this day of , 19 .
(Date) (Month) (Year)
By
(Name)
Attorney-At-Law
MAINTENANCE BOND
The maintenance bond shall be in the following form:
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT WE, ,
(Contractor’s Name)
as PRINCIPAL, and , a company duly authorized to
(Surety)
transact business in the State of Iowa, as surety, are held and firmly
bound unto the City of Muscatine, Iowa, as obligee, in the sum of
$ for payment whereof well and truly to be made, the
principal and the surety bind themselves, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors, and assigns jointly and severally firmly by
these presents.
SIGNED and sealed and dated this day of , 19 .
(Date) (Month) (Year)
WHEREAS, the principal has entered into contract for the construction
of
(Improvement to an Addition)
to the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
WHEREAS, the obligee has required said principal to furnish a bond
guaranteeing remedy of any defect in material or workmanship within a
period of two (2) years from the date of official acceptance of the
improvements by the City Council of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the
said principal does and shall at his own cost and expense remedy any
and all defects that may develop in said work, then this obligation
shall be null and void; otherwise, it shall remain in full force and
effect.
By
Principal
By
Surety
By
Agent & Attorney-In-Fact
STATE OF IOWA ))
ss:
County of Muscatine )
On this day of , 19 , A.D., before me, the undersigned,
(Date) (Month) (Year)
a Notary Public, personally appeared the above named
(Name)
Principal (Agent or Attorney for Principal), and/or
(Name)
Surety (Agent or Attorney for Surety), to me known to be the person or
persons named in and who executed the foregoing instrument, and
acknowledged that he (they) executed the same as his (their) voluntary
act and deed.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto signed my name and affixed my
Notarial Seal the day and year last above written.
(SEAL)
Notary Public in and for
County, State of
RESOLUTION NO.
WHEREAS, there has been presented before the City Council of the
City of Muscatine, Iowa, a dedication and plat of a subdivision of
the following described real estate situated in the County of
Muscatine, and State of Iowa, to-wit:
(Insert Legal Description)
which dedication and plat lay out and subdivide said real estate
into (# of lots) lots; and
WHEREAS, said plat has heretofore been approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission of the City of Muscatine, Iowa; and
WHEREAS, said dedication and plat fully conform with all laws of
the State of Iowa and all ordinances of the City of Muscatine,
Iowa, applicable thereto; and
WHEREAS, the platting of said subdivision is conducive to an
orderly development within the City of Muscatine, Iowa; is not in
conflict with any extensions of the established street system of
the City of Muscatine, Iowa; and is in harmony with the
Comprehensive Plan of zoning now in effect within the City of
Muscatine, Iowa.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
MUSCATINE, IOWA, as follows:
Section 1. That the dedication and plat of (name of subdivision),
be, and the same area, hereby accepted and approved, and that in
filing of approved bonds or other security guaranteeing to the City
that all of the improvements required by Title 11 of the City Code
of the City of
Muscatine, Iowa, will be installed within two (2) years from the
date hereof and in accordance with the plans and specifications for
the installation thereof now on file in the Office of the Planning
Administrator.
Section 2. That said subdivision be, and the same is hereby
designated as (name of subdivision) to the City of Muscatine, in
Muscatine County, Iowa; and that the descriptions of the lots and
parcels of land located therein shall be according to the number
and designation thereof as set forth on said plat.
Section 3. That, upon the filing of approved surety bonds, the
Mayor and City Clerk of the City of Muscatine, Iowa, be and they
are, hereby authorized and directed to certify this resolution in
order that the same and all other matters material to said
subdivision may be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of
Muscatine County, Iowa.
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this day of , 19 _.
BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
MUSCATINE, IOWA
Mayor
Attest:
City Clerk
CERTIFICATE OF THE MAYOR AND CITY CLERK
The certificate of the Mayor and City Clerk shall be in the
following form:
STATE OF IOWA ))
ss:
County of Muscatine )
We, and , do hereby certify that
we are the Mayor and City Clerk, respectively of the City of Muscatine,
Iowa; that the dedication and plat of Lots of
(Name of Subdivision) to the City of Muscatine, in
Muscatine County, Iowa, were presented to the City Council of the City of
Muscatine, Iowa, on the day of _, 19 that the
following resolution was duly adopted by said City Council at a meeting
thereof held on the day of , 19 , at 7:30 o'clock
P.M., at which meeting a quorum was present.
The dedication and plat of said subdivision were thereby accepted and
approved by said City Council, approved surety bonds have been filed in
accordance with the provisions of said resolution; and that the undersigned
were authorized and directed to certify said resolution in order that the
same and all other matters material to said subdivision may be recorded in
the Office of the Recorder of Muscatine County, Iowa.
Dated at Muscatine, Iowa, this day of _, 19 .
(SEAL)
Mayor
Attest:
City Clerk
CERTIFICATE OF THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY
OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
The certificate of the Executive Secretary of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be in the following form:
STATE OF IOWA ))
ss:
County of Muscatine )
, do hereby certify that I am the
Executive Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of
Muscatine, Iowa; and that the attached plat of lots (# of lots) inclusive,
of (Name of Subdivision) to the City of Muscatine, in
Muscatine County, Iowa, was approved by said Commission on the
day of _, 19_ , as shown by the records of said Commission now in
my possession.
Dated at Muscatine, Iowa, this day of _, 19 .
(Name)
Executive Secretary of
the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the City
of Muscatine, Iowa
Title 11 – Subdivision Regulations
Chapter 4 – Enforcement
SECTIONS:
11-4-1 Approval Required
11-4-2 Building; Repair Permits
11-4-3 Conformance
11-4-4 Changes; Amendments
11-4-5 Validity
11-4-1 Approval Required. No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the
County Recorder's Office or be of any validity until it shall be approved in the manner
prescribed herein. Upon approval, the subdivider shall be responsible for the recording of all
necessary documents and plats.
11-4-2 Building, Repair Permits. No building or repair permits shall be granted for any
structure located on a lot in any subdivision within the limits of the City, the plat of which
has been prepared after the adoption of this Title, but which has not been approved in
accordance with the provisions contained herein.
11-4-3 Conformance. The Council shall not permit any public improvements over which it
has any control to be made or any money expended for improvements in any area that has
been subdivided or upon any street that has been platted after the date of the adoption of
this Title, unless such subdivisions or street has been approved in accordance with the
provisions contained herein.
11-4-4 Changes; Amendments. Any regulations or provisions of this Title may be changed,
modified, or amended from time to time by the Council, provided, however, that such
changes, modifications, or amendments shall not become effective until after study and
report by the Planning Commission and until after a public hearing has been held, notice of
which shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least four (4) days
prior to such hearing.
11-4-5 Validity. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Title is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or void, such shall not effect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Title.
TITLE 12
PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Commercial Frontage Roads 1
Rural Street Standards 2
Title 12 – Public Works Improvements
Chapter 1 – Commercial Frontage Roads
SECTIONS:
12-1-1 Intent
12-1-2 Developer's Responsibilities
12-1-3 Design Standards
12-1-4 Final Plans
12-1-1 Intent. The purpose of a commercial frontage road is to provide access to real estate
located along and adjacent to existing and proposed arterial streets and limited access
highways. All proposed commercial frontage roads shall be aligned parallel and adjacent to
the existing right-of-way of either the arterial street or limited access highway.
All proposed commercial frontage roads shall be initially reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to
the City Council on the proposed lay out. The City Council will make the determination of
whether the proposed frontage road will be accepted as a public street.
All commercial frontage roads providing access to laid out lots of record shall be constructed
in accordance with the specifications of the City Engineering Department. Upon completion
of the construction and inspection approval by the City Engineering Department, the
frontage road shall be dedicated to the City as a laid out public street.
12-1-2 Developer's Responsibilities. The developer shall file a duly completed and executed
bond, escrow agreement, or other collateral, the amount to be determined by the City
Engineering Department, certified by the City's Corporate Council as valid and enforceable
by the City, with the Finance Director at the time of filing final construction plans with the
Engineering Department. This performance guarantee shall be retained by the City Clerk
until the improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the
specification of the City Engineering Department.
Prior to proceeding with the construction, the developer must show evidence of contractors
and public liability insurance for both personal injury and property damage (the amount of
such insurance shall be determined by the City Engineering Department), by filing a current
certificate of such insurance with the City Clerk. A maintenance bond guaranteeing
workmanship and materials for a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance is
required.
12-1-3 Design Standards. All designs shall be based on accepted engineering practices and
sound planning principles. The developer shall provide a complete set of reproducible
drawings to the City Engineering Department. The design of all proposed frontage roads
submitted for approval shall be prepared by a Professional Engineer registered in the State
of Iowa. All costs associated with required construction inspections performed by the City
Engineering Department shall be paid by the developer. In the event that the workload of
the City Engineering Department does not permit timely construction inspections, the
inspection may be completed by a qualified independent inspector approved by the City,
however, the final inspection and acceptance will be made by the City Engineer.
12-1-4 Final Plans. The following criteria shall be incorporated in the final plans:
A. The minimum right-of-way for frontage roads shall be fifty feet (50') (15.25 meters),
as designated by the Iowa Department of Transportation.
B. The paved width shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24') (7.3 meters), with a
surface consisting of seven inches (7") (17.8 centimeters) of concrete, as specified
by Iowa DOT standards relating to C-3 mix.
C. The shoulder adjacent to an existing arterial or limited access highway shall be
stabilized for a width of ten feet (10') (3 meters) from the pavement according to
Iowa DOT specifications - Class A three-fourths inch (3/4") stone six inches (6")
(15.25 centimeters) thick. Normally underground power and/or telephone utilities
will be installed within the right-of-way on this side of the pavement, on or
established rear/side lot line easements.
D. The paved portion of the frontage road adjacent to commercial oriented
establishments shall be curbed. Normally water lines shall also be installed within the
right-of-way on this side of the pavement.
E. The maximum number of curb cuts per commercial lot fronting on a commercial
frontage road is two (2). The maximum width of the cut at the property line shall be
twenty-five feet (25') (7.6 meters), the maximum width of the cut at the paved
frontage road shall be determined by the City Engineer.
F. Based on existing and projected development of the general vicinity, sidewalk
construction or a surety bond guaranteeing installation 'at a future specified date
may be required at the discretion of the City Council.
As applicable, the following criteria may be incorporated in the final plans and shall be
installed by the developer:
A. The final plan should indicate the location of all sanitary sewer installations within the
right-of-way.
B. The final plan should indicate any street lighting fixtures which may be required.
C. Clearing, grading, replacement of top soil, final seeding, and landscaping will be the
responsibility of the developer.
D. The final plan should indicate any required storm sewers/ culverts for the purpose of
handling surface runoff.
E. A turn around radius shall be provided on dead end frontage roads.
Title 12 – Public Works Improvements
Chapter 2 – Rural Street Standards
SECTIONS:
12-2-1 Intent
12-2-2 Area of Impact
12-2-3 Design Standards
12-2-1 Intent. The purpose of this amendment to the City Code is to establish reasonable
rural residential street standards consistent with safe, convenient vehicle and pedestrian
circulation. Consideration of appropriate balance among initial construction costs,
amortization costs, operating and maintenance costs, and replacement costs were
considered in formulating these rural residential street design standards. The adoption of a
consistent standard based on rural residential traffic load, subgrade soil, surface drainage
and climatic conditions in this area will contribute toward promoting the quality of our
residential neighborhoods. Commercial and industrial subdivision streets will be reviewed on
a case-by-case basis by the City Engineer.
12-2-2 Area of Impact. The design standards are applicable to new residential streets for
the Muscatine Island area, specifically for that portion within the corporate limits west of
Highway 61 and south of Sampson Street and east of Highway 61 and south of Maple Grove
Road as extended from its intersection at Latham Street toward Highway 61; and for those
rural areas outside the corporate limits but within two (2) miles thereof, which are subject
to subdivision review by the City of Muscatine as provided by the Code of Iowa, Section
409.14.
12-2-3 Design Standards. For the appropriate locations as specified above, the following
minimum design standards shall apply as follows:
A. The right-of-way width shall be sixty-six feet (66'), except that at the end of a cude-
sac diameter shall be one hundred feet (100').
B. Two (2) twelve foot (12') travel lanes are to be provided to serve the residential
area. This twenty-four foot (24’) travel surface width shall have a four foot (4’)
stabilized shoulder on each side. The hard surfaced turning radius at the end of a
culde- sac shall consist of forty feet (40’) to the outside of the travel surface.
C. Drainage shall be provided for by grader ditching parallel to each roadway shoulder.
Driveway culverts shall be provided and maintained by the property owner, the
diameter of which shall be determined by the City Engineer.
D. The surface material for travel lanes shall have an equivalent to a structural number
(SN) of 4.0. The thickness and type of material for the travel lanes shall be reviewed
by the City Engineer for a determination of the SN. This method allows for the
substitution of material, such as asphalt, flyash mixtures, and concrete, along with a
type of roadway base, to achieve a strength and service life acceptable for rural
residential area. NOTE: SN = 4.0, equivalent strength is equal to eight inches (8”)
concrete.
E. In the rural residential area defined above, sidewalks shall be installed within the
right-of-way on both sides of streets and cu-de-sacs. The subdivider shall install
sidewalks according to the following specifications, or as may otherwise be required
by the city.
1. An excavation shall be made a full five feet (5’) in width to a depth of four
inches (4”) below the finished grade of the walk; the subgrade shall be
thoroughly compacted by a mechanical means or hand tamping, and in such
excavation shall be placed a concrete mix reaching four thousand (4,000) psi
compressive strength in twenty-eight (28) days according to ASTM-39.
Concrete sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet (4’) wide and four inches
(4”) thick.
F. In the rural residential area defined above, a pipe storm sewer system is not
required.
TITLE 13 – PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1 – UTILITY CONNECTIONS
SECTIONS:
13-1-1 Duty of Abutting Owners Generally
13-1-2 Connections After Improvement is Made
13-1-3 Connections to be Made by Resolution
13-1-4 Publication and Form of Notice of Resolution Requiring Connection
13-1-5 Procedure When Abutting Property Owner Fails to Make Connection Generally
13-1-6 Cost; Expense Collection; Lien
13-1-7 Assessment Resolution; Notice
13-1-1 Duty of Abutting Owners Generally. Whenever the City Council shall order the
permanent improvement of any street, highway, avenue, or public ground or place, by paving,
graveling, or macadamizing the same, it shall be the duty of the owners of property abutting
thereon to make connections from gas, water, sewers, and underground electric connections to
the curb line of the abutting property before such ordered improvement is made.
13-1-2 Connections After Improvement is Made. In any case, where connections as
referred to in Section 13-1-1 of this Chapter are not made before the improvement is made, no
permit shall be permitted which shall require the cutting or displacement of any paving,
graveling, or macadamizing as provided in such connections for a period of five (5) years from
the date of the notice provided for in Section 13-1-4 of this Chapter, unless such connection is
for an emergency or is deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
13-1-3 Connections to be Made by Resolution.
A. Connections as referred to in Section 13-1-1 of this Chapter shall be made, one for each
utility connection required by the resolution of the City Council, for each lot of record
owned by each property owner in residential districts and for each lot of record owned
by each property owner in business districts; provided, however, that at least one of
each utility connection of such connections required by the resolution of the City Council
shall be made for each buildable parcel of land abutting upon the street or other public
place ordered improved.
B. Whenever the Council shall have ordered the permanent improvement of any street,
highway, avenue, alley, or public ground or place, by paving, graveling, or macadamizing
the same and the connections from the gas, water, sewers, and underground electrical
connections have not been made therefrom to the curb line for the abutting property to
the extent and in the manner required by this Chapter, the Council shall by resolution
declare the necessity of making such connections as it deems advisable, which resolution
shall require all owners of property abutting upon the streets and other public places to
be improved, naming and describing such streets, parts of streets, and public places as
accurately as may be, to make the connections required on or before a day to be stated
in such resolution and shall require water, electric, and communications connections to
be made in the manner required by the rules of the Water, Electric, and Communications
Board of Trustees of the City and in the manner required by the laws of the State of
Iowa, the provisions of this Code, and other Ordinances of the City relating thereto.
13-1-4 Publication and Form of Notice of Resolution Requiring Connection. Upon the
adoption of the resolution provided for in Section 13-1-3, the City Clerk shall give notice to each
property owner by certified mail and one publication in some newspaper of general circulation
published in the City at least twenty (20) days prior to the time fixed in the resolution and the
notice by which the making of such connections must be completed. Such notice shall be
substantially in the following form:
NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS
To owners of property abutting upon the following named and described streets, parts of streets,
highways, avenues, alleys, and public grounds and places, in the City of Muscatine, to-wit:
You and each of you are hereby notified that the City Council of the City of Muscatine, Iowa,
has ordered the permanent improvement of the above named and described public places by
paving the same and that you and each of you are required, on or before the _________ day
of , 20_____ , to make connections from the upon
said public places to the curb line of your abutting property, one utility connection for each lot
of record if in a residential district and for each lot of record in a business district, but at least
one utility connection for each buildable lot or parcel of land.
All connections with water pipes, and electrical and communications lines shall be made in the
manner required by the rules of the Water, Electric, and Communications Board of Trustees of
the City and all other applicable municipal and state laws.
Should you fail to make said connections in the manner, of the kind and number, and by the
date above mentioned, the City of Muscatine will cause the same to be made and will levy and
assess the cost and expense thereof against the property in front of which they are made.
No permit will be hereafter issued for a period of five (5) years for the making of said
connections which will require the cutting or displacement of the pavement after the same is
laid, unless on an emergency basis as determined by the City.
Given by order of said City Council this day of , 20 .
City Clerk
13-1-5 Procedure When Abutting Property Owner Fails to Make Connection Generally.
If the owner of any lot, part of lot, or parcel of land abutting upon any street, highway, avenue,
or public ground or place ordered to be improved as provided in the preceding Sections of this
Chapter shall refuse, fail, or neglect to make the connections of the kinds and number and in
the manner and by the date prescribed in the resolution and the notice thereof, the water,
electric, and communications connections required shall be made by the Board of Water,
Electric, and Communications Trustees of the City of Muscatine and the actual cost thereof shall
be by such Board certified to the Council, and the Council shall cause the actual cost and
expense thereof, as hereinafter set out, to be levied and assessed as a special tax against the
property in front of which such connections are made as above provided. In the making of such
connections the Council may, if it deems best, contract for the making of all such connections
as are made necessary by the improvements ordered to be made at any one time. If the Council
shall determine to contract for the making of such connections, it may advertise for bids thereon,
stating the amount of work to be done and the manner thereof, but reserving the right to reject
any and all bids.
13-1-6 Cost; Expense Collection; Lien. The cost and expense of the connections made or
caused to be made by the City under this Chapter shall be paid by the City and the Council shall
then levy and assess against the several lots, parts of lots, and parcels of land in front of which
such connections are made, the cost and expense of making the same. The amount of money
so levied and assessed against such lots, parts of lots, and parcels of land, with interest thereon
at the rate established by the City Council, shall be a lien upon the real estate so assessed until
paid and shall be certified for collection as other special assessments.
13-1-7 Assessment Resolution; Notice. Assessments as referred to in Section 13-1-6 of this
Chapter shall be by resolution of the City Council and shall be substantially in the following form:
RESOLUTION
Be it resolved by the City Council of the City of Muscatine, Iowa: That there is hereby assessed
against the following described lots, parts of lots, and parcels of land in the City of Muscatine,
Iowa, owned as hereinafter stated, special taxes in the amounts hereinafter indicated for the
cost and expense of making connections from__________________________________to the
curb line of the property described below and which the owners of said property have refused,
failed, or neglected to make as heretofore ordered by the City Council.
Owner Description of Property Tax
_________________________ _________________________________________ ______________
That this resolution be set for its consideration and passage at the next regular session of the
Council and the City Clerk be directed to give notice thereof accordingly.
TITLE 13 – PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 2 – WATER SUPPLY
SECTIONS:
13-2-1 Quality
13-2-2 Separation of Distribution Systems
13-2-3 Water Service Pipe
13-2-4 Flushometers
13-2-5 Shut-offs
13-2-6 Setting Water Meters
13-2-7 Pumps and Hydrants; Surface Water
13-2-8 Unauthorized Opening; Use
13-2-9 Tapping Water Mains; Distributing Pipes
13-2-10 Breaking Seals
13-2-11 Throwing Substances into Reservoirs; Water Mains
13-2-12 Outlets Kept Closed; Repair of Fixtures
13-2-13 Compliance
13-2-14 Breaking, Defacing Hydrants
13-2-15 Defacing Reservoirs; Tanks
13-2-16 Authorized Inspectors; Right of Entry
13-2-17 Plumbers Permit
13-2-1 Quality. The quality of water shall meet accepted standards of purity as established by
the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees of the City of Muscatine, by the
State of Iowa, and by the Federal Government.
13-2-2 Separation of Distribution Systems. The water supply shall be distributed through
a piping system entirely independent of any piping system conveying any other supply.
13-2-3 Water Service Pipe. The water service pipe of any building shall be of sufficient size
to permit an ample flow of water on all floors.
13-2-4 Flushometers. No water closet or urinal bowl shall be supplied directly from a water
supply system through a flushometer or other valve unless such valve is set at least six inches
(6") above the overflow rim of the water closet or urinal or in a manner such as to prevent any
possibility of polluting the water supply.
13-2-5 Shut-offs. A main shut-off on the water supply line shall be provided near the curb.
Accessible shut-offs shall be provided on the main supply line just inside the foundation wall and
ahead of the meter.
13-2-6 Setting Water Meters. Plumbers shall provide for the setting of City water meters in
accordance with the policies established by the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications
Trustees.
13-2-7 Pumps and Hydrants; Surface Water. All pumps and hydrants shall be protected
from surface water and contamination. Yard hydrants to furnish water for human consumption
are hereby prohibited.
13-2-8 Unauthorized Opening; Use. No persons, except such as are duly authorized by the
Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees shall, except for fire purposes or in case
of fire, open any fire hydrant or take or use any water therefrom, or remove the cap or cover
of any fire hydrant or any stopgate box; or shall dig out, curb over, or remove any fireplug,
hydrant, stop-cock, valve, valve box, or other fixture appertaining to the waterworks; or use or
take water from any part of the water system, or turn the water on or off from or into any water
pipe.
13-2-9 Tapping Water Mains; Distributing Pipes. All tapping and inserting ferrules in the
street mains or distributing pipes of the water system shall be done by employees of the Board
of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees, under the direction of the Board of Water,
Electric, and Communications Trustees.
13-2-10 Breaking Seals. No person shall break any seal connected to any meter, valve,
private fire hydrant, or other fixture that may have been sealed by employees of the Board of
Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees, except that in case of fire the seals on private
fire hydrants and private fire protection valves may be broken, but the breaking of such seals
shall be reported to the water department of the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications
Trustees within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter.
13-2-11 Throwing Substances Into Reservoirs; Water Mains. It shall be unlawful for any
person to throw, place, or deposit any substance, or thing whatsoever, in any reservoir, water
main, or pipe of the water system.
13-2-12 Outlets Kept Closed; Repair of Fixtures. All users of water supplied from the City
mains shall keep the hydrants, taps, hose, water closets, urinals, baths, or other fixtures in
good repair. Consumers of water shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and shall keep all
water outlets closed when not in actual use.
13-2-13 Compliance. Consumers of water shall, in all respects, conform to the rules and
regulations of the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees.
13-2-14 Breaking, Defacing Hydrants. Any person who shall, in any way, intentionally or
carelessly break, deface, or otherwise injure or destroy any hydrant or other property
appertaining to the water works, or property of others used in connection with the water supply,
shall be liable for all damage done and shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
13-2-15 Defacing Reservoirs; Tanks. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any
reservoir or tank.
13-2-16 Authorized Inspectors; Right of Entry. Such inspectors as may be authorized by
the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees may enter, at all reasonable hours,
into any premises supplied with water from the City mains, to examine the plumbing, meters,
tanks, or other apparatus or for the purpose of placing or carrying away any meter, instrument,
pipes, fitting, or other appliance belonging to the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications
Trustees.
13-2-17 Plumbers Permit. Plumbers and plumbing firms, desiring to work in connection with
the water supply or the pipes, fixtures, and appliances appertaining thereto, shall first obtain a
permit in the Office of the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees and shall
subscribe to the rules and regulations of the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications
Trustees.
All persons, except plumbers with a proper permit, are prohibited from making any extensions,
additions to, or alterations of any pipes, fixtures, or appliances connected with service pipes
attached to the City mains, or from, in any manner, intermeddling with the water system.
TITLE 13 – PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 3 – GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
SECTIONS:
13-3-1 Definitions
13-3-2 Sanitation District
13-3-3 Deposit, Accumulation, and Burning
13-3-4 Preparation of Refuse and Recycling for Collection
13-3-5 Refuse Containers
13-3-6 Removal of Container Lids
13-3-7 Cleaning of Containers
13-3-8 Prohibited Materials
13-3-9 Containers - Location
13-3-10 Collection of Refuse and Recycling
13-3-11 Collection Fees
13-3-12 Notice of Multiple Dwellings
13-3-13 Violation Declared Nuisance
13-3-14 Responsibility of Owner to Terminate Service
13-3-15 Assessment of Unpaid Charges
13-3-16 Preparation of Delinquent List
13-3-1 Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
A. "Ashes" shall mean and include the ashes of wood, paper, coal, coke, or charcoal and
the residue resulting from the combustion of any material or substance.
B. "Curbside" shall mean at the lot line abutting a public alley if the property is served by
such an alley and shall mean within three feet (3') of the edge of the paved portion of a
public street (a public sidewalk shall be excluded from the calculation of said three feet
(3').
C. "Domestic refuse" shall mean garbage, ashes, and miscellaneous rubbish originating
from a building or buildings containing exclusively dwelling units or accessory uses to a
dwelling unit and shall be divided into the following three (3) classes:
1. Class I-Domestic (single family and multi-family up to five (5) units) refuse permitted
to be stored in trash cans.
2. Class II-Domestic (six (6) or more dwelling units) and commercial refuse permitted
to be stored in trash cans.
3. Class III-Domestic refuse consisting entirely of miscellaneous rubbish.
D. "Dumpster" shall mean any container with at least a two (2) cubic yard capacity and a
maximum of four (4) cubic yard capacity and shall be equipped with a hinged lid, wheels,
and such other equipment as is needed for mechanical dumping.
E. “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable wastes
resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and consuming of food
or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding useful industrial
byproducts, and shall include all such substances from all public and private
establishments and from all residences.
(Iowa Admin. Code r. 567-100.2[455B,455D])
F. "Hazardous materials" shall include explosive materials; drugs; poisons; radioactive
materials; highly combustible materials; solid dressings, clothing, bedding, or other
wastes which are contaminated by infection or contagious disease; other wastes which
present an unreasonable risk of injury to collection personnel or equipment or to the
public; and material as defined by the Iowa Department of Environmental Quality as
hazardous.
G. "Household hazardous waste" shall mean toxic and/or corrosive products, e.g. oil-based
paints, insecticides, thinners, solvents, cleaners, turpentine, furniture stripper, nail
polish remover, etc.
H. "Industrial waste" shall mean wastes such as acids, oils, chemicals, grease, tires, vehicle
and aircraft parts, ashes, cinders, and other wastes, including construction wastes, such
as earth, plaster, metals, wood, plastics, tile, brick, concrete, terra cotta, slate, marble,
minerals, and other similar wastes.
I. "Miscellaneous rubbish" shall mean materials or substances discarded as worthless, such
as paper, rags, cardboard, wearing apparel, excelsior, sticks, chips, leaves, straw,
bottles, crockery, metals, plastics, tin cans, and other household items.
J. "Recycling” means any process by which waste, or materials which would otherwise
become waste, are collected, separated, or processed and revised or returned to use in
the form of raw materials or products. “Recycling” includes but is not limited to the
composting of yard waste which has been previously separated from other waste, but
does not include any form of energy recovery.
(Code of Iowa, Section 455D.1)
K. “Refuse” means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes including but not limited to
garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid wastes and sewage treatment wastes in dry or
semisolid form.
(Iowa Admin. Code r. 567-100.2[455B,455D])
L. "Residential premise" shall mean a single family dwelling, a multiple family dwelling
consisting of up to and including five (5) units, or a property used by the City of
Muscatine.
M. “Rubbish” means nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind.
(Iowa Admin. Code r. 567-100.2[455B,455D])
N. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid or
semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials resulting from industrial,
commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as
defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa, Subsection 90. This definition does not
prohibit the use of rubble at places other than a sanitary disposal project. Solid waste
does not include toxic and hazardous wastes as defined by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Section 455B.301)
O. “Trash cart” shall mean the City provided roll out container with either a thirty-five (35)
gallon, sixty-five (65) gallon, or a ninety-five (95) gallon capacity. Residents are to
utilize plastic trash bags for trash disposal insider their trash cart.
P. “Yard waste” means debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and
trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
(Iowa Admin. Code r. 567-100.2[455B,455D])
Q. “Yard waste bag" shall mean a special degradable bag supplied by the City with not less
than fifteen (15) gallon capacity nor more than twenty-five (25) gallon capacity. This
bag shall be capable of decomposing within 60 days of exposure to aerobic bacteria or
ultraviolet light.
13-3-2 Sanitation District. There is hereby established in the City a sanitary district, such
district to comprise and embrace all the area within the Corporate Limits of the City, for the
collection and disposal of garbage and such other waste material as may become dangerous to
the public health or detrimental to the best interests of the community, such provision being in
compliance with the Code of Iowa.
13-3-3 Deposit, Accumulation, and Burning.
A. Unless otherwise provided, no person shall burn, place, throw, deposit, drop, dump, spill,
or store, or cause to be burned, placed, thrown, deposited, dropped, dumped, spilled, or
stored on any public or private property any refuse or hazardous material.
B. Unless otherwise provided, no owner shall allow to be accumulated on their premises any
refuse or hazardous material.
13-3-4 Preparation of Refuse and Recycling for Collection. No person shall place refuse
out for collection unless properly prepared for collection. Garbage shall be thoroughly drained
and wrapped or placed in disposal containers before being placed into containers for collection.
Recycling should be placed in the recycling container provided for collection. Yard waste that is
not composted on the premises shall be prepared as follows:
A. Grass clippings shall only be placed in specially marked yard waste bags that are
distributed by the City through retail outlets.
B. Tree limbs and trimmings, clippings, and other similar waste from shrubs or trees shall
be bundled with degradable string or cord in four foot (4') lengths.
C. Leaves not collected by the City's leaf vacuum units shall be placed in yard waste bags
distributed by the City through retail outlets.
D. Other yard wastes shall be placed in yard waste bags distributed by the City through
retail outlets.
13-3-5 Refuse Containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep refuse on his premises
except in the appropriate containers as prescribed in this Section. The required containers shall
be as follows:
A. Type of Building.
1. Residential Buildings of Five (5) Units or Less. The owner or agent of the owner shall
provide or shall require the occupant of each dwelling unit to provide a minimum of
two (2) trash cans for a building containing five (5) or fewer dwelling units. The owner
or the agent of the owner can request each tenant be billed at the residential rate
for refuse collection services. The number of roll out carts will be based on the
number of units. Each individual billing unit will be eligible for one City supplied cart.
2. Commercial and Industrial Buildings. The owner, agent of the owner, or the occupant
of any multi-family units of six (6) units or more or commercial or industrial building
shall provide a sufficient number of dumpsters or trash cans so that all commercial
rubbish can be contained therein during the interval between collections.
B. Type of Refuse.
1. Garbage, Ashes, and Commercial Rubbish. This type of refuse shall be placed in either
trash cans or dumpsters as required in (A) above.
2. Miscellaneous Rubbish. Miscellaneous rubbish shall be placed in suitable containers
for handling and shall not exceed a loaded weight of fifty (50) pounds. Large
discarded household articles shall be less than ten (10) cubic feet in volume and shall
not weigh more than fifty (50) pounds. Yard waste shall be prepared and placed for
collection as set forth in Section 13-3-4.
C. Separation of Yard Wastes Required. All yard wastes shall be separated by the owner or
occupant from all other garbage and refuse accumulated on the premises and shall be
composted on the premises, collected by leaf vacuum units, or placed in degradable bags
supplied by the City and set out for collection by the City.
D. Recycling. All items set out for recycling shall be placed in the recycling container
provided to each resident.
13-3-6 Removal of Container Lids. No person shall remove a container lid or allow to remain
uncovered a trash can or dumpster except for the purpose of depositing refuse therein, for
collection thereof, or for the cleaning thereof.
13-3-7 Cleaning of Containers. The owner of a trash can, recycling container, or dumpster
shall clean and maintain such in a sanitary condition.
13-3-8 Prohibited Materials. No person shall place or cause to be placed in containers for
refuse any of the following materials:
A. Material contaminated by infectious or contagious disease. Such materials may be
disposed of only according to applicable State and/or Federal Law.
B. Hazardous materials. Such materials may be disposed of only according to applicable
State and/or Federal Law. However, household hazardous wastes are exempted.
C. Waste motor oil. Such material shall only be disposed of at drop-off points designated
by the City or applicable State and/or Federal Agencies.
D. Lead acid batteries. Such materials shall only be disposed of at drop-off points designated
by the City or applicable State and/or Federal Agencies.
E. Tires. Such materials shall only be disposed of at drop-off points designated by the City
or in accordance with applicable State and/or Federal regulations.
F. Appliances. Such material shall only be disposed of at drop-off points designated by the
City or in accordance with applicable State and/or Federal regulations.
13-3-9 Containers—Location
A. Refuse and recycling containers shall be placed for City collection pursuant to
Subsections (B) and (C) at or before 5:00 o’clock A.M. on collection days, but in no case,
earlier than 4:00 o’clock P.M. the day before collection. Empty containers on curb setouts
shall be returned to the container storage area within twelve (12) hours after collection.
The storage area shall be either within a building or to the rear or side of the residence.
The owner and tenant/occupant are jointly and severally responsible for compliance with
this Chapter.
B. Where City collections are made from alleys, refuse and recycling containers shall be
placed adjacent to and in back of the property line abutting the alley. Special
arrangements may be made with the City to permit containers or dumpsters in the alley
if the owner's building is on the property line.
C. Where City collections are made from streets, refuse and recycling collection containers
shall be placed within three feet (3') of the back of the curb line or the shoulder of the
street without causing the container to be placed on any public street or sidewalk.
D. Recycling containers must be three (3’) from any structure.
E. Owners who have requested a curbside pickup prior to their trash pickup day, may set
out refuse to be collected in bags if the bags are completely intact and tightly sealed.
Each household is allowed three (3) curbside pickups per calendar year for bulky items.
Five (5) to seven (7) bulky items are allowed per pickup.
F. Any handicapped or senior citizen owner who is unable to set out their refuse containers
pursuant to Subsections (B) and (C) may petition the Solid Waste Manager to collect
their refuse at their regular storage area. The Solid Waste Manager may grant the
request if reasonable grounds for the request exist.
13-3-10 Collection of Refuse and Recycling.
A. The City of Muscatine shall collect and dispose of weekly only Class I and Class III
domestic refuse, but only if said domestic refuse is properly prepared for collection and
disposal, is within an authorized container (if required), and is at curbside or adjacent
to the alley.
B. The City of Muscatine will collect and dispose of Class II domestic and commercial
refuse upon request by the owner, provided such refuse is within authorized
containers.
C. The City shall adopt rules and regulations concerning what materials within Class III
domestic refuse cannot practically be collected as part of the weekly scheduled City
collection. Those rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk. All such materials
listed as not practical for weekly collection shall be collected by the City by special
collection arranged through the Solid Waste Manager during the City's "cleanup" week
in the spring.
D. All refuse other than Class I, II, and III domestic and commercial refuse picked up by
the City of Muscatine shall be collected and disposed of at the expense of the occupant,
tenant, owner, or agent of the owner of the premises upon which the refuse is located.
The collection and disposal shall be performed by a licensed refuse hauler pursuant to
Title 5, Chapter 15 of the City Code, or by equipment owned by the occupant, tenant,
owner, or the agent of the owner of the premises upon which the refuse is located. Said
collection and disposal shall be in accordance with this Code, all other ordinances of the
City, and with state and federal laws and regulations and shall be performed or done as
often as the need requires but in no case less often than once per week.
E. Recycling is collected on a biweekly basis as determined by the Solid Waste Manager and
contracted vendor. An updated schedule will be published annually.
F. Collection schedules for refuse and recycling may vary from one another during holiday
schedules. The Solid Waste Manager will publish the holiday schedule prior to the
holiday.
13-3-11 Collection Fees. The City Council shall establish by ordinance monthly collection fees
for Class I and II domestic waste and establish the guidelines for collection fees for Class II
domestic and commercial accounts. The following refuse collection rates are hereby established
effective July 1, 2018.
A. Class I and III. Twenty dollars and fifty cents ($20.50) per month for each singlefamily
dwelling, except persons sixty-five (65) years of age and over shall be charged
fifteen dollars and fifty cents ($15.50) per month for each single-family dwelling.
However, yard waste fees shall be charged on a per bag basis.
B. Class I and III Twenty dollars and fifty cents ($20.50) per month for each dwelling
unit or apartment unit in a multi-family dwelling or apartment building with up to five
(5) units, except persons sixty-five (65) years of age and over shall be charged fifteen
dollars and fifty cents ($15.50) per month for each dwelling unity or apartment in a
multi-family dwelling or apartment building with up to five (5) units. However, yard
waste fees shall be charged on a per bag basis.
The City Council hereby delegates the billing of all refuse collection charges to the Board of Water,
Electric, and Communications Trustees, except those customers without a utility account with the
Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees. The authority to accept payment of the
same is also delegated to the Board of Water, Electric and Communications Trustees of the City
of Muscatine Iowa.
As part of the duties delegated to the Board of Trustees, an accurate and complete record of
such collections will be maintained and at least once each week, all funds so collected shall be
deposited in a bank or banks specified by the Finance Director in the Refuse Collection Fund.
The City Council authorizes that the Board of Trustees shall charge to the City a service charge
for the cost of billing and collecting the refuse collection charges. As a part of the duties
delegated to the Board of Trustees, and accurate and complete list of delinquent accounts shall
be sent to the Finance Director on at least a monthly bases, in addition to regular monthly
refuse collection revenue reports.
13-3-12 Notice of Multiple Dwellings. It shall be the duty of the owners of multiple dwellings
to notify the City of the persons occupying the premises for which the services of this Chapter
shall be required. The City shall keep a list of all persons occupying multiple dwellings and shall
notify all owners thereof of delinquent accounts owed by the occupants of such premises, when
such account shall be delinquent for more than three (3) months.
13-3-13 Violation Declared Nuisance. The presence on any premises of any garbage or
refuse in violation of any Section of this Chapter is hereby declared a nuisance and it is hereby
provided that either the owner or occupant, or both, of such premises shall be subject to the
provisions as set forth in Title 9, Chapter 3 of the City Code.
13-3-14 Responsibility of Owner to Terminate Service. Charges shall be made against all
premises and it shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to notify the City when
service is not desired when the building is vacant.
13-3-15 Assessment of Unpaid Charges. The collection of garbage and refuse by the City,
as provided by this Chapter, is hereby declared a benefit to the property so served and in case
of failure to pay the monthly collection fee heretofore provided, then the monthly charge shall
be assessed against the property benefited in the manner provided by special assessment.
(Code of Iowa, Section 364.12[3][h])
13-3-16 Preparation of Delinquent List. On or before April 1st of each year, the Director of
Finance shall prepare a delinquent list of persons failing to pay the monthly charge required by
this Chapter, which list shall show the property to which the service was rendered and the
amount due therefrom. The City Clerk shall thereupon prepare a resolution assessing the
delinquent charges to the property so benefited, and which resolution having passed by an
affirmative vote of the Council, shall be certified for collection as provided by law in cases of
special assessment.
TITLE 13 – PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 4 – SOLIDWASTE DISPOSAL LANDFILL AND TRANSFER STATION
SECTIONS:
13-4-1 Definitions
13-4-2 Disposal Permit Required
13-4-3 Depositing Refuse
13-4-4 Use of Authorized Disposal Sites
13-4-5 Supervision of Disposal
13-4-6 Hours for Disposal
13-4-7 Removal of Refuse
13-4-8 Dumping in Public Places
13-4-9 Responsibility of Owner; Occupant
13-4-10 Garbage; Waste; Depositing on Riverfront
13-4-11 Disposal Charges
13-4-12 Prohibited Waste
13-4-1 Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
A. "Disposal site" shall mean any public property operated by the City under permit by the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR). It shall include the transfer station, any
landfill operated by the City under contractual agreement with the Muscatine County
Solid Waste Management Agency, or any privately operated landfill under contractual
agreement with the City, which has proper permit approval of IDNR.
B. "Rules" shall mean such rules, procedures, and regulations as established by the IDNR
pursuant to the operation of sanitary and solid waste disposal sites and as required by
Section 567-101 of the Administrative Code of Iowa.
C. "Solid waste" shall mean garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid or
semi-solid materials, including, but not limited to, such materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, or domestic activities. Nothing herein shall be construed as
prohibiting the use of dirt, stone, brick, or similar inorganic material for fill, landscaping,
excavation, or grading at places other than a sanitary disposal site.
(Code of Iowa, Section 455B.300)
13-4-2 - Disposal Permit Required. No person owning or occupying any premises, and no
officer controlling or in charge of City premises, shall cause any ashes, refuse, or other solid
waste material to be placed thereon or shall allow such premises to be used as a public landfill
or disposal site for ashes, refuse, or other solid waste material, without a permit from the IDNR,
and only then in accordance with the rules prescribed by the IDNR.
13-4-3 Depositing Refuse. No person shall, without permission from the City of Muscatine
and the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, throw or deposit in or upon any street, way,
public place, or vacant lot, or throw into or deposit in any pond or body of water within the
limits of the City any dead animal, dirt, sawdust, wastewater, rubbish, filth, or any refuse
material or substance whatsoever.
13-4-4 Use of Authorized Disposal Sites. All of the materials mentioned herein and/or as
defined by Section 567-113 of the Administrative Code of Iowa, shall be deposited and/or
dumped at authorized disposal sites in accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 455B.
13-4-5 Supervision of Disposal. All disposal at the authorized landfill disposal site shall be
under the supervision of the City and shall be performed in accordance with the rules and
regulations established by Section 567.113 of the Administrative Code of Iowa.
13-4-6 Hours of Disposal. No refuse materials or substances shall be dumped at the public
disposal site outside the hours of operation as posted at the site unless by permission of the
City.
13-4-7 Removal of Refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person or commercial hauler to
remove, haul, or carry away, or cause to be removed, hauled, or carried away refuse, rubbish,
waste matter, garbage, debris, and solid waste of any nature and description from the City
disposal site, except for authorized recycling personnel.
13-4-8 Dumping in Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit upon any of
the streets, alleys, or other public places any offensive material or solid waste which cause or
will cause offensive odors and sights.
13-4-9 Responsibility of Owner; Occupant. Every person owning or occupying premises is
hereby required to keep such premises clean and free from all offensive materials and solid
waste which cause or are likely to cause offensive odors and sights.
13-4-10 Garbage, Waste: Depositing on Riverfront. No person shall deposit any garbage
or solid waste matter whatsoever at any place along the riverfront or levee.
13-4-11 Disposal Charges. The City Council shall establish by resolution fees for the disposal
of solid waste. The fees shall be as set by resolution of City Council and are set out in the
Schedule of Fees and Charges in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances. Where applicable, unpaid
disposal charges thirty (30) days past due from the date of billing will be assessed an interest
penalty on the unpaid balance. This penalty will be as follows:
Unpaid Balance Interest Penalty
0 - $100 0%
Over $100 1 1/2% per month
13-4-12 Prohibited Waste. There shall be no disposal of solid waste or refuse which is defined
by the IDNR as hazardous or that is otherwise prohibited, upon any public or private land or
sanitary landfill without the approval of the IDNR and the City of Muscatine. Prohibited wastes
shall include, but are not limited to, lead acid batteries, waste motor oil, yard wastes, and tires.
TITLE 13 – PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 5 – SEWAGE RATE SYSTEM
SECTIONS:
13-5-1 Purpose
13-5-2 Definitions
13-5-3 Analytical Requirements
13-5-4 Unit Rates
13-5-5 Sewerage Rate System
13-5-6 General Provisions
13-5-7 Collection
13-5-1 Purpose. The City of Muscatine, hereinafter called the "City", has undertaken to
construct, expand, and operate a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) consisting of
interceptor and trunk sewers, pumping stations, pressure pipe transmission mains, and
secondary waste water treatment facilities to provide adequate and proper treatment of sewage
and wastewater generated from all properties within the Corporate Limits of the City and to
maintain required compliance with federal and state regulations.
The City has issued sewer revenue and general obligation bonds to finance construction of said
publicly owned treatment works and is obligated to repay the bond principals and interest and
maintain bond reserve funds, hereinafter called "fixed capital financing".
The City must collect revenues to operate and maintain expenses of said publicly owned
treatment works including anticipated replacement expenses, hereinafter called "user charges".
13-5-2 Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this Ordinance:
A. Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). Shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5)
days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C.), expressed in terms of mass and
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/L)).
B. Domestic Strength Wastewater Customer. Shall mean a customer whose wastewater
strength approximates an average daily concentration of two hundred fifty milligrams
per liter (250 mg/L) BOD and an average daily concentration of two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/L) SS, or less but does not exceed an average daily standard
strength units of a customer class 1 as defined in Section 13-5-5(A).
C. Industrial User (I.U.) or User. The source of non-domestic waste. The source of any
direct or indirect discharge.
D. Significant Industrial User (S.I.G.). Shall apply to: a) industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards; and b) any other industrial user that i) discharges
an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater, ii) contributes a
process waste stream which makes up 5 percent or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant or, iii) is designated as significant
by the City on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
E. Operation and Maintenance Expenses. Shall mean those expenses incurred in the
collection, pumping, and treatment of wastewater in the POTW of the City of Muscatine.
F. Replacement Expenses. Shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the publicly
owned treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
G. Suspended Solids (SS). The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is
suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory
filtering.
H. Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by Section
212 of the Clean Water Act that is owned by the state or municipality. This definition
includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes
sewers, storm sewers, pipes, and other conveyances and devices used in the collection
and transport of wastewater, stormwater or the combination of both.
I. Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
J. Collection and Drainage Expenses. Shall mean those expenses incurred in the collection
and conveyance of wastewater through the collection and drainage system of the City of
Muscatine.
13-5-3 Analytical Requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be
submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed by
a laboratory certified by the IDNR proficient in the analysis of wastewater following EPA 40 CFR
136.
A. Sampling and Analytical Fees. The City shall adopt by resolution reasonable charges and
fees for sampling and analytical services which will be assessed to all users that the City
is required to monitor as a requirement of a State or Federal Permit, the City's
Pretreatment Program or that the City monitors to assess user charges. Such fees shall
be periodically reviewed and adjusted as required by City personnel and are set out in
the Schedule of Fees and Charges in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances
13-5-4 Collection and Drainage. To provide for the recovery of costs associated with the
operation of the collection and drainage system, the following per bill charge shall be assessed
to all users of the POTW, except for users provided by special agreement, on the following basis:
A. From July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2019, $12.40 per bill
B. From July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020, $12.65 per bill.
C. From July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021, $12.90 per bill.
D. From July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022, $13.15 per bill.
E. On and after July 1, 2022, $13.40 per bill.
These unit rates may be reviewed and adjusted by Ordinance adopted by the City Council and
published per Section 362.3 of the Iowa Code.
13-5-5 Sewage Rate Component.
A. The sewage rate system shall be determined on the basis of a monthly customer charge
and a sewer user charge for a domestic strength wastewater customer (Class 1
customer). The sewage rate components shall be as follows:
1. From July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2019:
a. Customer charge, $8.18 per bill
b. Volume, $2.80 per 100 cubic feet
2. From July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020:
a. Customer charge, $8.42 per bill
b. Volume, $2.88 per 100 cubic feet
3. From July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021:
a. Customer charge, $8.68 per bill
b. Volume, $2.97 per 100 cubic feet
4. From July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022:
a. Customer charge, $8.94 per bill
b. Volume, $3.06 per 100 cubic feet
5. On and after July 1, 2022:
a. Customer charge, $9.21 per bill
b. Volume, $3.15 per 100 cubic feet
These sewage rate components may be reviewed and adjusted by ordinance adopted by
the City Council and published per Section 362.3 of the Iowa Code.
6. The minimum charge for service shall be determined based on the customer charge
and the unit rate for up to a minimum quantity of three hundred (300) cubic feet per
month of normal domestic strength wastewater. The minimum charge for service for
each month or fraction thereof shall be:
a. From July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2019, $16.58
b. From July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020, $17.06
c. From July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021, $17.59
d. From July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022, $18.12
e. On and after July 1, 2022, $18.66
The minimum charge for sewerage rates as set forth in this Section shall be in addition
to the per bill charge for collection and drainage as set forth in Section 13-5-4.
The minimum sewage service charge shall apply to any individual, firm, institution or
private corporation discharging by conveyance of the collection system, waste water or
other liquid into the water pollution control facilities of the city, even though no water
meter is installed upon his, her or its premises.
These minimum charges for service may be reviewed and adjusted by resolution adopted
by the City Council and published per Section 362.3 of the Iowa Code and are set out in
the Schedule of Fees and Charges in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances.
7. The sewerage user charge component in this Section shall be applicable to all
customers except those customers subject to a special agreement.
B. Customer Class System.
1. All customers shall be considered a standard classification customer except those
customers that are subject to a special agreement. All customers shall be considered
non-monitored customers, except the Director of the Water Pollution Control Plant
may designate industrial users as monitored customers. Monitored customers shall
be subject to the requirements for sampling and analytical testing in accordance with
the schedule determined by the Director of the Water Pollution Control Plant. Any
monitored customer shall be subject to the charges for analytical requirements as
set forth in Section 13-5-3.
2. The classification system defines the relative Water Pollution Control Facilities cost
associated with the wastewater strength for each class. The user charge shall be
calculated from metered water use times the sewerage rate stated in Section 13-5-
5(A) per 100 cubic feet times the factor presented in the following table, plus the
customer charge per bill and the collection and drainage charge as stated in Section
13-5-4.
Customer Class Factor Times Class 1 Rate
1 1.00
2 1.22
3 1.38
4 1.55
5 1.71
6 1.87
7 2.50
8 3.00
9 4.00
10 5.0 or greater
3. The City Administrator of the City of Muscatine and Director of the Water Pollution
Control Plant shall be responsible for assigning customer classes to each type of
customer. Customer class assignments of users will be given to the Board of Water,
Electric, and Communications Trustees for implementation on the sewer user charges
that are billed by the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees on
behalf of the City. Customer class assignments shall be reviewed on an annual basis.
4. For each customer designated as a Class 10, the City Administrator and the Director
of the Water Pollution Control Plant shall establish the appropriate classification rate
which shall be at a rate of 5.0 or greater.
C. Senior Discounts. A discount of $1.00 per month shall be given to all metered dwellings
where the customer as the occupant is a qualifying senior citizen sixty-five (65) years of
age and older.
D. Summer Rates. User charges for Class 1 domestic residential users will be based on
water usage during the winter quarter months of December, January and February of
each year. Subsequent monthly sewer bills will be no more than 115% of the billed usage
during the previous winter quarter. The City Administrator and the Director of the Water
Pollution Control Plant will be responsible for implementing specific procedures in
effecting this rate.
13-5-6 General Provisions.
A. The monthly service charges, rates, or rentals as specified in Sections 13-5-4 and 13-5-
5 hereof, shall be increased by ten percent (10%) for all users of the treatment works
who are located outside of the Corporate Limits of the City and who have been granted
permission by the City to discharge to the POTW.
B. At the request of an industrial user and with the approval of the City Council, the City
and customer may enter into a separate agreement that provides for sewer user charges.
The agreement shall establish the charges that would otherwise be due and payable
under the provisions of Section 13-5-4 and Section 13-5-5. Such agreement shall include
provisions for the establishment of sewer user charge rates, the method of payment and
the method of sampling and analytical analysis. The special agreement shall provide for
the method of determining the sewer user charges provided the revenue generated
under a special agreement shall not be less than the established rates for a Class 1
domestic customer.
C. Any customer may provide separate water and/or wastewater meters as approved by
the Director of the Water Pollution Control Department and the water department of the
Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees at their own expense to
determine that volume of their total water usage which discharges to the Water Pollution
Control Facilities.
D. The rates and classifications provided in this Ordinance shall be reviewed annually to
determine that the same are fair and equitable and may be changed periodically at the
discretion of the City Council.
E. The Director of Water Pollution Control and other authorized representatives of the
Department of Water Pollution Control shall be entitled to access to the premises of any
contributor in accordance with Chapter 6, Section 13-6-7.1 and 13-6-7.2.
13-5-7 Collection.
A. The City Council hereby delegates the billing of all sewer use charges except those
subject to special agreements under the provisions of Section 13-5-6(B), users with
separate wastewater meters and users without a water meter account with the Board of
Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees and the authority to accept payment of
the same to the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees, in accordance
with the foregoing schedule and said schedule shall be certified to the Board of Water,
Electric, and Communications Trustees by the City.
As part of the duties delegated to the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications
Trustees, an accurate and complete record of such collections will be maintained and at
least once a week, all funds so collected shall be deposited in a bank or banks specified
by the Finance Director in the Sewer Fund. The City Council authorizes the Board of
Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees to charge the City a service charge for
the cost of billing and collecting the sewerage rate system. As a part of the duties
delegated to the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees, an accurate
and complete list of delinquent accounts shall be sent to the Finance Director on at least
a monthly basis, in addition to regular monthly sewer revenue reports.
B. The City Council hereby delegates the billing of sewer use charges for those users subject
to a special agreement under Section 13-5-6(B), users with separate wastewater meters
and users without a water meter account with the Board of Water, Electric, and
Communications Trustees, and the authority to accept payment of same to the Finance
Director of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
C. The service charge, rate, or rental as provided in Section 13-5-5 hereof, shall be applied
to the quantity of water used or wastewater discharged by each contributor of sewerage
and other wastewater or liquid for each individual water or wastewater meter
contributing to said Water Pollution Control Facility as determined by the monthly water
or wastewater meter readings of the Board of Water, Electric, and Communications
Trustees. Quantities of wastes originating from users with privately owned water supplies
or unmetered water supplies will be determined to the satisfaction of the City at the
expense of the owner of the system.
D. The service charge, rate, or rental herein established for all users, except those subject
to a special agreement under Section 13-5-6(B), users with separate wastewater meters
and users without a water meter account with the Board of Trustees shall be due and
payable to Board of Water, Electric, and Communications Trustees at the Muscatine
Power and Water business office with the billing schedule for water service.
E. Unpaid service charges, rates, or rentals not paid within the billing schedule shall be
delinquent. Such charges, rates, or rentals which are delinquent may be certified by the
Finance Director to the County Auditor of Muscatine County, Iowa, for collection in the
same manner as property taxes as provided in Iowa Code, Section 384.84.
F. Unpaid service charges, rates, or rentals thirty (30) days past due may be assessed an
interest penalty on the unpaid balance. This interest penalty will be as follows:
Unpaid Balance Interest Penalty
$0 - $1,000 0% per month
Over $1,000 1 1/2% per month
TITLE 13 – PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 6 – SEWER USE REGULATIONS
SECTIONS:
13-6-1.0 General Provisions
13-6-1.1 Purpose & Policy
13-6-1.2 Administration
13-6-1.3 Definitions
13-6-1.4 Abbreviations
13-6-2.0 General Sewer Use Requirements
13-6-2.1 Use of POTW Required
13-6-2.2 Private Sewer Systems
13-6-2.3 Prohibited Discharge Standards
13-6-2.4 Federal Pretreatment Standards
13-6-2.5 State Requirements
13-6-2.6 Specific Pollutant Limitations
13-6-2.7 City's Right of Revision
13-6-2.8 Special Agreements
13-6-2.9 Dilution
13-6-3.0 Pretreatment of Wastewater
13-6-3.1 Pretreatment Facilities
13-6-3.2 Additional Pretreatment Measures
13-6-3.3 Accidental Discharge
13-6-3.4 Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans
13-6-3.5 Tenant Responsibility
13-6-3.6 Hauled Wastewater
13-6-3.7 Vandalism
13-6-4.0 Wastewater Discharge Permit Eligibility
13-6-4.1 Wastewater Survey
13-6-4.2 Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
13-6-4.3 Wastewater Discharge Permitting, Existing Connections
13-6-4.4 Wastewater Discharge Permitting, New Connections
13-6-4.5 Wastewater Discharge Permitting, Extra Jurisdictional Industrial Users
13-6-4.6 Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
13-6-4.7 Application Signatories and Certification
13-6-4.8 Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
13-6-5.0 Wastewater Discharge Permit
13-6-5.1 Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
13-6-5.2 Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
13-6-5.3 Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals
13-6-5.4 Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
13-6-5.5 Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
13-6-5.6 Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
13-6-5.7 Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
13-6-6.0 Reporting Requirements
13-6-6.1 Baseline Monitoring Reports
13-6-6.2 Compliance Schedule Progress Report
13-6-6.3 Report on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline
13-6-6.4 Periodic Compliance Reports
13-6-6.5 Report of Changed Conditions
13-6-6.6 Reports of Potential Problem Discharges
13-6-6.7 Reports from Nonsignificant Industrial Users
13-6-6.8 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting
13-6-6.9 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste
13-6-6.10 Analytical Requirements
13-6-6.11 Monitoring and Sample Collection Facilities
13-6-6.12 Timing of Reports
13-6-6.13 Record Keeping
13-6-7.0 Compliance Monitoring
13-6-7.1 Inspection and Sampling
13-6-7.2 Search Warrants
13-6-8.0 Confidential Information
13-6-9.0 Publication of Industrial Users in Significant Noncompliance
13-6-10.0 Administrative Enforcement Remedies
13-6-10.1 Notification of Violation
13-6-10.2 Consent Orders
13-6-10.3 Show Cause Hearing
13-6-10.4 Compliance Orders
13-6-10.5 Cease and Desist Orders
13-6-10.6 Administrative Fines
13-6-10.7 Emergency Suspensions
13-6-10.8 Termination of Discharge
13-6-11.0 Judicial Enforcement Remedies
13-6-11.1 Injunctive Relief
13-6-11.2 Civil Penalties
13-6-11.3 Criminal Prosecution
13-6-11.4 Remedies Nonexclusive
13-6-12.0 Supplemental Enforcement Actions
13-6-12.1 Performance Bonds
13-6-12.2 Liability Insurance
13-6-12.3 Water Supply Severance
13-6-12.4 Public Nuisance
13-6-13.0 Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
13-6-13.1 Upset
13-6-13.2 General/Specific Prohibitions
13-6-13.3 Bypass
13-6-14.0 Surcharge Costs
13-6-15.0 Miscellaneous Provisions
13-6-15.1 Pretreatment Charges and Fees
13-6-15.2 Severability
13-6-15.3 Conflicts
13-6-16.0 Fats, Oils, and Grease Control
13-6-16.1 Scope and Purpose
13-6-16.2 Definitions
13-6-16.3 Grease Traps and Interceptors
13-6-16.4 Food Service Establishment Permitting Program
13-6-16.5 Grace Period
13-6-16.6 Fees
13-6-16.7 Schedule of Fees
13-6-17.0 Separate Storm Sewers and Watercourses
13-6-17.1 Control of Pollutant Discharges to Separate Storm Sewers and Watercourses
13-6-17.2 Prohibited Discharges to Separate Storm Sewers and Watercourses
13-6-17.3 Flow Obstruction Prohibited
13-6-17.4 Prohibition of Illicit Connections
13-6-1.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS. This Ordinance regulates the use of residential and nonresidential
public and private sewers, drains, and wastewater pretreatment and treatment
systems, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the City’s wastewater system, stormwater
system, drainage facilities, watercourses, and outfalls; and provides for penalties for the
violation thereof.
13-6-1.1 Purpose and Policy. This Ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
wastewater collection and wastewater treatment system of the City of Muscatine, Iowa and
enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws including the Clean Water
Act (1977) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this
Ordinance are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW)
which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the sludges;
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the
system, inadequately treated, into the receiving stream, atmosphere or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;
C. To protect the personnel who may be affected by wastewater, sewer sludges and biosolids
in the course of operating the POTW;
D. To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment biosolids are maintained at a level
to allow for its use, recycle, reclamation, or disposal in compliance with applicable statutes
and regulations;
E. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance
and improvement of the POTW; and
F. To enable the City of Muscatine to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit conditions, biosolids use and disposal, and any other State or
Federal laws to which the POTW is subject.
This Ordinance provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the POTW through
the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
users reporting, establishes administrative review procedures, and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of cost resulting from the program hereby established.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all direct or indirect contributors to the wastewater
collection and treatment system in the City of Muscatine or by contract or agreement outside of
the City of Muscatine.
13-6-1.2 Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Any of the powers granted or duties
delegated upon the Director, may be delegated by the Director to other city personnel.
13-6-1.3 Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this Ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
1. Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water
Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
2. Approval Authority. The Executive Director of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources
is the Approval Authority.
3. Authorized Representative of the Industrial User.
a. If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean:
i. the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge
of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy
or decision-making functions for the corporation;
ii. the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities
employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures
exceeding $25 million (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures;
b. If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an authorized
representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively;
c. If the industrial user is a Federal, State or local governmental facility, an authorized
representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to
oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or
his/her designee;
d. The individuals described in paragraphs a-c above may designate another authorized
representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which
the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for
the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City of Muscatine.
4. Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at 20
degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter
(mg/L)).
5. Biosolids. Treated sewage sludge that meets the EPA pollutant and pathogen
requirements for land application and surface disposal. Nutrient rich material, that is solid
or semi-solid, obtained from wastewater, that is treated and stabilized and can be used
for fertilizer.
6. Building Sewer. The piped extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other
place of disposal.
7. ByPass. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user’s sewer
system, treatment facility or pretreatment facility or other control facility.
8. Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD). A quantitative measure of the
amount of dissolved oxygen required for the biological oxidation of carbon-containing
compounds in a sample.
9. Categorical Industrial User. An industrial user subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards.
10.Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Limitations on pollutant
discharges to publicly owned treatment works promulgated by EPA in accordance with
Section 307 of the Clean Water Act (CWA) that apply to specified process wastewaters of
particular industrial categories [40 CFR 403.6 and Parts 405-471].
11.Combined Sewer. A pipe or conduit designed and intended to receive and convey
wastewater, stormwater including roof and street drainage, unpolluted water and cooling
water.
12.Combined Sewer Overflow (CSO). A discharge that occurs from a combined sewer into
waters of the State when the flow in the combined sewer exceeds the capacity of the
combined sewer or flow regulation facility due to wet weather conditions.
13.Composite Sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater
samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.
14.Control Authority. The Director is the Control Authority.
15.Cooling Water. Water discharged from any use such as air conditioning cooling or
refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.
16.Director. The person designated by the City of Muscatine, Iowa, to direct the operation
of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this Ordinance, or his or her duly authorized representative.
17.Direct Discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated water directly into the waters of
the State of Iowa.
18.Discharge or Indirect Discharge. The discharge or indirect discharge of any pollutant from
any source (including holding tanks) regulated under Section 307 (b) or (c) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. 1317) into the POTW.
19.Discharge Permit. Means a permit issued by the City to a user for a discharge of
wastewater or stormwater into the City system.
20.Dry Weather Flow. In a combined sewer means flow which is a combination of sanitary
flow, industrial flow and infiltration with no contribution from stormwater runoff.
21. Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or,
where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or
other duly authorized official of said agency.
22. Existing Source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which
commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which
will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance
with Section 307 of the Act.
23.Grab Sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
24.General Permit-An NPDES permit issued under 40 CFR 122.28 that authorizes a category
of discharges under the CWA within a geographical area. A general permit is not
specifically tailored for an individual discharger.
25.General Pretreatment Standards. Means any regulations containing pollutant discharge
limits or requirements applicable to all industrial users, promulgated by EPA in 40 CFR
Chapter One, Subchapter N, Parts 401 through 403 (as amended), in accordance with
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act.
26. Industrial User (I.U.) or User. The source of nondomestic waste. The source of any direct
or indirect discharge.
27. Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources: 1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 2) therefore is a cause of a
violation of the City's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water
Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any
State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean
Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
28.Medical Waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, disease causing etiologic agents,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and
dialysis wastes.
29.Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):
a. Owned and operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district,
association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having
jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes,
including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district
or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal
organization, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208
of the Clean Water Act (CWA) that discharges to waters of the United States;
b. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
c. Which is not a combined sewer.
30. NAICS. North American Industry Classification System. An industry classification system
that groups establishments into industries based on the activities in which they are
primarily engaged.
31.Natural Outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or any other body of
surface or ground water.
32.National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit. A permit issued
pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
33.New Source.
a. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a
discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of
proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307 (c) of the Act which will be
applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance
with that section, provided that:
i. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no
other source is located; or
ii. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or
production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing
source; or
iii. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure,
facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the
same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors
such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant,
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.
b. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification
rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure,
facility or installation meeting the criteria of Section (a) (ii) or (iii) above but otherwise
alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
c. Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the
owner or operator has:
i. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program;
or
ii. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
iii. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement,
assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
iv. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or
equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable
time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified
without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design
studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
34.Noncontact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
35.Outfall. Means any point of discharge into a watercourse, or other body of surface
or groundwater.
36. Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
37. Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal
entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all
Federal, State or local governmental entities.
38. pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance expressed in standard units.
39. Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or
the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a publicly owned treatment
works [40 CFR 403.3(q)].
40. Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard.
41. Pretreatment Standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibitive discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
42. Private Sewer. Means a sewer within the boundaries of the City but not owned or
controlled by the City.
43. Prohibited Discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear in Section 13-6-2.3 of this Ordinance.
44. Pollutant. Means any substance which, alone or in combination with other substances, if
discharged to waters of the State in sufficient quantities, causes or is reasonably certain
to cause any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of such waters;
or to create a nuisance; or to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to
public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or
other legitimate beneficial uses or to any organism, aquatic life, plant or animal.
45. Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by Section 212
of the CWA that is owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices
and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, storm sewers,
pipes, and other conveyances and devices used in the collection and transport of
wastewater, stormwater or the combination of both.
46.Sanitary Sewer. Means a pipe or conduit designed and intended to receive and convey
wastewater as defined herein.
47. Sanitary Sewer Overflow (SSO). Any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of
untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system.
48.Sanitary Wastewater. Means wastewater emanating from the sanitary conveniences,
including toilet, bath, laundry, lavatory, and/or kitchen sink, of residential and nonresidential
sources, as distinct from industrial waste.
49.Separate Storm Sewer. Means a pipe, conduit, conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, manmade channels, roof runoff, condensate, non-contact cooling water or storm
drains) designed and intended to receive and convey stormwater, as defined herein and
which discharges to waters of the State and which is not part of the combined sewer
system.
50.Septic Tank Waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets,
campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
51.Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dish washing
operations, etc.).
52. Shall is mandatory. May is permissive.
53. Significant Industrial User. Shall apply to: a) industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards; and b) any other industrial user that i) discharges an average
of 25,000 Gallons Per Day (gpd) or more of process wastewater, ii) contributes a process
wastestream which makes up 5 percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the treatment plant or, iii) is designated as significant by the City on
the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
54.Slug Load. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of
the prohibited discharge standards in Section 13-6-2.3 of this Ordinance or any discharge
of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a
noncustomary batch discharge.
55.Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
56.Standard Methods. The latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater" as published jointly by the American Public Health Association, The
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
57.State. The State of Iowa.
58.Storm Sewer. A sewer which carries stormwater, surfacewater, groundwater, artesian
well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, noncontact
cooling water, but excludes all pollutants, sewage or wastewater.
59.Storm Water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation,
and resulting therefrom, including snow melt.
60.Stormwater System. The entire system of combined sewers and separate storm sewers,
operated by the City, for the collection, storage and treatment of stormwater to serve
the needs of the City and its inhabitants and others, including all appurtenances and
facilities connected therewith or relating thereto, together with all extensions,
improvements, additions and enlargements made thereto or as may be acquired by the
City.
61.Surface Water. All water appearing on the land surface as distinguished from groundwater
and including water appearing in watercourses, lakes, and ponds.
62.Suspended Solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is
suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory
filtering.
63. Total Suspended Solids (TSS). All matter in water, wastewater, or other liquids; that is
retained on a filter as determined by Standard Methods and expressed in milligrams per
liter.
64. Total Toxic Organics (TTO). The summation of all quantifiable values greater than .01
mg/l for the applicable toxic organics included in the listing in 40 CFR 401.15 of toxic
pollutants identified pursuant to Section 307(a)(1) of the Clean Water Act as determined
using the analytical techniques specified in 40 CFR136 and expressed in milligrams per
liter. For discharges subject to categorical pretreatment standards, the list of organics to
be included in the local TTO limit specified in this Ordinance and in the Industrial
Discharge Permits, the organics to be included in the TTO are all of those from the list in
40 CFR 401.15 which are or may be present in the discharge.
65. Toxic Pollutant. Any substance which alone or in combination with other substances, when
discharged to a wastewater system, stormwater system or watercourse in sufficient
quantities, interferes with any biological wastewater treatment process, or, either through
direct exposure or through indirect exposure by ingestion through the food chain,
interferes with the normal life processes of any organism, aquatic life, plant or animal or
causes adverse human health impacts. Toxic substances include, but are not limited to
pollutants listed as toxic in 40 CFR 401.15 pursuant to section 307(a)(1) of the CWA and
those listed as toxic in sludge pursuant to section 405(d)(2) of the CWA.
66. Treatment. The reduction or elimination of pollutants in wastewater or stormwater prior
to discharge to waters of the State.
67.Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with pretreatment or treatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed pretreatment or treatment facilities,
lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
68.User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into
the City's POTW.
69.Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
70.Wastewater Treatment Plant or Water Pollution Control Plant. That portion of the POTW
designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste.
71.Watercourse. A natural or manmade surface drainage channel or body of water (including
a lake or pond) in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
72.Waters of the State. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water courses, waterways, wells,
springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies
or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion thereof.
73.Wet Weather Flow. In a combined sewer means flow which is a combination of sanitary
flow, industrial flow, infiltration and stormwater runoff.
74.Whole Effluent Toxicity (WET). The total toxic effect of an effluent measured directly with
a toxicity test.
13-6-1.4 Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
1. BMR - Baseline Monitoring Report
2. BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand
3. C - Celsius
4. CBOD - Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand
5. CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
6. COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand
7. CSO - Combined Sewer Overflow
8. CWA - Clean Water Act
9. EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
10. F - Fahrenheit
11. FOG - Fats Oils and Grease
12. gpd - Gallons per day
13. IAC - Iowa Administrative Code
14. IDNR - Iowa Department of Natural Resources
15. L – Liter
16. lbs/day - Pounds per day
17.mg – Milligrams
18.mg/L or mg/l - Milligrams per Liter or Parts Per Million (ppm)
19.MGD - Million gallons per day
20.NAICS - North American Industry Classification System
21. nm - Nanometer
22.NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
23.O&G or O/G - Oil and Grease
24.O&M - Operation and Maintenance
25. POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
26. ppm - Parts Per Million or Milligrams per Liter (mg/L)
27.RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
28.SIC - Standard Industrial Classifications
29.SSO - Sanitary Sewer Overflow
30.SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.).
31. TSS - Total Suspended Solids
32.USC - United States Code
33.WET - Whole Effluent Toxicity
34.WPCP - Water Pollution Control Plant
13-6-2.0 GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
13-6-2.1 Use of POTW Required.
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or open into, use,
alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without obtaining a written
permit from the City in accordance with the Schedule of Fees and Charges Fees in
Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the City, or in any area
under the jurisdiction of said City, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this Chapter.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
private vat, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting any street, alley, or
right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located, a public
sanitary or combined sewer of the City, is hereby required, at his expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, within ninety (90) days after the
date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the property line. Any septic tank, cesspool, lagoon, or other residential, or
non-residential wastewater treatment facility shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material as per applicable City Ordinances and/or State or local regulations or shall be
removed unless such system is to be used for pretreatment or control of wastewater prior
to discharge to the City wastewater system.
E. All multiple stack connections shall be prohibited. Every structure within the City which is
required to connect to the public sewer, as provided in Section 13-6-2.1(D), shall have
an independent connection made or caused to be made at no expense to the City unless
specifically approved in writing by the City.
13-6-2.2 Private Sewer Systems.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 13-6-
2.1(D), the sewers as therein provided shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this Section.
B. No private sewage disposal system shall be constructed without first obtaining a permit
to so construct in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
C. Before issuance of a permit to construct a private sewage disposal system, the owner or
applicant shall submit to the City plans, specifications, or other information as deemed
necessary by the City. The fee for such a permit shall be as set by resolution of City
Council and is set out in the Schedule of Fees and Charges in Appendix C to this Code of
Ordinances. Any percolation test must be made and certified by a licensed engineer.
D. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply
with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State of Iowa. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural
outlet.
E. In addition to complying with the provisions of this Code, all commercial and industrial
facilities utilizing a private disposal system shall obtain a permit from the IDNR when
employing more than fifteen (15) persons and/or discharging other than sanitary waste
to the private disposal system.
F. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private
sewage disposal system as provided in Section 13-6-2.1(D), a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer in compliance with this Chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools,
and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
G. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary
manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
H. No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by any health officer.
13-6-2.3 Prohibited Discharge Standards. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
either directly or indirectly into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with
the operation or performance or cause pass through or interfere with the POTW. These
prohibitions, both general and specific, apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are
subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other National, State or local pretreatment
standard or requirement. Furthermore, no user may contribute the following substances to the
POTW:
A. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal wastewater collection
and POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, and other
flammable or explosive fuels.
B. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 9.5, or otherwise causing
corrosive damage to the POTW or equipment, or endangering City personnel.
C. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting
in interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
Included, but not limited to, bones, hide or fleshings, entrails, feathers, ashes, sand,
spent lime, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, diapers, rags, spent grains,
wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt, grease, or garbage.
D. Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the
POTW; or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard
to humans or animals.
E. Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (65.6 degrees C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in
no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment
plant to exceed 88 degrees F (31 degrees C).
F. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts
that will cause interference or pass through.
G. Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the
POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
H. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the City in
accordance with Section 13-6-3.6.
I. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to
life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
J. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically
approved by the Director in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
K. Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, interior and
exterior foundation drains, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Director.
L. Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
M. Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Director in a wastewater
discharge permit.
N. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as,
but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
O. Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
P. Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail an effluent toxicity test,
violate its NPDES permit or the receiving stream water quality standards.
Q. Any discharge of fats, oil, or grease of animal or vegetable origin is limited to 100 mg/L.
R. Any discharge of waste that interferes with the UV disinfection system which absorbs light
or will cause interference with the transmittance of light at 254nm.
Wastes prohibited by this Section shall not be stored or processed in such a manner that they
could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in such process or material storage
areas must discharge to the user’s pretreatment facility before connecting to the POTW. When
it is determined that a user or users are contributing to the POTW, any of the above listed
substances in amounts to interfere with the proper operation of the POTW, the Director shall: 1)
advise the user(s) of the impact on the POTW; and 2) develop a limitation for the user(s) to
correct the interference on the POTW; or 3) proceed with remedies contained in Sections 13-6-
10.0 through 13-6-12.0.
13-6-2.4 Federal Pretreatment Standards
A. The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.
B. Upon promulgation of Federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industry
subcategory, the Federal Standard if more stringent than stated in this Ordinance, shall
immediately supersede the limitations imposed by this Ordinance.
The Director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under
40 CFR, Section 403.12.
13-6-2.5 State Requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in
any case where they are more stringent than Federal requirements or limitations or those in this
Ordinance.
13-6-2.6 Specific Pollutant Limitations. Specific local limitations will be established by
resolution and published per Section 362.3 of the Iowa Code. These local limits shall be
periodically reviewed for any substance which would cause the POTW to be in noncompliance of
the requirements of its NPDES permit, the receiving streams water quality standards, Federal or
State sludge regulations, the City's Biosolids Recycle Program, the City's Pretreatment Program,
or any other local, State or Federal regulations. Current limitations are hereby established as a
composite loading of all users contributing the following specific pollutants to the POTW:
A. Not to exceed the following 30 day average mass loading in the influent to the POTW:
CBOD 21,500 lbs/day
TSS 13,700 lbs/day
TKN 1,670 lbs/day
E. Coli 126 MPN/100ml Geometric Mean
B. Not to exceed the following respective loadings in the influent to the POTW:
Arsenic 1.84 lbs/day Nickel 4.27 lbs/day
Cadmium 1.36 lbs/day Selenium 8.60 lbs/day
Chromium 16.33 lbs/day Zinc 40.0 lbs/day
Copper 11.12 lbs/day Silver 3.61 lbs/day
Lead 4.61 lbs/day Cyanide 1.21 lbs/day
Mercury
Molybdenum
0.38 lbs/day
0.66 lbs/day
Phenol 599 lbs/day
C. Any specific local pollutant limitation, including allocations contained in a wastewater
discharge permit, may be adjusted by the Director as necessary to meet current
composite loading limits or such composite loading limits that may become necessary as
a result of changes in Federal, State or local regulation or POTW capacity.
13-6-2.7 City's Right of Revision. The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the
POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Section 13-6-1.1 of this
Ordinance or the general and specific prohibitions in Section 13-6-2.3 of this Ordinance.
13-6-2.8 Special Agreements. The City reserves the right to enter into special agreements
with users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case
will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement.
However, the user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment
standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the user can prove that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
establishing that pretreatment standard. A user requesting a fundamentally different factor
variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
13-6-2.9 Dilution. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to
achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement. The Director may impose mass limitations on industrial
users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in
other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
SECTION 13-6-3.0 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
13-6-3.1 Pretreatment Facilities. Industrial users shall provide the necessary wastewater
treatment as required to comply with this Ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in Section 13-6-2.3
above within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the State, or the Director, whichever is
more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City
shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans
and/or written description of the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the City for review, and shall be acceptable to the City before construction of the
facility. The installation and activation of any required pretreatment facility shall be in accordance
with a specified schedule approved by the City. The City may require regular progress reports of
required changes to an industrial user’s pretreatment facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying
the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the City under the provisions of
this Ordinance.
13-6-3.2 Additional Pretreatment Measures
A. When deemed necessary, the Director may require users to restrict discharge during peak
flow periods, designate certain wastewaters be discharged into specific sewers, or
separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams. Suitable flow control and
storage may be required to provide flow equalization and regulation.
G. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Director,
they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts
of grease and oil or sand. Such interceptors shall not be required of residential users. All
interceptor units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director and shall be
located so as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall
be inspected, cleaned and repaired by the owner at his expense.
H. Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to
install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
13-6-3.3 Accidental Discharge. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Ordinance. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for
review and approval before construction. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the
owner’s or user's own cost. Review and approval of such plans and procedures shall not relieve
the user from any responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirement of this Ordinance. In the case of any accidental discharge or slug load, it is the
responsibility of the user to immediately notify the POTW in accordance with Section 13-6-6.6
of this Ordinance.
13-6-3.4 Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans. The Director may require any industrial
user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every
five years the Director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan.
Any industrial user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan
shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges.
B. Description of stored chemicals.
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge.
Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the
prohibited discharges in Section 13-6-2.3 of this Ordinance.
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such
procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment
for emergency response.
13-6-3.5 Tenant Responsibility Where an owner of property leases premises to any other
person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an
industrial user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
13-6-3.6 Hauled Wastewater
A. Permitting Requirements. In accordance with Section 13-6-4.2, commercial septic tank
cleaners, including industrial waste haulers, must apply for and obtain a permit from the
City of Muscatine Water Pollution Control Plant (WPCP) before disposing of septage or
wastewater from any private waste facility, septic tank, industry or non-residential source.
B. Permitting Procedures
1. Application for permit. Commercial septic tank cleaners, including industrial waste
haulers, shall apply for a permit by completing an application form provided by the
City of Muscatine (WPCP) and submitting it to the Pretreatment Coordinator,
Muscatine Water Pollution Control Plant, 1202 Musser Street, Muscatine, Iowa 52761-
1645. In the case of a commercial septic tank cleaner, including an industrial waste
hauler, which is a corporation, partnership, association, or any other business entity,
the entity itself must apply as provided in this Ordinance. The entity shall designate
one person in accordance with Section 13-6-1.3 (C) to act as its authorized
representative for the purpose of applying for a permit. Individuals employed by a
commercial septic tank cleaner business, including industrial waste haulers, are not
required to be separately permitted. Each cleaning unit (vehicle or tank) must have
the state license and city permit number prominently displayed and a copy of the
current state license and city permit with each vehicle.
2. Permit Fee. The initial permit application and each renewal application must be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the form of a check or money order made
payable to the City of Muscatine. The fee shall be determined annually by the Director.
3. Permit Renewal. A commercial septic tank cleaner or industrial waste hauler permit
must be renewed annually by the expiration date specified on the permit. Renewal
application must be made on an application form provided by the Muscatine WPCP,
and must be received by the WPCP Pretreatment Coordinator or postmarked at least
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date. The renewal application form must be
accompanied by the permit fee specified in Section 13-6-3.6 (B) (2).
4. Change in Ownership. Within thirty (30) days of a change in ownership of any
commercial septic tank cleaner or industrial waste hauler, the new owner shall furnish
the Muscatine WPCP with the following information in writing: 1) name of business
and permit number; 2) name, address, and telephone number of new owner; and 3)
the date the change in ownership takes place. The permit will transfer with the
ownership with no additional fee due until the next renewal date.
5. Suspension, Revocation, and Denial of Permit. The City may suspend, revoke, or deny
a commercial septic tank cleaner permit for any of the following reasons:
a. Material misstatement of facts in a permit application.
b. Failure to provide the adequate permit application fee.
c. Failure to satisfy the obligations of a commercial septic tank cleaner and standards
as provided in the Code of Iowa and the Muscatine City Code.
d. Failure to maintain state commercial septic tank cleaner license.
6. Appeal. A commercial septic tank cleaner or industrial waste hauler may appeal the
suspension, revocation, or denial of a permit under Section 13-6-5.3 of this
Ordinance.
7. Reinstatement In the case of a denial, revocation, or suspension pursuant to Section
13-6-3.6 (B) (5) (b) or (c), the City may immediately reinstate or issue a permit after
receipt of the requisite fee or confirmation that the commercial septic tank cleaner or
industrial waste hauler is fulfilling the requirements of this Ordinance. In the case of
a denial, revocation, or suspension pursuant to Section 13-6-3.6 (B) (5) (a) or (d),
the City may reinstate or issue a permit no sooner than sixty (60) days after the
denial, revocation, or suspension, if the City is satisfied the commercial septic tank
cleaner or industrial waste hauler has corrected the deficiency and will comply with
the City ordinances in the future.
8. Continuation. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the
permit is reissued if:
a. The permittee has submitted a complete permit application at least 30 days prior
to the expiration date of the users existing permit; and
b. The failure to reissue the permit prior to expiration of the previous permit is not
due to any act or failure to act on the part of the permittee.
C. Standards for Discharge to the Muscatine Water Pollution Control Plant
1. Disposal of wastes from private waste facilities shall be carried out in accordance with
the rules established by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR), the
Muscatine City Code and any such laws, regulations, standards, or requirements that
may become effective.
a. Any tanks or equipment used for hauling from private waste facilities shall not be
used for hauling hazardous or toxic wastes as defined in the Code of Iowa 567,
Chapter 131, or other wastes detrimental to wastewater treatment plants; and
shall not be used in a manner that would contaminate a potable water supply or
endanger the food chain or public health.
b. The name and address of the permit holder shall be prominently displayed on the
side of the tank or vehicle.
c. All vehicles shall display the state commercial septic tank cleaner license and city
permit numbers assigned to the commercial septic tank cleaner on the vehicle as
to be readable by WPCP electronic monitoring equipment.
d. Waste from private sewage disposal systems, holding tanks for wastes, impervious
vaults, portable or chemical toilets, or other similar types of private waste facilities
may be disposed of by discharging, with proper approval, to the Muscatine Water
Pollution Control Plant.
e. Waste from private sewage disposal systems, holding tanks for wastes, impervious
vaults, portable or chemical toilets, or other similar types of private waste facilities
shall only be discharged at a designated structure within the treatment plant area,
and only at such times as are established by the Director, provided such wastes
do not violate any requirements established or adopted by the City.
f. Fees for discharging waste from private sewage disposal systems, holding tanks
for wastes, impervious vaults, portable or chemical toilets, or other similar types
of private waste facilities shall be established as part of the industrial user fee
system as authorized in Section 13-6-15.1.
g. All vehicles shall be equipped with appropriate discharge equipment as to be
compatible with the facilities provided at the Muscatine WPCP discharge station.
13-6-3.7 Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or
equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be
subject to the sanctions set out in Sections 13-6-10.0, 13-6-11.0, and 13-6-12.0.
SECTION 13-6-4.0 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ELIGIBILITY
13-6-4.1 Wastewater Survey. When requested by the Director all industrial users must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater
survey prior to commencing their discharge. The Director is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete
this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall
be considered a violation of the Ordinance.
13-6-4.2 Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
A. It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge wastewater into the
City's POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the Director. Any
violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed
a violation of this Ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the
sanctions set out in Sections 13-6-10.0, 13-6-11.0, and 13-6-12.0. Obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with
all Federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of Federal, State and local law.
B. The Director may require other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
13-6-4.3 Wastewater Discharge Permitting, Existing Connections. Any significant
industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90)
days after said date, apply to the City for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with
Section 13-6-4.6 below, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after
one hundred and eighty (180) days of the effective date of this Ordinance except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Director.
13-6-4.4 Wastewater Discharge Permitting, New Connections. Any significant industrial
user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain
a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An
application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to
the date upon which any discharge will begin.
13-6-4.5 Wastewater Discharge Permitting, Extra Jurisdictional Industrial Users.
A. Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the City limits shall submit a
wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with Section 13-6-4.6 below,
within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this Ordinance. New significant industrial
users located beyond the City limits shall submit such applications to the Director ninety
(90) days prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW.
B. Alternately, the Director may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction
in which the significant industrial user is located to provide for the implementation and
enforcement of pretreatment program requirements against said industrial user.
13-6-4.6 Wastewater Discharge Permit Application. In order to be considered for a
wastewater discharge permit, all users required to have a permit must submit an application, in
the form required by the City, accompanied by the proper fee as set by resolution of City Council
and is set out in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code
of Ordinances.
The application must contain the information required in Section 13-6-6.1(B) of this Ordinance.
In addition the following information shall be supplied:
A. Name, address, and location if different from address.
B. NAICS industry classification number
C. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those in Section
13-6-2.3 of this Ordinance as determined by a certified laboratory. Sampling and analysis
performed in accordance with Section 13-6-6.10 of this Ordinance.
D. Number and type of employee and hours of operation of the facility including operation
of a pretreatment facility.
E. Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of
raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally
or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW.
F. The current site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show
all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points
of discharge.
G. Time and duration of the discharge to the POTW.
H. Average daily flows including fifteen (15) minute peak flows, and any daily, monthly or
seasonal flow variations.
I. Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are
limited by the City, State or Federal Pretreatment Standards and a statement regarding
whether or not pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the user to meet pretreatment standards.
J. Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director to evaluate the
wastewater discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant
for revision.
13-6-4.7 Application Signatories and Certification. All wastewater discharge permit
applications and industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be
signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate,
and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
13-6-4.8 Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions. The Director will evaluate the
information supplied by the industrial user in the application for a wastewater discharge permit
and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the information
supplied, the Director shall determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit
subject to the terms of this Ordinance.
SECTION 13-6-5.0 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT
13-6-5.1 Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration. Wastewater discharge permits shall be
issued for a period less than, but not longer than, five (5) years. Each permit will indicate the
specific time and date of expiration. An expired permit will continue to be effective and
enforceable until the permit is reissued if:
A. The permittee has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the
expiration date of the users existing permit; and
B. The failure to reissue the permit prior to expiration of the previous permit is not due to
any act or failure to act on the part of the permittee.
13-6-5.2 Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents. Wastewater discharge permits shall
include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the Director to prevent pass
through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's
effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect
ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following information:
1. A statement of duration not to exceed five (5) years.
2. A statement of nontransferability without prior notification to and approval from the
Director and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the
existing wastewater discharge permit.
3. Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in Federal, State,
and local law.
4. Specifications for monitoring programs which include sampling, reporting, notification,
and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on Federal, State, and local law.
5. Statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements, and, any applicable compliance schedule.
Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable Federal, State, or local law.
6. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve
the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State
pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of
the wastewater discharge permit.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following:
1. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
2. Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum
concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or
properties.
3. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or
prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.
4. Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions
including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or routine discharges
5. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount
of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
6. The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for the management
of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
7. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities
and equipment.
8. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure compliance with
this Ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations.
13-6-5.3 Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals. Any person, including the industrial user,
may petition the City to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30)
days of its issuance.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit
provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if
any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the
appeal.
D. If the City fails to act within ninety (90) days, a request for reconsideration shall be
deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to
issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit
shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge
permit decision must do so by filing a petition with the Iowa District Court for Muscatine
County within thirty (30) days of the decision.
13-6-5.4 Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification. The Director may modify the
wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
A. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation,
processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge
permit issuance.
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the authorized discharge.
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City's POTW,
city personnel, or the receiving waters.
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application or in any required reporting.
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to
40 CFR 403.13.
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit.
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not
stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
13-6-5.5 Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be
reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least
thirty (30) days advance notice to the Director and the Director approves the wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Director must include a written certification by the
new owner and/or operator which:
A. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the
facility's operations and processes.
B. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
C. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge
permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable
on the date of facility transfer.
13-6-5.6 Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation. Wastewater discharge permits may be
revoked for the following reasons:
A. Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed
discharge.
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the City of changed conditions pursuant to Section
13-6-6.5.
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application.
D. Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment.
F. Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records.
G. Failure to meet effluent limitations.
H. Failure to pay fines.
I. Failure to pay sewer charges.
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules.
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application.
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility.
M. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater
discharge permit or the Ordinance.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer
of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit.
13-6-5.7 Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance. A permitted industrial user shall apply
for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge
permit application in accordance with Section 13-6-4.6 a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to
the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
SECTION 13-6-6.0 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
13-6-6.1 Baseline Monitoring Reports
A. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination
under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject
to such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the City a report which contains
the information listed in paragraph B, below. At least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required
to submit to the City a report which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below.
A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to
use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of
its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
B. The industrial user shall submit the information required by this Section including:
1. Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility including the name of
the owners, operator, and contact in direct responsible charge.
2. Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or
for the facility.
3. Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production, and standard industrial classifications (SIC number) of the operation(s)
carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes.
4. Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other
streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in
40 CFR 403.6(e).
5. Measurement of Pollutants.
a. Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated
process.
b. Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the City) of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous,
daily maximum and long term average concentrations (or mass, where required)
shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13-6-6.10.
c. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13-
6-6.11.
6. Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user's authorized representative
and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
7. Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards; the industrial user will define the shortest schedule which
will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this Section must meet
the requirements set out in Section 13-6-6.2 of this Ordinance.
8. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section
13-6-4.7.
13-6-6.2 Compliance Schedule Progress Report. The following conditions shall apply to the
schedule required by 13-6-6.1(B)(7). The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning
and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months.
The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Director no later than fourteen (14)
days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay,
(and, if appropriate) the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to
the Director.
13-6-6.3 Report on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline.
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical
pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment
standards and requirements shall submit to the City a report containing the information described
in Section 13-6-6.1(B). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the industrial user's long term production rate. For all other industrial
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
industrial user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13-6-4.7.
13-6-6.4 Periodic Compliance Reports
A. Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall, at a frequency
determined by the Director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13-6-4.7.
B. All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge.
Wastewater sampling, monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an
industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds
for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
C. If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of this Section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW, using the procedures
prescribed in Section 13-6-6.11 of this Ordinance the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
13-6-6.5 Report of Changed Conditions. Each industrial user is required to notify the Director
in writing of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or system which
might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the
change.
A. The Director may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed
necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater
discharge permit application under Section 13-6-4.6.
B. The Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 13-6-4.8 or modify
an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 13-6-5.4.
C. No industrial user shall implement the planned changed conditions(s) until and unless the
Director has responded to the industrial user's notice.
D. For purposes of this requirement flow increases of ten percent (10%) or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed significant.
13-6-6.6 Reports of Potential Problem Discharges
A. In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental discharges,
discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug
load which may cause potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the
prohibited discharge standards in Section 13-6-2.3 of this Ordinance), it is the
responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the City of the
incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
B. Within five (5) days following the beginning of such discharge, the industrial user shall,
unless waived by the Director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to stop the discharge
and to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial
user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this Ordinance.
C. Failure to notify the City of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate
violation of this Ordinance.
D. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described
in paragraph A, above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause or
suffer such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
13-6-6.7 Reports from Nonsignificant Industrial Users. All industrial users not subject to
categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to the City as the Director may require.
13-6-6.8 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting. If sampling performed by
an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must notify the Control Authority within
twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat
the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Control Authority
within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required
to resample if the POTW performs monitoring at the industrial user's at least once a month, or
if the POTW performs sampling between the industrial user's initial sampling and when the
industrial user receives the results of this sampling.
13-6-6.9 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste
A. Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the
POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste
authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must
include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the
industrial user discharges more than ten (10) kilograms of such waste per calendar month
to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent
such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of
the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar
month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to
be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place
no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any
notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under
Section 13-6-6.5, above. The notification requirement in this Section does not apply to
pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections 13-6-6.1,
13-6-6.3, and 13-6-6.4, above.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (A) of this Section during a
calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous
wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d)
and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous
wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one- time notification. Subsequent months
during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous
waste do not require additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous
waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this Section, the industrial user shall certify
that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes
generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
13-6-6.10 Analytical Requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to
be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in
an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed
in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
13-6-6.11 Monitoring and Sample Collection Facilities
A. The Director may require any industrial user of the POTW to provide and operate at the
user's expense, sampling or monitoring facilities to allow inspection sampling and flow
measurement of a building sewer or any internal drainage system. The monitoring facility
will normally be situated on the user's property, but the Director may, when such a
location is impractical or would cause undue hardship, allow the facility to be located in a
public street, right-of-way, or sidewalk, provided there is no safety hazards or
interference with the normal use of the public area.
B. Except as indicated in Section C, below, the industrial user must collect wastewater
samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow
proportional sampling is infeasible, the Director may authorize the use of time
proportional sampling or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being
discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous discharge limits.
C. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides, and
volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
D. The Director may use a grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment
standards.
13-6-6.12 Timing of Reports. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid into a mail facility serviced
by the U.S. Postal Service, and for reports which are electronically submitted, the date of receipt
of the report shall govern.
13-6-6.13 Record Keeping. Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and
copying, all records and information required to be retained under this Ordinance. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this Ordinance, or where
the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Director.
SECTION 13-6-7.0 COMPLIANCE MONITORING
13-6-7.1 Inspection and Sampling. The City shall have the right to enter the facilities of any
industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this Ordinance, and any permit or order issued
hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial user is complying with all requirements
thereof. Industrial users shall allow the Director and/or his representatives ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying,
and the performance of any additional duties.
A. Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the City, State, and EPA will be permitted to enter without
delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
B. The City, State, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property,
or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or
metering of the user's operations.
C. The City may require the industrial user to install sampling and monitoring equipment.
Such equipment and facilities shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper operating
condition. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated
periodically, but at a minimum six (6) month interval. Calibration records shall be
maintained with each instrument. The City may require additional calibration or repairs
or replacement to assure accurate and continuous sampling and monitoring. All cost for
installation, operation, calibration, and repair/replacement shall be at the industrial user's
expense.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility
to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the
written or verbal request of the Director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be born by the industrial user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing City personnel access to the industrial user's premises
shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
13-6-7.2 Search Warrants. If the Director has been refused access to a building, structure or
property or any part thereof, and if the Director has demonstrated probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this Ordinance or that there is a need to inspect as part of a
routine inspection program of the City designed to verify compliance with this Ordinance or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of
the community, then upon application by the City Attorney, the Magistrate of Muscatine County
shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the
warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the
property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the Director in the
company of a uniformed police officer of the City. In the event of an emergency affecting public
health and safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant.
SECTION 13-6-8.0 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge
permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from City
inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction - unless the
industrial user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City,
that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. When requested
and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment
program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be
recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.
SECTION 13-6-9.0 PUBLICATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT
NONCOMPLIANCE
The City shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where
the POTW is located, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The
term significant noncompliance shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixtysix
percent (66%) or more of the wastewater measurements taken during a 6-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter
by any amount;
B. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three
percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a 6-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the
average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria [1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH];
C. Any other discharge violation that the City believes has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of
City personnel or the general public);
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to
the environment, or has resulted in the City's exercise of its emergency authority to halt
or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule
milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports,
including baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
H. Interference with the operation of the lift stations and collection system;
I. Any other violation(s) which the City determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
SECTION 13-6-10.0 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
13-6-10.1 Notification of Violation. Whenever the Director finds that any user has violated
or is violating this Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment requirement, the Director or his agent may serve upon said user a written
Notice of Violation. Within seven (7) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Director. Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice
of Violation. Nothing in this Section shall limit the authority of the City to take any action,
including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of
Violation.
13-6-10.2 Consent Orders. The Director is hereby empowered to enter into Consent Orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
Orders shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to
Sections 13-6-10.4 and 13-6-10.5 below and shall be judicially enforceable.
13-6-10.3 Show Cause Hearing. The Director may order any user which causes or contributes
to violation(s) of this Ordinance, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the City and show cause why
a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying
the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered,
immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing
shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
13-6-10.4 Compliance Orders. When the Director finds that a user has violated or continues
to violate the Ordinance, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, he or she may issue an order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within thirty (30) days. If the user
does not come into compliance within thirty (30) days, sewer service shall be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend
the deadline for compliance established for a Federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor
does a compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action
against the user.
13-6-10.5 Cease and Desist Orders. When the Director finds that a user is violating this
Ordinance, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
A. Immediately comply with all requirements.
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or
terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against
the user.
13-6-10.6 Administrative Fines.
A. Notwithstanding any other section of this Ordinance, any user that is found to have
violated any provision of this Ordinance, its wastewater discharge permit, and orders
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on
a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge
limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
B. Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the
Director shall have such other collection remedies as may be available for other service
charges and fees.
C. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed
an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue
thereafter at a rate of one and one-half percent (1 1/2%) per month. A lien against the
individual user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
D. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the Director to
reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within twenty (20) days of
being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the Director shall convene a hearing
on the matter within twenty (20) days of receiving the request from the industrial user.
In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment together with any interest
accruing thereto shall be returned to the industrial user. The City may add the costs of
preparing administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders to the fine.
E. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action
against the user.
13-6-10.7 Emergency Suspensions. The Director may immediately suspend a user's
discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Director may
also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an
endangerment to the environment.
A. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Director shall allow
the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the City that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings set forth in Section 13-6-10.8 are initiated against the user.
B. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the
Director, prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections 13-
6-10.3 and 13-6-10.8.
Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension under this Section.
13-6-10.8 Termination of Discharge. In addition to those provisions in Section 13-6-5.6 of
this Ordinance, any user that violates the following conditions of this Ordinance, wastewater
discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to discharge termination.
A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge.
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and
characteristics prior to discharge.
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection,
monitoring or sampling.
E. Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section 13-6-2.0 of this Ordinance. Such user
will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity
to show cause under Section 13-6-10.3 of this Ordinance why the proposed action should
not be taken.
SECTION 13-6-11.0 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
13-6-11.1 Injunctive Relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or
requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this Ordinance, wastewater discharge
permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the Director may
petition the Iowa District Court for Muscatine County through the City's Attorney for the issuance
of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
Ordinance on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief may also be sought by the City. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed
as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user.
13-6-11.2 Civil Penalties
A. Any user which has violated or continues to violate this Ordinance, any order or
wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be subject to a civil penalty as established by City Council and set out
in the Schedule of Penalties in Appendix A to this Code of Ordinances. In the case of a
monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of the violation.
B. The City may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and
the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation,
the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against
a user.
13-6-11.3 Criminal Prosecution
A. Any user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this Ordinance, any orders
or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided
in Section 1-2-14 of the Code of Ordinances.
B. Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which
causes, or is capable of causing, personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty as provided in Section
1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of
action for personal injury or property damage available under State law.
C. Any user that knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in
any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be
maintained, pursuant to this Ordinance, wastewater discharge permit or order, or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section
1-2-14 of this Code of Ordinances.
D. In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished as provided in Section 1-2-
14 of this Code of Ordinances.
13-6-11.4 Remedies Nonexclusive. The provisions in Sections 13-6-9.0 through 13-6-12.0
are not exclusive remedies. The City reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally
be in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the City reserves the right
to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These
actions may be taken concurrently.
SECTION 13-6-12.0 SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
13-6-12.1 Performance Bonds. The Director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, any orders,
or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files a
satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Director
to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
13-6-12.2 Liability Insurance. The Director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, any order,
or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof
that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW
caused by its discharge.
13-6-12.3 Water Supply Severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this Ordinance, orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water
service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after
it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
13-6-12.4 Public Nuisance. Any violation of this Ordinance, wastewater discharge permits or
storm water discharge regulations, or orders issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Director or his designee. Any
person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code Title 9,
Chapter 3 governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City for any costs incurred in
removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
SECTION 13-6-13.0 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
13-6-13.1 Upset
A. For the purposes of this Section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does
not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (C) are met.
C. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
1. An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
2. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and
in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures;
3. The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and treatment
plant operator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset.
Information may initially be provided orally. However, if this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days:
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected,
the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of
the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence
of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of
upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards.
F. The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to
maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or
failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of
treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
13-6-13.2 General/Specific Prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and
specific prohibitions in Section 13-6-2.3 of this Ordinance if it can prove that it did not know or
have reason to know that its discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: (a) a local limit exists for
each pollutant discharged and the industrial user was in compliance with each limit directly prior
to, and during, the pass through or interference, or (b) no local limit exists, but the discharge
did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the
City of Muscatine was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
13-6-13.3 Bypass
A. "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user's treatment facility.
B. "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by
delays in production.
C. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance
to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of
Paragraphs (C) and (D) of this Section. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need
for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least ten (10) days before the
date of the bypass if possible. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within
twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the industrial user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and,
if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass, The
POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received with twenty-four (24) hours.
D. Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement action against an industrial
user for a bypass, unless;
1. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage;
2. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal
periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering
judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or preventive maintenance; and
3. The industrial user submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of this Section.
E. The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if
the POTW determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (D) of this
Section.
SECTION 13-6-14.0 SURCHARGE COSTS (RESERVED)
SECTION 13-6-15.0 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
13-6-15.1 Pretreatment Charges and Fees. The City may implement and periodically review
reasonable charges and fees for the recovery of the costs of setting up and operating the City's
Pretreatment Program. These fees and charges shall be adopted by resolution of City Council
and is set out in the Schedule of Fees and Charges in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances.
These fees and charges may include:
A. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such
applications.
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of
collection and analyzing an industrial user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports
submitted by industrial users.
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction.
D. Fees for the filing and review of appeals.
E. Fees for the dumping of hauled wastewater.
F. Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained
herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this ordinance and are separate
from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the City.
13-6-15.2 Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full
force and effect.
13-6-15.3 Conflicts. All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency
or conflict.
SECTION 13-6-16.0 FATS, OILS, AND GREASE CONTROL
13-6-16.1 Scope and purpose: The scope and purpose of this Section shall be to establish
uniform permitting, maintenance, and monitoring requirements to aid in the prevention of
sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions that result from the discharge and accumulation of
fats, oils, and grease into the City of Muscatine Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) from
industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving
establishments.
A. The objectives of this Ordinance are to:
1. Prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of grease into Muscatine's POTW.
2. Prevent clogging or blocking of the City's sewer lines due to grease build-up causing
sewer line backup and flooding of streets, residences and commercial buildings,
resulting in potential liability to the City.
3. Implement a procedure to recover the costs incurred in cleaning and maintaining
sewer lines and disposing of grease blockages,
4. Implement a procedure to recover costs for any liability incurred by the City for
damage caused by grease blockages resulting in the flooding of streets, residences or
commercial buildings.
5. Issue Grease Discharge Permits (GDPs) to food service establishments to require
maintenance, monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities.
6. Establish administrative review procedures and reporting requirements.
7. Establish fees for the recovery of costs resulting from the program established herein.
8. Establish enforcement procedures for violations of any part or requirement of this
Section.
B. Applicability: The provisions of this Section shall apply to all existing food service
establishments that are located within the municipal boundaries of the City of Muscatine
and to all food service establishments that begin operations within the municipal
boundaries of the City of Muscatine on or after the effective date of this Ordinance.
13-6-16.2 Definitions: The following terms, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them below:
A. Best Management Practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the
pollution of waters of the State. For purposes of this Ordinance, Best Management
Practices include procedures and practices that reduce the discharge of Fats, Oil and
Grease (FOG) to the building drain and to the POTW.
B. Fats, Oils, and Grease: means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant
sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are
detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136,
as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease"
or "greases".
C. Food Service Establishment: A commercial facility engaged in preparing and/or serving
food for consumption by the public, such as a convenience store, restaurant, commercial
kitchen, caterer, hotel, school, hospital, prison, correctional facility, and care institution.
D. Grease Discharge Permit (GDP): A permit issued by the City of Muscatine authorizing the
discharge of grease laden wastewater to the POTW from a food service establishment.
E. Grease Interceptor: A tank that serves one or more fixtures and is remotely located. Such
grease interceptors include, but are not limited to tanks that capture wastewater from
dishwashers, floor drains, pot and pan sinks and trenches. For purposes of this Ordinance,
a grease interceptor is an outside, underground, multi-compartment tank that reduces
the amount of FOG in wastewater prior to discharging into the POTW.
F. Grease Trap: A device designed to retain grease from one to a maximum of four fixtures.
A grease trap is not appropriate for use on heated water (e.g., dishwasher) or in-line to
a waste disposal unit (e.g., garbage disposal and grinders). For purposes of this
Ordinance, a grease trap is a small, indoor device.
G. Minimum design capability means the design features of a grease interceptor or grease
trap and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from
grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the POTW.
H. Non-cooking establishments mean those food service establishments primarily engaged
in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of cooking. These
include coffee shops, cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation, and serving
establishments.
I. POTW means the Publicly Owned Treatment Works in Muscatine, Iowa and includes the
collection and drainage system, the pumping stations, and the wastewater treatment
plant.
J. Restaurant fixture means sinks, dishwashers, garbage grinders, floor drains, trenches, or
other equipment discharging wastewater to a grease interceptor or grease trap.
K. User means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the
City, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into
the POTW, including persons who contribute wastewater from mobile sources, such as
those who discharge hauled wastewater.
13-6-16.3 Grease Traps and Interceptors:
A. Requirements: All food service establishments are required to have a grease interceptor
or grease trap. The requirements in this Section are in addition to any applicable
requirements of the City of Muscatine Plumbing Code as adopted by the City.
1. New Establishments: On or after the effective date of this Section, food service
establishments which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which
will be expanded or renovated to include a food service establishment, where such
establishment did not previously exist, shall be required to install, operate and
maintain a grease interceptor or grease trap according to the requirements contained
in this Section. Grease interceptors or grease traps shall be installed and permitted
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
2. Existing Establishments: All food service establishments existing within the City prior
to the effective date of this Section shall be permitted to operate and maintain existing
grease interceptors or grease traps provided their grease interceptors or grease traps
are in efficient operating condition.
On or after the effective date of this Section, the City may require an existing food
service establishment to install, operate, and maintain a new grease interceptor or
grease trap that complies with the requirements of this Section or to modify or repair
any noncompliant plumbing or existing interceptor or trap within ninety (90) days of
written notification by the City when any one or more of the following conditions exist:
a. The establishment is found to be contributing oils and grease in quantities greater
than one hundred milligrams per liter (100mg/L).
b. The establishment does not have and is not maintaining a grease interceptor or
grease trap.
c. The establishment has an undersized, irreparable, or defective grease interceptor
or grease trap.
d. Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is
performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the City of Muscatine.
e. The existing establishment does not have plumbing connections to a grease
interceptor or grease trap in compliance with the requirements of this Section
f. The establishment fails to submit a completed GDP Application within sixty (60)
days after the date of the receipt of an application form from the City of Muscatine.
g. The establishment has not operated as a food service facility for twelve (12)
consecutive months prior to receiving the GDP application form.
B. Grease interceptors and grease traps shall be installed by users as follows:
1. Grease interceptors or grease traps shall be installed at the user's expense, when
such user operates a food service establishment. Grease interceptors or grease traps
may also be required in non-cooking or cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs
establishments and other industrial or commercial establishments when it is deemed
necessary by the Director or his/her designee for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease.
2. Grease interceptors shall conform to the standards outlined in the Plumbing Code
adopted by reference in Title 8 of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Grease interceptors shall provide access manholes with a minimum diameter of
twenty-four (24) inches over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes
shall extend at least to the finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent
water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to
facilitate inspection and grease removal.
4. Grease interceptors and grease traps shall be equipped with an accessible sampling
port on the effluent side of the interceptor or trap.
C. Users who are required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor or grease trap
shall:
1. Operate the grease interceptor or grease trap in a manner so as to maintain such
device such that attainment of the grease limit is consistently achieved. "Consistent"
shall mean any wastewater sample taken from such grease interceptor or trap shall
meet the numerical limit of one hundred milligrams per liter (100mg/L).
2. Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as required when FOG and
solids reach twenty-five percent (25%) of the unit's capacity, at the user's expense.
Grease interceptors and grease traps shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials,
such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc.,
which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the
grease interceptor or grease trap.
3. Not reintroduce skimmed or pumped wastes or other materials removed from the
grease interceptor or grease trap that are treated in any fashion on-site back into the
grease interceptor or grease trap as an activity of or after such on-site treatment.
4. Understand and agree that use of hot water as a grease abatement method is
prohibited and the use of biological additives as a grease degradation agent is
conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the Director or his/her
designee. Any establishment using this method of grease abatement shall maintain
the interceptor or trap in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater
discharge limit, as measured from the outlet, is consistently achieved.
5. Understand and agree that the use of an automatic grease removal system is
conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the Director or his/her
designee. Any establishment using this equipment shall operate the system in such a
manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from
the unit's outlet, is consistently achieved.
6. Maintain a written record of grease interceptor or grease trap maintenance, including
dates and means of disposal, for three (3) years. All such records will be available for
inspection by the City at all times.
13-6-16.4 Food Service Establishment Permitting Program
A. Permitting requirements for food service establishments: Each food service establishment
shall be evaluated to determine whether it falls within the definition of a Significant
Industrial User (SIU). Establishments classified, as SIUs shall be subject to permitting as
provided in Section 13-6-4.0 et. seq. All other food service establishments shall be
required to apply for and obtain a Grease Discharge Permit from the City. The City shall
approve, deny, or approve with special conditions all applications for GDPs in accordance
with the policies and regulations established in this Section. The GDP shall be in addition
to any other permits, registrations, or occupational licenses that may be required by
Federal, State or local law. It shall be unlawful for any food service establishment
identified by the City to discharge wastewater containing fats, oils and grease to the City's
POTW without a current GDP.
B. Application form: The City shall provide an application form for a GDP. The appropriate
form shall be provided to all food service establishments identified by the City. All food
service establishments required under the terms of this program to obtain a GDP shall
submit a completed application form for a GDP to the City at the address shown on the
form within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the form. Each application form shall
include the following information:
1. Name, address, telephone number and location, (if different from the address) of
applicant, owner of the premises (if different from the tenant when property is leased)
from which fats, oils, and grease are discharged, and the name of a representative
duly authorized to act on behalf of the food service establishment.
2. A description of the activities, facilities, and processes on the premises, including a
list of all equipment, raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility. Safety
Data Sheets (SDSs) of all such chemicals shall be included.
3. A drawing in sufficient detail to show the location of all kitchen equipment that
produces wastewater, and all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, grease
interceptors, and appurtenances in the user's premises, if known.
4. The number of employees, the number and times of shifts, and the hours and days of
facility operation.
5. Copies of recent water bills.
6. Details of all grease interceptor maintenance conducted within the past year.
7. A signed statement certifying that the information provided is accurate, and that the
applicant agrees to abide by the regulations contained in this Section, as well as any
other applicable Federal, State or local regulations governing the food service
establishment.
8. Any other information determined by the Director to be necessary in order to evaluate
the GPD application.
C. Application procedure: Once a completed application form has been returned to the City,
the food service establishment will be inspected prior to the issuance of the GDP. During
the pre-permit inspection, the information contained in the application form will be
verified and the grease interceptor or grease trap will be inspected. If all information is
verified and the grease interceptor or trap is in proper working condition, a GDP will be
issued together with a copy of the City's information document entitled "Fats, Oil and
Grease Best Management Practices Manual".
If the grease interceptor or grease trap requires any maintenance or repairs, or incorrect
information has been given, the inspector shall provide a Notice to Correct any
deficiencies. The Notice shall include a required time schedule for repairs to be effected
prior to a second pre-permit inspection. Second pre-permit inspections shall be performed
after a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days have elapsed to allow for corrective action
by the food service establishment. If the facility is not in compliance at the second prepermit
inspection, charges and fees will be levied.
An application for a permit shall be granted with conditions or denied within sixty (60)
days after the date of the last pre-permit inspection in which the applicant's facility is in
compliance.
D. Grease Discharge Permit: The following criteria apply to all GDPs:
1. Each GDP shall be effective for a one-year period and shall have an effective and an
expiration date.
2. The GDP must be posted for public view and a copy of the GDP must be kept in the
establishment's records file.
3. The GDP shall be issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A GDP shall not be
transferred or sold to a new owner under any circumstances. A new owner is required
to apply for a new GDP.
4. An application for renewal of the GDP shall be submitted at least sixty (60) days prior
to the expiration date of the existing GDP by each applicant wishing to continue to
discharge wastewater to the POTW. Failure to submit applications in a timely manner
shall be a violation of this Section.
5. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is
reissued if a) the permittee has submitted a complete permit application at least thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration date of the user’s existing permit; and b) the failure
to reissue the permit prior to expiration of the previous permit is not due to any act
or failure to act on the part of the permittee.
6. The terms and conditions of the GDP are subject to modification by the City during
the term of the permit, if limitations or requirements in this program are modified.
The permit holder shall be informed of any proposed changes in the issued permit at
least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of the change(s). Any changes or new
conditions in the GDP shall include a reasonable schedule for achieving compliance
E. Entry: Each food service establishment shall allow the Director or his/her designee or
other duly authorized employees or agents of the City bearing proper credentials and
identifications access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose
of inspection, observation, records examination, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this Section. The refusal of any food service
establishment to allow entry to or upon the establishment's premises for purposes of
inspection, sampling effluents or inspecting and copying records or performing such other
duties as shall be required by this Section shall constitute a violation of this Section. The
Director may seek a warrant or use such other legal procedures as may be advisable and
reasonably necessary to discharge his duties pursuant to this Section.
F. Inspection: All food service facilities shall be inspected as follows:
1. Pre permit inspections: Pre-permit inspections shall be conducted by City officials as
outlined in Section 13-6-16.4(C).
2. Inspections: The inspector shall inspect food service establishments on both an
unscheduled and unannounced basis or on a scheduled basis after a GDP has been
issued to verify compliance with the requirements of this Section. The Inspector shall
also determine if the practices contained in the "Fats, Oil and Grease Best
Management Practices Manual" issued to the establishment have been implemented.
All food service establishments with a current GDP shall be inspected. Inspections
shall include all equipment, food processing and storage areas and shall include a
review of the processes that produce wastewater discharged from the facility through
the grease interceptor or grease trap. The inspector shall also inspect the interceptor
or trap maintenance logbook and file, other pertinent data, the grease interceptor or
grease trap, and may check the level of the interceptor or trap contents and/or take
samples as necessary. The Inspector shall record all observations on a Compliance
Inspection Checklist. Any deficiencies shall be noted, including but not limited to:
a. Failure to properly maintain the grease interceptor or grease trap in accordance
with the provisions of the GDP and this Section.
b. Failure to report changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
c. Failure to report pumping activities or keep copies of manifest forms or receipts.
d. Failure to maintain logs, files, records, or access for inspection or monitoring
activities.
e. Failure to obtain or renew the GDP in a timely manner.
f. Any other inconsistency with the program that requires correction by the food
service facility concerned.
g. If any deficiencies are recorded by the Inspector during an inspection, the
inspector shall provide the food service establishment a written Notice to Correct
within twenty-one (21) calendar days and a tentative date for a re-inspection.
3. Re-inspections: The Inspector shall re-inspect food service establishments that
receive a Notice to Correct. The Inspector shall inspect any repairs or other
deficiencies and shall note compliance on the Compliance Inspection Checklist. In the
event that the food service establishment has returned to compliance with all of the
deficiencies, there shall be no charge for the re-inspection. In the event of continuing
non-compliance, successive re-inspections will be scheduled and appropriate fees
shall be charged to the food service establishment. A first re-inspection shall be
performed after a minimum of twenty-one (21) calendar days have elapsed to allow
for corrective action by the food service establishment to be completed.
G. Monitoring: The City shall have the right to sample and analyze the wastewater from
any food service establishment at any time to determine compliance with the
requirements of the Sewer Use Regulations. If violations of the oil and grease limit
are detected, enforcement action may be initiated and monitoring costs may be billed
to the food service establishment.
13-6-16.5 Grace Period
A. Except as provided herein, for a period of ninety (90) days after the effective date of this
Section, although installation of grease interceptors or grease traps will be required, no
enforcement actions will be taken under this Section for failure to achieve limits on grease
discharges from grease interceptors or grease traps.
B. If, during this grace period, an obstruction of a City sewer main(s) occurs that causes a
sewer overflow to the extent that a hazard to human health or the environment is realized
and that such overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection system to convey sewage
can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease in the City's sewer
main(s), the City will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the City's
Industrial Pretreatment Program Enforcement Response Plan and Sewer Use Regulations,
against the generator or contributor of such grease.
13-6-16.6 Fees
A. The charges and fees provided for in this Section are separate and distinct from all other
fees chargeable by the City. The City shall adopt and periodically review reasonable
charges and fees for the recovery of the costs of operating the City's Fats, Oils, and
Grease Control Program. These fees and charges shall be adopted by resolution of City
Council and are set out in the Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements in Appendix
B to this Code of Ordinances. These charges and fees may include:
1. Fees for a Grease Discharge Permit application including the cost of processing such
applications.
2. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of
collecting and analyzing a food service establishment's wastewater discharge and
reviewing monitoring reports.
3. Fees and charges for reviewing construction and responding to accidental discharge.
4. Fees for filing and review of appeals.
5. Other charges and fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein.
13-6-17.0 SEPARATE STORM SEWERS AND WATERCOURSES
13-6-17.1 Control of Pollutant Discharges to Separate Storm Sewers and
Watercourses. Discharges to the City’s separate storm sewers enter waters of the
State directly or after conveyance through the City’s system and are or may be subject
to NPDES permit regulations. All users shall comply with the provisions of this Section
to ensure that discharges from the City’s separate storm sewers do not violate
conditions of any of City NPDES permits, now or later adopted, or of any NPDES permit
regulations, including stormwater discharge regulations, or cause any violations of
State or Federal water quality standards.
13-6-17.2 Prohibited Discharges to Separate Storm Sewers and
Watercourses.
A. No person shall discharge any wastewater treatment plant effluent, cooling
water, stormwater or unpolluted water into any separate storm sewer or
watercourse unless such discharge is authorized by an NPDES permit or is
exempt from NPDES permit regulations and is not otherwise prohibited by this
Ordinance.
B. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any separate storm
sewer any stormwater associated with industrial activity as defined in 40 CFR
122.26(b) unless the discharge is in compliance with all applicable provisions
of the NPDES stormwater regulations in 40 CFR 122.26 and any applicable State
regulations and is in compliance with the terms and conditions of any systemwide
stormwater discharge permit issued to the City pursuant to those
regulations.
C. No person shall place or deposit into any outfall, drainage facility, storm sewer
or watercourse within the City any pollutant of concern. A pollutant of concern
may include, but is not limited to paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this Ordinance:
1. Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or
lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water,
foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater de-watering
systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial
washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows,
swimming pools (if de-chlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine),
fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing Pollutants.
2. Discharges specified in writing by the control authority as being necessary
to protect public health and safety.
3. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to
the control authority prior to the time of the test.
4. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted
under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws
and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for
any discharge to the storm drain system.
10.6.17.3 Flow Obstruction Prohibited.
A. No person shall place any dam or other flow restricting structure or device in
any drainage facility or watercourse without first having obtained approval from
the Director.
B. No person shall place or deposit into any outfall, drainage facility, storm sewer
or watercourse within the City any garbage, trash, yard waste, soil, rock or
similar material, or any other substance which obstructs flow in the system or
damages the system or interferes with the proper operation of the system or
which constitutes a nuisance or a hazard to the public. In the event that such
an obstruction occurs, the Director may cause such obstruction to be removed
or cause such damage to be repaired and to recover applicable costs pursuant
to the provisions of Section 13-6-12.4 of this Ordinance.
13-6-17.4 Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
A. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections
to the storm drain system is prohibited.
B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made
in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
ATTACHMENT A
TITLE 14 -
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1 - GAS FRANCHISE
SECTIONS:
14-1-1 Granting of Franchise
14-1-2 Construction of Distribution System
14-1-3 Restoration of Public Places
14-1-4 Relocation of Facilities or Equipment
14-1-5 Furnishing of Service
14-1-6 Non-Exclusive
14-1-7 Franchise Fee
14-1-8 Term of Franchise
14-1-9 Publication
14-1-10 Acceptance
14-1-11 Repealer
14-1-1 Granting of Franchise. There is hereby granted to INTERSTATE POWER & LIGHT
COMPANY, hereinafter referred to as the "Company," its successors and assigns, the right, franchise
and privilege for the term of twenty-five (25) years from and after the passage, adoption, approval and
acceptance of this Ordinance, to lay down, maintain and operate the necessary pipes, mains and other
conductors and appliances in, along and under the streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the City
of Muscatine, Muscatine County, Iowa as now or hereafter constituted, for the purpose of distributing,
supplying and selling gas to said City and the residents thereof and to persons and corporations
beyond the limits thereof; also the right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code
of Iowa. The term "gas" as used in this franchise shall be construed to mean natural gas only.
14-1-2 Construction of Distribution System. The mains and pipes of the Company must be so placed
as not to interfere unnecessarily with water pipes, drains, sewers and fire plugs which have been or
may hereafter be placed in any street, alley and public places in said City nor unnecessarily interfere
with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage, or with the sewers, underground pipe
and other property of the City, and the Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City free
and harmless from all damages arising from the negligent acts or omissions of the Company in the
laying down, operation and maintenance of said natural gas distribution system.
14-1-3 Restoration of Public Places. In making any excavations in any street, alley, avenue or public
place, Company, its successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in progress by guards,
barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of the streets, shall back fill all openings in
such manner as to prevent settling or depressions in surface, and shall replace the surface, pavement or
sidewalk of such excavations with same materials, restoring the condition as nearly as practical and if
defects are caused shall repair the same.
14-1-4 Relocation of Facilities or Equipment. The Company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and
relocate its existing facilities or equipment in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the City
in such a manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the
construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street or alley or any public improvement of,
ATTACHMENT A
in or about any such street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement. If the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its existing facilities or
equipment for the primary benefit of a commercial or private project, or as the result of the initial
request of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, the Company shall receive
payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its existing facilities or
equipment. The City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects so as
not arbitrarily to cause the Company unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority under
this section. The City shall also provide a reasonable alternative location for the Company’s facilities.
The City shall give the Company reasonable advance written notice to vacate a public right-of-way.
Vacating a public right-of-way shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain
existing facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocating the same are paid to theCompany.
14-1-5 Furnishing of Service. Said Company, its successors and assigns, shall throughout the term of
the franchise distribute to all consumers gas of good quality and shall furnish uninterrupted service,
except as interruptible service may be specifically contracted for with consumers; provided, however,
that any prevention of service caused by fire, act of God or unavoidable event or accident shall not be
a breach of this condition if the Company resumes service as quickly as is reasonably practical after
the happening of the act causing the interruption.
14-1-6 Non-exclusive. The franchise granted by this Ordinance shall not be exclusive.
14-1-7 Franchise Fee.
(A) In its monthly billing Company shall include a franchise fee of five percent (5%) on the gross
receipts from the distribution, supply, or sale of natural gas for customers within the limits of
the City of Muscatine, Muscatine county, Iowa. The Company shall make all reasonable
effort to commence collecting the 5% franchise fee by the date of July 1, 2019, but no later
than August 1, 2019. The franchise fee may be increased or decreased by the City on or after
January 1, 2020, provided that the franchise fee shall be limited to a maximum of 5%. The
City shall give the Company a minimum 90-day notice prior to the request to implement an
increase or decrease in the franchise fee. The City shall be solely responsible for the proper
use of any amounts collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such fees as collected for a
purpose as allowed by applicable law. Collection of the franchise fee shall cease at the
earlier of the City’s repeal of the franchise fee of the end of the Ordinance term.
(B) The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers’ bills in accordance with Iowa Code
Chapter 364.2(f) and 423B.5. The Company shall not grant exemptions or refunds of
the franchise fee beyond that granted by the Code of Iowa. If at any time the Iowa
Utilities Board or another authority having proper jurisdiction, prohibits the collection
or payment of a franchise fee, the Company shall be relieved of its obligation to collect
and pay to the City the franchise fee.
(C) City agrees that Company’s obligations related to the franchise fee are limited to those
obligations set forth in Sections 7, 8 and 12 herein. City further agrees to bear all costs
(including attorney fees), and to defend, indemnify and hold Company harmless from
any and all liability, claims or causes of action associated with disputes related to the
billing and/ or collection of the franchise fee, provided that the City shall not be
ATTACHMENT A
obligated to bear such costs or to defend, indemnify and hold Company harmless if such
disputes arise from claims of inaccurate billing by the Company.
(D) Section 10. Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval authorizing
annexation, or changes in the limits of said City, the City Clerk shall provide written
notification to an officer of Company of such annexation or change in the limits of
said City, and the Company shall apply the franchise fee to its customers who are
affected by the annexation or change in the limits of the City, commencing no more
than six (6) months from receipt of the written notice and City’s verification of
addresses within the annexed area.
(E) Section 11. The amount of franchise fee shall be shown separately on the utility bill to
each customer.
(F) The Company shall remit collected franchise fees to the City on a quarterly basis,
within thirty (30) days after last day of the last revenue month of the quarter.
(G) That said franchise fee shall be in lieu of any other payments to the City for the
Company’s use of streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the said City and other
administrative or regulatory costs with regard to said franchise; and said pipes, mains,
and other conductor and appliances in, along and under the streets, avenues, alleys and
public places in the said City for the purpose of distributing, supplying and selling gas
to said City and the residents thereof and to persons and corporations beyond the limits
thereof shall be exempt from any special tax, assessment, license or rental charge
during the entire term of this ordinance.
14-1-8 Term of Franchise. The term of the franchise granted by this Ordinance and the rights
granted thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty-five (25) years from and after its
acceptance by the said Company, as herein provided.
14-1-9 Publication. The expense of the publication of this Ordinance shall be paid by the
Company.
14-1-10 Acceptance. The franchise granted by this Ordinance shall be conditioned upon
acceptance by the Company in writing. The acceptance shall be filed with the City Clerk within
ninety (90) days from passage of thisOrdinance.
14-1-11 Repealer. This Ordinance sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between the
Company and the City of Muscatine with respect to the rights contained herein, and may not be
superseded, modified or otherwise amended without the approval and acceptance of the
Company. Upon acceptance by the Company, this Ordinance shall supersede, abrogate and repeal
the prior gas system ordinance between the Company and the City of Muscatine as of the date
this Ordinance is accepted by the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the
City of Muscatine enact any ordinance or place any limitations, either operationally or through
the assessment of fees other than those approved and accepted by the Company within this
Ordinance, that create additional burdens upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.
TITLE 15
FIRE REGULATIONS
SUBJECT CHAPTER
Fire Department 1
Fire Prevention Codes 2
Fire Inspections 3
Explosives 4
Open Burning 5
Smoke Detectors 6
Private Hydrants 7
Fireworks Sales, Discharging, and Display 8
TITLE 15 – FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1 - FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTIONS:
15-1-1 Establishment and Purpose
15-1-2 Organization
15-1-3 Duties
15-1-4 Departmental Authority
15-1-5 False Information
15-1-6 Outside City Limits
15-1-7 Priorities
15-1-8 Fire in Public Places; Notice
15-1-9 Required Training
15-1-1 Establishment and Purpose. A Fire and Rescue Department is hereby established
to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire
prevention and fire safety, to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other
established agency, and to provide emergency rescue and ambulance service resulting from
fire, accident or illness; and to undertake all other duties imposed upon said Fire and Rescue
Department either by the Council or the laws of the State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16).
15-1-2 Organization. The Department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
15-1-3 Duties.
A. The Fire Chief, or other authorized officer of the Fire Department, shall perform all
duties required by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Command. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the executive head of the Fire
Department and shall be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire Department
shall, at all times be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
2. Investigation. The Chief of the Fire Department or the Chief’s designee shall
investigate into the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the
City by which property has been destroyed or damaged or which results in bodily
injury to a person, and determine whether the fire was the result of natural causes,
negligence or design.
(Code of Iowa, Section 100.2)
3. Notification. When death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in excess of
two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has occurred as a result of a fire, or if
arson is suspected, the fire official required by Section 100.2 of the Code of Iowa
to make fire investigations, shall notify the state fire marshal’s division
immediately. For all other fires causing an estimated damage of fifty dollars
($50.00) or more or emergency responses by the fire service, the fire official
required by Section 100.2 to investigate shall file a report with the fire marshal’s
division within ten (10) days following the end of the month. The report shall
indicate all fire incidents occurring which have an estimated damage of fifty dollars
($50.00) or more and state for each incident the name of the owners and occupants
of the property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated
total loss to the property, the origin of the fire as determined by investigation, and
other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incident. The report
on each emergency response shall include the nature of the incident and other
facts, statistics and circumstances concerning the emergency response.
(Code of Iowa, Section 100.3)
4. Duty to Order Corrections. The Fire Chief or an authorized subordinate who
conducts an inspection under Section 100.12 of the Code of Iowa shall order the
correction of a condition found to be in violation of any state, county or City fire
safety ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Section 100.12)
5. Duty at Fires. No member of the Fire Department shall resign at the time of an
emergency or shall willfully fail or neglect to discharge his/her duty at such time.
6. Maintenance of Records. The Fire Chief shall keep a record of all emergency calls
and all the facts concerning the same, including statistics, as to the circumstances
surrounding such emergencies and the injuries or damage caused thereby.
7. Maintenance and Control of Property. The Fire Chief shall have exclusive
supervision and control of engines, machinery, or apparatus used by the Fire
Department. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to make inspections as often as
deemed necessary, to carefully examine the condition of all such property,
including buildings, and see that the same is at all times in good repair and
condition, and to report to the City Administrator any major defect in the same, or
any major repairs, attention, alterations, or additions required, and shall, with the
consent of the Mayor and Council, cause all such major repairs to be made without
delay.
15-1-4 Departmental Authority.
The Fire Chief or other authorized officer of the Fire Department shall have all authority
granted by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
A. Enforce Laws. The Fire Chief or other authorized officer of the Fire Department may
enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and the investigation of the
cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
B. Technical Assistance. The Fire Chief is authorized to require the owner or the person
in possession or control of the building or premises to provide, without charge to the
jurisdiction, a technical opinion and report. The opinion and report shall be prepared
by a qualified engineer, specialist, laboratory or fire-safety specialty organization
acceptable to the Fire Chief and the owner and shall analyze the fire-safety properties
of the design, operation or use of the building or premises and the facilities and
appurtenances situated thereon, to recommend necessary changes.
C. Authority at Fires. The Fire Chief or other authorized officer of the Fire Department in
charge of a fire scene which involves the protection of life or property, may direct an
operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous
condition, or take any other action as deemed necessary in the reasonable
performance of the Department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Section 102.2)
D. Control of Fire Scene. The Fire Chief or other authorized officer of the Fire Department
in charge of a fire scene which involves the protection of life or property, may prohibit
an individual, vehicle, or vessel from approaching a fire scene and may remove from
the scene any object, vehicle, vessel, or individual that may impede or interfere with
the operations of the Fire Department.
(Code of Iowa, Section 102.2)
E. Barricade. The Fire Chief or other authorized officer of the Fire Department may place
or erect ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street, alley, rightof-
way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent
accidents or interference with the fire fighting efforts of the Fire Department, to control
the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related
to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Section 102.3)
F. Demolition of Buildings. The Fire Chief or designated Officer in Charge shall have the
power to tear down, demolish, destroy, or otherwise remove any building or erection
of any kind or to order the same to be done whenever, in his/her opinion and
judgment, it is necessary to do so in order to arrest the progress of or to extinguish
any conflagration.
G. Control of Evidence. If any fire results in loss or injury to life or destruction or damage
to property and appears of suspicious origin, the Fire Department is authorized to take
immediate charge of all physical evidence relating to the cause of the fire.
H. Investigation of Release of Hazardous Material. The Chief, Officer in Charge, or
designated representative is authorized to investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of unauthorized releases of hazardous materials.
I. Authority to Inspect. The Fire Chief or an authorized subordinate who is trained in fire
prevention safety standards may enter a building or premises at a reasonable hour to
examine the building or premises and its contents.
(Code of Iowa, Section 100.12)
J. Fire Prevention Rules. The Chief, with the approval of the City Administrator, is
authorized to make and enforce such rules and regulations for the prevention and
control of fires and fire hazards as may be necessary from time to time to carry out
the intent of all local fire prevention laws and ordinances.
15-1-5 False Information. No person shall, without reasonable cause therefore, for the
purpose of either misleading or deceiving, give any alarm of fire, or give or circulate false
information as to the location of any bomb, explosive, or other hazardous device or dangerous
instrument upon the premises of any building or property or permit said false alarm or
information to be given verbally or through any alarm or communication system.
15-1-6 Outside City Limits. The fire fighting equipment owned by the City shall not leave
the Corporate Limits of the City except under the following conditions:
A. In response to calls where specified fire or Haz Mat (Hazardous Materials) agreements
have been approved by the City Council.
B. In response to a call for properties owned by the City outside the City limits.
C. In case of emergencies other than buildings, Fire Department trucks and equipment
may respond if deemed advisable by the Fire Chief, or his/her designated
representative; provided, however, that there is no present demand from within the
City.
D. Where mutual-aid auto-aid agreements exist with other governmental units, a City
truck may respond to that call; provided, however, that there is no present demand
from within the City and the response will not substantially reduce the availability of
the equipment and manpower needed for adequate protection within City limits.
E. In response to calls from Lock and Dam No. 16.
F. For special events or activities as may be approved by the City Administrator and City
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
15-1-7 Priorities. For the purpose of clarification, the priority of calls shall be as follows:
A. Calls within the Corporate Limits of the City.
B. Calls listed in Subsections (A) through (G) of Section 15-1-6 of this Chapter, as
prioritized by the Fire Chief.
15-1-8 Fire in Public Places; Notice.
A. No person, by smoking or attempting to light or to smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or
tobacco in any manner, in which lighters or matches are employed, shall in a careless,
reckless, or negligent manner whatsoever, whether willfully or wantonly or not, set fire
to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes, or any household fittings in any sleeping
room, lodging house, or room of any hotel, rooming house, or other place of public
abode, so as to endanger life or property in any way or to any extent.
B. In each sleeping room of all hotels, rooming houses, lodging houses, and other places
of public abode, a plainly printed notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place advising
tenants of the provisions of this Section.
15-1-9 Required Training. All members of the Fire Department shall have completed the
training required by law prior to engaging in structural fire fighting. Any member of the Fire
Department who serves in a capacity other than structural fire fighting at an emergency
incident shall have received training based on the duties the member might perform at an
emergency incident as required by law. All members of the Fire Department shall also meet
the minimum annual in-service training as required by law.
(IAC, 661-251.101(100B), 661-251.102(100B), and 661-251.10(100B))
TITLE 15 – FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 2 – FIRE PREVENTION CODES
SECTIONS:
15-2-1 Adoption of Fire Prevention Codes
15-2-2 Enforcement
15-2-3 Definitions
15-2-4 Amendments Made in the International Fire Code
15-2-5 Appeals
15-2-6 Penalties
15-2-7 Hazardous Materials
15-2-1 Adoption of Fire Prevention Codes. Pursuant to published notice and public
hearing as required by the Code of Iowa, the document entitled “International Fire Code”,
2015 Edition, as amended and published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted
by reference as the Fire Code for the City of Muscatine, Iowa, and is made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this Ordinance. An official copy of said Code is on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
15-2-2 Enforcement. The fire prevention codes adopted by the City Council shall be
enforced by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designated representative in the Fire Department
of the City of Muscatine, Iowa.
15-2-3 Definitions. Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in any of the fire prevention
codes, it is the City of Muscatine, and all properties outside the corporate City limits which are
owned by, or have signed contracts for the provision of Fire Department Services with, the
City of Muscatine.
15-2-4 Amendments Made to the International Fire Code. The International Fire Code
is amended and changed in the following respects:
A. Delete Section 307 in its entirety (open burning)
B. Delete Section 401 in its entirety (false reporting)
15-2-5 Appeals. Whenever the Fire Chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that
the true intent and meaning of a provision of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief to the City Council
within 30 days from the date of the decision.
15-2-6 Penalties.
A. No person shall violate any of the provisions of this Code or standards hereby adopted
or fail to comply therewith, or shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
thereunder, or shall operate or build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit
issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or shall fail to comply
with such an order of the Fire Chief as affirmed by the City Council or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, or shall severally for each and
every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty, and subject to
penalties as provided in Title 1 of this Code of Ordinances. The imposition of one
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal
of prohibited conditions.
15-2-7 Hazardous Materials.
A. Definitions of terms pertaining to the prevention, control and mitigation of dangerous
conditions related to the storage, dispensing, use, handling, and transportation of
hazardous materials shall be as defined in Chapter 50, Section 5001.2.2.1 and
5001.2.2.2 of the International Fire Code, as adopted in Section 1 of this Chapter.
B. The person, firm, or corporation responsible for an unauthorized discharge shall
institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized
discharge, whether sudden or gradual, at no cost to the jurisdiction. When deemed
necessary by the Fire Chief, cleanup may be initiated by the Fire Department or by an
authorized individual or firm. Costs associated with such cleanup shall be borne by the
owner, operator or other person responsible for the unauthorized discharge.
C. Costs associated with the response of the City of Muscatine to any unauthorized
discharge shall be borne by the owner, operator or other person responsible for the
unauthorized discharge.
D. In the absence of an assignment of responsibility for costs to an owner, operator or
other responsible person, the costs associated with cleanup or response shall be borne
by the owner of the hazardous material.
TITLE 15 – FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3 – FIRE INSPECTIONS
SECTIONS:
15-3-1 Inspections
15-3-2 Fees
15-3-3 Notice of Violation
15-3-4 Nationally Recognized Standards
15-3-5 Alternate Materials and Methods
15-3-6 Technical Assistance
15-3-7 Liability
15-3-8 Knox Box; Requirements, Definition, and Costs
15-3-9 Validity
15-3-1 Inspections. The Fire Department shall inspect, as often as the Fire Chief deems
necessary, buildings and premises, including such other hazards or appliances as the Fire
Chief may designate for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any
conditions or violations of provisions of this Code or of any other law or standard affecting fire
safety.
15-3-2 Fees. The inspection fees shall be in the amount as set by resolution of City Council
and are set out in the Schedule of Fees and Charges in Appendix C to this Code of Ordinances.
Fees shall be remitted to the City of Muscatine Fire Department no later than 30 days following
the date of inspection. Failure to pay the inspection fee within 30 days of the inspection shall
be deemed a violation of this Code of Ordinances and is punishable as provided in 15-3-3.
15-3-3 Notice of Violation. When the Fire Chief finds that inspection fees have not been
paid within 30 days of the inspection, the Fire Chief is authorized to prepare a written notice
of violation describing the facts constituting violation of this Chapter. If a recipient of a notice
of violation does not pay the inspection by the due date set out in such notice, or request a
trial before a judge or magistrate, a municipal infraction citation will be issued to the recipient
by certified mail from the Fire Department. Said municipal infraction citation will result in a
mandatory court appearance by the recipient as well as imposition of state mandated court
costs if a finding of guilty is made by the court.
15-3-4 Nationally Recognized Standards. Where no applicable standards or requirements
are set forth or contained within other laws, codes, regulations, ordinances or bylaws adopted
by the jurisdiction, compliance with applicable standards of the National Fire Protection
Association or other nationally recognized fire-safety standards as are approved by the Fire
Chief shall be deemed as prima facie evidence of compliance with the intent of this Ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Title shall derogate from the power of the Fire Chief to determine
compliance with codes or standards for those activities or installations within the Fire Chief's
jurisdiction or responsibility.
15-3-5 Alternate Materials and Methods.
A. Practical Difficulties. The Fire Chief is authorized to modify any of the provisions of local
fire prevention laws and ordinances upon application in writing by the owner, a lessee
or a duly authorized representative where there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the provisions of said law or ordinance, provided that the spirit of the law
or ordinance shall be complied with, public safety secured and substantial justice done.
The particulars of such modification and the decision of the Fire Chief shall be entered
upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the
applicant.
B. Alternate Materials. The Fire Chief, with the concurrence of the Building Official, is
authorized to approve alternate materials or methods, provided that the Fire Chief
finds that the proposed design, use or operation satisfactorily complies with the intent
of the local law or ordinance and that the material, method of work performed or
operation is, for the purpose intended, at least equivalent to that prescribed in quality,
strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Approvals under the
authority herein contained shall be subject to the approval of the Building Official
whenever the alternate material or method involves matters regulated by the Building
Code.
C. Proof of Compliance. The Fire Chief is authorized to require tests as proof of compliance
with the intent of this Code. Such tests shall be made by an approved agency at the
expense of the person requesting approval of the alternate material or method of
construction.
D. A sign bearing the message, "Discharge of Consumer Fireworks is Prohibited at All
Times within the City of Muscatine Except for July 15t through July 8th and December
26th through January 3rd, shall be posted at all points of ingress and egress to and
from the CFRS. Such sign shall not count towards the limits of allowable signage
provided for by Title 10 of the City Code.
15-3-6 Technical Assistance. To determine the acceptability of technologies, processes,
products, facilities, materials and uses attending the design, operation or use of a building or
premises subject to the inspection of the Department, the Fire Chief is authorized to require
the owner or the person in possession or control of the building or premises to provide, without
charge to the jurisdiction, a technical opinion and report. The opinion and report shall be
prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist, laboratory, or fire-safety specialty organization
acceptable to the Fire Chief and the owner and shall analyze the fire-safety properties of the
design, operation or use of the building or premises and the facilities and appurtenances
situated thereon, to recommend necessary changes.
15-3-7 Liability. The Fire Chief and other individuals charged by the Fire Chief with the
control or extinguishments of any fire, the enforcement of this Chapter, any fire prevention
law or ordinance, or any other official duties, acting in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of their duties, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for any damage that
may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or omission
in the discharge of their duties. Any suit brought against the Fire Chief or such individuals
because of such act or omission performed in the enforcement of any provision of such codes
or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this Chapter
or enforced by the code enforcement agency shall be defended by this jurisdiction until final
termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by
this jurisdiction.
This Chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person
owning, operating or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or
property caused by defects, nor shall the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction
be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this Chapter
or any permits or certificates issued.
15-3-8 Knox Box; Requirements, Definition, and Costs.
A. Knox Box Required. A Knox Box must be installed in commercial or industrial buildings
which have fire detection, fire alarm, or fire suppression systems and are not occupied
24 hours a day 7 days week when access to or within a structure or an area is restricted
because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life saving
or firefighting purposes or as required by the Fire Chief or his designee. A Knox Box is
also required for residential property consisting of six (6) or more residential dwelling
units.
B. Definition. A Knox Box is a key box placed on the exterior of a commercial or industrial
building for rapid entry use by fire department personnel.
C. Costs. The cost of purchase and installation of each Knox Box shall be paid by the
building owner.
15-3-9 Validity. If any provision of any chapter of this Title or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of City Code and the application of such
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected hereby.
TITLE 15 – FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4 - EXPLOSIVES
SECTIONS:
15-4-1 Explosives
15-4-2 Storage Requirements, Explosive Gunpowder
15-4-3 Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of Explosives and Blasting
Agents is to be Prohibited
15-4-1 Explosives. Retail sales, storage, handling, and display of sporting gunpowders,
primers, percussion caps and ammunition shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
International Fire Code, Article 56. A permit from the Fire Department is required for storage,
handling, display and sales of such explosives.
15-4-2 Storage Requirements, Explosive Gunpowders. Other than as provided for Retail
Sales in Section 15-4-1, no person shall be permitted to keep more than twenty-five (25)
pounds of gunpowder or five (5) pounds of black powder in any building. Powder shall be kept
in closed kegs or metallic canisters in a place secure from fire, and where it can easily and
safely be removed in case of fire. Nothing in this Section shall be so construed as to prevent
persons from keeping powder in smaller quantities for common hunting purposes, or the legal
transportation thereof, as permitted by State or Federal authorities.
15-4-3 Establishments of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of Explosives and
Blasting Agents is to be Prohibited. The limits referred to in the International Fire Code,
in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as the
corporate City limits of the City of Muscatine, except as specifically allowed by the Fire Chief,
such as, but not limited to, what is permitted in 6-3-2, Fireworks Defined. The City Council
shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for granting of permits for use of
explosives.
TITLE 15 – FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5 – OPEN BURNING
SECTIONS:
15-5-1 No Open Burning; Permit Required
15-5-2 Open Burning Permit Purposes
15-5-3 Permit Fees
15-5-4 Hours Open Burning Permitted
15-5-5 Open Burning Restrictions
15-5-1 No Open Burning; Permit Required. There will be no open burning within the
corporate City Limits without a permit having been issued by a representative of the Fire
Department or by special exception of City Council. Non-permitted burning may be allowed
in disaster situations as declared by the Fire Chief or Mayor. Disaster burning will require
notification of the Fire Department and may include an onsite review prior to burning.
15-5-2 Open Burning Permit Purposes. Permits for open burning may be issued for the
following purposes:
A. Bon fires by organizations such as the Muscatine High School, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts,
churches, etc., with the purpose of these bon fires being directed towards raising
school spirit, ceremonial events and so on.
B. Wiener roasts or cooking fires, which would be limited to the actual purpose of cooking
food and not for the intent of burning large quantities of brush or other combustible
material.
C. Burning of actual prairie grass fields.
D. Individuals who have property of one acre or more be issued permits to burn landscape
waste, which commonly consists of leaves, organic matter, brush and trees gathered
from that property. Building materials shall not be burned under this permit. Prior to
the permit being issued, the Fire Department representative will attempt to insure the
fire poses no problem with relation to smoke obscuring roadways, creating a nuisance
or of the fire spreading beyond the control of the responsible individual. Such burning
shall be done in piles that are easily controlled and extinguishable. Large piles cannot
be used for open burning purposes.
E. Fire Department training activities including fires in structures and small fires started
for fire extinguisher classes. Verbal approval of the burn may be obtained in lieu of a
written permit for this purpose only. Any training fire that involves the destruction of
a structure shall be in accordance to Iowa Code Chapter 23, and all required paperwork
and forms will be completed and submitted prior to such a burn.
F. Outdoor fireplaces, including fire pits, fire rings, chimneys, and permanent outdoor
campfire like structures. Liquefied petroleum gas fueled decorative devices are
exempt from the permit requirement.
G. Commercial burning of organic materials gathered on site, for clearing, grubbing and
construction operations. Any such burning shall be limited to areas located at least
one-fourth of a mile from any building inhabited by other than the landowner or tenant
conducting the burning. The controlled burning of any demolished building shall be in
accordance with Iowa Code 23.2(3)j.
15-5-3 Permit Fees. The fee for the issuance of a permit under this Chapter shall be set by
resolution of the City Council and is listed in the Schedule of Permit and Other Licensing
Requirements in Appendix B of this Code of Ordinances.
15-5-4 Hours Open Burning Permitted. Open burning, when permitted by Section 15-5-
2(D), shall be done only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on the days stipulated
on the permit. Fires shall not be allowed to burn or smolder outside that time period. Permits
issued in accordance to 15-5-2(F) allow for burning of materials between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight on the days stipulated on the permit.
15-5-5 Open Burning Restrictions.
A. Open burning permitted by 15-5-2(D) shall not be conducted within 50 feet (50’) of
any structure or other combustible material. Conditions which could cause the fire to
spread to within 50 feet (50’) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
B. Permits issued in accordance with 15-5-2(F) shall not be conducted within 10 feet (10’)
of any structure or other combustible material. Conditions which could cause the fire
to spread to within 10 feet (10’) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
C. A hose connected to an adequate water supply or other approved fire-extinguishing
equipment shall be readily available for use at open burning sites.
D. Burning material shall be constantly attended by a person knowledgeable of the permit
limitations which restrict open burning. An attendant shall supervise the burning
material until the fire has been extinguished. Supervision means the burning is within
eyesight of the knowledgeable person. It is not permissible for a fire to be supervised
from within a structure.
E. Open burning permitted by 15-5-2(D) may be for approved purposes to burn leaves,
organic matter, brush, and trees gathered from that property but not for building
construction materials, trash, decomposing organic material (including composting
material), or other refuse.
F. Outdoor fireplaces will burn only natural wood or charcoal – no construction materials
(including dimensional lumber), trash, leaves, grass, or other organic materials are
allowed to be burned.
G. The Fire Chief or designee is authorized to require that permitted burning be
immediately discontinued if they determine that smoke emissions are offensive to
occupants of surrounding property or if the open burning is determined to constitute a
hazardous condition.
H. Open burning on any street or alley within the City is prohibited.
I. All permits will be on file with the dispatch agency, Muscatine Joint Communications
(MUSCOM). Permit holders, under 15-5-2(D), shall call MUSCOM and report that they
are burning prior to beginning such activity.
J. Failure to adhere to all rules may result in revocation of permits and denial of future
permits for open burning or outdoor fireplace, and/or a municipal citation.
K. The burning of residential waste is not allowed, including the burning of residential
waste in an outdoor fireplace. At no time are tires allowed to be burned.
L. All open burning must meet applicable State and Federal codes and regulations, as
applicable.
TITLE 15 – FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 6 – SMOKE DETECTORS
SECTIONS:
15-6-1 Detectors Required
15-6-2 General Requirements
15-6-3 Non-compliance
15-6-1 Detectors Required. All residential buildings shall be equipped with operating smoke
detectors.
15-6-2 General requirements. Smoke detectors used to meet the requirements of this
Chapter shall meet or exceed the requirements of Iowa Code 661-210.3(100).
15-6-3 Non-compliance. Any violation of this Chapter shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in Title 1 of this Code.
TITLE 15 – FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 7 – PRIVATE HYDRANTS
SECTIONS:
15-7-1 Purpose
15-7-2 Inspections
15-7-3 Winterization
15-7-4 Penalty Provision
15-7-1 Purpose. It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and proper for the
regulation of the public health, safety and welfare to regulate the maintenance of those fire
hydrants on private property which are connected to water lines that are connected to the
City of Muscatine water lines.
15-7-2 Inspections. The City of Muscatine through its utility, water, and fire departments
may inspect each fire hydrant annually, to determine if it is in proper working condition. Any
qualified employee of the Department shall at all reasonable hours have the right to enter the
premises where such hydrants are installed for the purpose of testing, removing, or inspection
the same. No person shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with such employee in the lawful
discharge of his or her duties in relation to the care and maintenance of such fire hydrants. If
the hydrant needs repair, the City of Muscatine will notify the owner of the property in writing
by certified mail requesting that the hydrant be fixed within ten (10) days of receipt of the
letter. If the hydrant is not repaired within ten (10) days, the City of Muscatine will fix the
hydrant and bill the owner of the property for the cost of the labor and materials necessary
to put the hydrant back in proper working condition.
15-7-3 Winterization. The owner of the property that has fire hydrants that require
winterization shall perform maintenance during the month of October. The property owner
may do this themselves or hire it done by a reputable firm knowledgeable in the winterizing
of fire hydrants.
15-7-4 Penalty Provision. The violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be deemed
a municipal infraction and deemed to be a nuisance. Each and every day during which any
section hereof is violated shall be deemed a separate offence. At the request of the Fire Chief,
the City may institute an injunction, mandamus, abatement, or other appropriate action or
actions, proceeding or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove an unlawful violation
of this Ordinance. The rights and remedies herein are cumulative and in addition to all other
remedies prescribed by law.
TITLE 15 – FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 8 – FIREWORKS SALES, DISCHARGING, AND DISPLAY
SECTIONS:
15-8-1 Purpose and Intent
15-8-2 Fireworks Discharging Regulations
15-8-3 Fireworks Sales Permit Required
15-8-4 Fireworks Sales Permit Issuance
15-8-5 Fireworks Sales Safety and Operational Standards
15-8-6 Violations
15-8-7 Fireworks Display
15-8-8 Definitions
15-8-1 Purpose and Intent. To allow for the use and sale of fireworks as permitted under
state law in a manner that is safe and which minimizes disturbances to the community.
15-8-2 Fireworks Discharging Regulations. Fireworks shall only be discharged in a
manner that is compliant with all of the following regulations:
A. General Regulations Regarding the Discharging of Fireworks
1. Any person discharging a fireworks device, or person permitting the discharge of a
fireworks device on their property, assumes responsibility for its operation and the
consequences thereof. No person shall discharge a fireworks device in a reckless
manner or manner likely to cause death, injury, fire, or property damage.
2. Persons 17 years of age and younger shall not discharge fireworks except under
the supervision of an adult. Supervision shall be adequate where the adult is within
sight and sound of the minors during the discharge of the fireworks.
3. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having custody
or control of any minor 17 years of age or younger to knowingly allow such minor
to discharge fireworks in violation of the preceding subsection.
4. Fireworks shall not be discharged by persons showing visible signs of, or
determined to be, intoxicated or under the influence of a drug or narcotic.
5. It shall be unlawful to alter, remove, or discharge components of a fireworks device
from its intended method of discharging.
6. Sky lantern open flame devices are not permitted to be released within the city
limits, except if tethered by a retrievable rope so the person discharging has control
over the sky lantern.
B. Allowable Times for the Discharging of Fireworks
1. A person shall not use or explode consumer fireworks on days other than July 3
through July 4 and December 31 through January 1 of each year, all dates
inclusive.
2. A person shall not use or explode consumer fireworks at times other than:
a. Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on July 3 and July 4.
b. Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. on December 31 and 12:30 a.m. on the
following day.
C. Allowable Locations for the Discharging of Fireworks
1. A person shall only discharge a fireworks device on real property they own or on
property where consent has been given.
2. Snakes, sparklers, or caps can be discharged in a public place, unless specifically
prohibited by the entity owning the public place, so long as all trash, wrappers,
and wires are properly disposed of.
3. No person shall light or cause to be lighted any fireworks or other combustible
article within 300 feet of any location that has been permitted to sell fireworks.
D. This Chapter does not prohibit the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theatre,
or for signal purposes in athletic sports or by railroads or trucks for signal purposes,
or by a recognized military organization. This Chapter does not apply to any substance
or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes.
15-8-3 Fireworks Sales and Operational Permit Required. There shall be no sale of
fireworks within the corporate City Limits without a permit having been issued by
representatives of the Fire Department and inspections performed. If applicable, a transient
merchant license as required by Chapter 10 of Title 5 shall also be obtained from the Finance
Department.
15-8-4 Fireworks Sales and Operational Permit Issuance. Fireworks sales permits shall
be issued in accordance with the following:
A. The following items shall be submitted with any application for a fireworks sales
permit:
1. Proof of liability insurance that complies with the requirements set forth by the
state fire marshal.
2. Site plan that demonstrates how all applicable portions of City Code, the National
Fire Protection Association 1124 (2006 edition and amendments thereto) are being
complied with.
3. Fees in accordance with the adopted fee schedule (Appendix B).
B. Proof of a valid permit or license issued from the state fire marshal shall be submitted
prior to the start of sales.
C. Inspections. Any property, building, or premise whether it be permanent or temporary,
intended for fireworks sales shall have an initial fire inspection completed by the fire
chief or their designee prior to engaging in fireworks sales. The fire chief or designee
shall cause an annual inspection to occur each selling period meeting the requirements
of the National Fire Protection Association 1124 (2006 edition and amendments
thereto) and the current fire code adopted by the City of Muscatine.
15-8-5 Fireworks Sales and Safety and Operational Standards. All fireworks sales
permit holders shall comply with the following safety and operational standards at all times.
A. Allowable Locations for the Sales of Fireworks
1. Zoning. Must be located within a zoning district that permits retail sales as an
allowed use.
2. Required Setback for Temporary Structures
a. Property line: 20 feet
b. Any residence: 150 feet
c. Non-residential structure on a different parcel: 50 feet
d. Any structure on the same parcel: 20 feet
e. Motor fuel dispensing station: 50 feet
f. Retail propane dispensing station: 50 feet
g. Motor fuel dispensing station: 50 feet
h. Bulk fuel dispensing or bulk storage: 300 feet
i. Storage of consumer fireworks: 20 feet
j. Generator fuel storage: 20 feet
k. Generator placement: 20 feet
l. Cooking equipment: 20 feet
m. Any open flame cooking equipment: 50 feet
n. Any parking space: 20 feet
3. All Department Access. All portion of the perimeter of a CFRS (Consumer Fireworks
Retail Sales Facilities and Stores) must be located within 150 feet of a public way
or an approved fire apparatus access.
B. Allowable Times for the Sales of Fireworks. Fireworks sales shall only be conducted in
accordance with dates and times designated by Iowa Code.
C. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1124. All CFRSs (Consumer Fireworks
Retail Sales Facilities and Stores) shall comply with all applicable provisions of “NFPA
1124 Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks
and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition” and any amendments thereto.
D. General Requirements
1. Smoking, open flame source, or matches shall not be located within 50 feet of
where fireworks are sold.
a. Except that lighters and matches may be sold as part of a retail business in
commercial structures who engage in other merchandise sales where fireworks
sales are not the primary business.
b. Locations who engage in fireworks sales as a primary source of revenue may
sell extended lighters so long as lighters are located in a sealed package and
not removed within the store premises.
2. One or more signs reading “Fireworks-No Smoking” shall be displayed at all places
where fireworks are stored or sold in letters not less than four inches in height.
3. No persons under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or narcotics shall be allowed to
remain in a CFRS.
4. Signs shall be posted at all points of ingress and egress to and from the CFRS,
stating no sales will be made to anyone under the age of 18.
5. A sign bearing the message, “Discharge of Consumer Fireworks is Prohibited at All
Times within the City of Muscatine Except for July 3rd through July 4th and
December 31st through January 1st, shall be posted at all points of ingress and
egress to and from the CFRS. Such sign shall not count towards the limits of
allowable signage provided for by Title 10 of the City Code.
6. Fireworks Use Regulations Informational Pamphlet
a. The City of Muscatine shall prepare a “fireworks use regulations informational
pamphlet.” Said pamphlet shall detail all relevant regulations regarding the use
of fireworks within the City of Muscatine. Said pamphlet shall be formatted in
a manner that allows for it to be legibly reproduced on an 8.5” x 11” piece of
paper.
b. A seller of fireworks shall distribute to each purchaser a copy of the fireworks
user regulation informational pamphlet on an 8.5” x 11” piece of paper.
c. It shall be the responsibility of the fireworks seller to reproduce all necessary
copies of the fireworks use regulation informational pamphlet from an original
copy provided by the City of Muscatine.
7. Flashing lights of any type are prohibited. All lighting shall be non-intermittent.
8. All signage must comply with Title 10 Chapter 21 of the City Code.
9. A CFRS shall provide a minimum of five hard surfaced parking spaces in accordance
with Title 10 of the City Code. No parking spaces mandated by Title 10 of the City
Code, for other uses on the subject parcel, shall be counted towards fulfillment of
this requirement.
10.All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from the location of the CFRS
including a distance of at least 30 feet surrounding the CFRS.
11.All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by
5:00 p.m. two days after the end of sales of fireworks.
12.All temporary structures shall be removed from the temporary location by 12:00
p.m. on the seventh day after the end of sales of fireworks, and all accompanying
litter shall be cleared from said location by the said time and date.
15-8-6 Violations.
A. Any violation that would constitute a simple misdemeanor pursuant to Iowa Code
Section 727.2 shall be charged as a simple misdemeanor. Any other violation of this
Chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided
for in Title 1 of this Code.
B. In addition to the penalties provided for in 15-8-6(A), any violation of the use
provisions of this Chapter may also result in the confiscation or destruction of any
fireworks or consumer fireworks.
C. If in the judgment of the fire chief or building inspector, the construction of a
permanent or temporary structure or the conduct of the operations therein do not
conform to the provisions of this Chapter, such officers or either of them, may order
the stand immediately closed, and the permit to operate such stand shall then be
suspended and/or revoked.
15-8-7 Fireworks Display
A. The City may, upon application in writing to the City Council at least one week in
advance of the last regular City Council meeting prior to the date of the display, grant
a permit for the display of fireworks by a City agency, fair associations, amusement
parks and other organizations or groups of individuals approved by City authorities
when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator.
B. Bond/Insurance for Fireworks Display Required. The permittee shall furnish a bond or
certificates of insurance in the amounts set out in the Schedule of Permits and
Licensing Requirements in Appendix B to this Code of Ordinances for the payment of
all damages which may be caused either to a person or persons or to property by
reason of the permitted display and arising from any acts of the permittee, his agents,
employees or subcontractors.
15-8-8 Definitions
Consumer Fireworks: First-class consumer fireworks and second-class consumer fireworks,
as those terms are defined in 2017 Iowa Acts, Senate File 489, Section 3.
Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Facilities and Stores (CFRS): The portion of a retail
sales store or facility, including the immediately adjacent aisles, where consumer fireworks
are located for the purpose of retail display and sale to the public.
APPENDIX A
Schedule of Penalties
I. Municipal Infractions
A. Standard Civil Penalties:
1. First Offense: Not to exceed $500
2. Each Repeat Offense: Not to exceed $750
B. Special Civil Penalties:
1. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial
user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each day a
violation exists or continues.
2. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is punishable by
a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence. However, an
environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of the following
conditions are satisfied:
i. The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup, cleaning,
repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment
designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
ii. The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24) hours from
the time that the violation begins.
iii. The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8)
hours.
C. Specified Civil Penalties:
Code Section No. Offense First Offense Repeat Offenses
5-3-9 Sale of Tobacco to
Minors, penalties as
provided in Iowa Code
453A.22
$300 + 14 day
suspension of permit
2nd: $1,500 + 30 day
suspension
3rd: $1,500 + 30 day
suspension
4th: $1,500 + 60 day
suspension
5th: Revocation.
5-2-5 [P] and
5-2-12
Amateur fighting and
boxing
$750 $1,000
5-2-6 Amateur fighting and
boxing
$750 $1,000
5-10 Violation of Peddlers,
Solicitors, and
Transient Merchant
Ordinance
Not to Exceed $100 Not to Exceed $100
5-11-3[C] and
5-11-5
Residential sales -
signs placed on public
way
$10 Second: $25
Third and
Subsequent: Not
more than $50 not
less than $75
Code Section No. Offense First Offense Repeat Offenses
6-2-32 More than 4 False
Alarms in 12 month
period
5 False Alarms: $50 6-8 False Alarms
$100
9 and more:
Suspension of Alarm
permit
6-2-32 Violation of Alarm
Ordinance Generally
$100 $200
6-6 Parental Responsibility
Violation
$50 Second: $100
Third and
Subsequent: $200
6-9 Failure to Comply with
Pit Bull Requirements
$300 $300
13-6-10.6 Administrative fine;
Failure to Comply with
Sewer Use
Regulations
Not to Exceed $1,000 Not to Exceed $1,000
13-6-11.2 Failure to Comply with
Sewer Use
Regulations
Not to Exceed $1,000 Not to Exceed $1,000
II. Notice of Fine/Violation
Code Section No. Offense First Offense Repeat Offenses
7-1 et seq. Parking violations
generally.
$10 first 20 citations $25 after 20
citations have been
issued.
Over time parking
and expired meter
violations.
$10 first 20
citations. If not paid
within 30 days, $5
increase.
$25 after 20
citations have been
issued. If not paid
within 30 days, $5
increase.
Snow route parking
violations.
$35. If not paid
within 30 days, $5
increase.
$35. If not paid
within 30 days, $5
increase.
Junk or Obsolete
violations.
$20. If not paid
within 30 days, $5
increase.
$20. If not paid
within 30 days, $5
increase.
Improper use of a
persons with
disabilities parking
permit
$200 $200
Code Section No. Offense First Offense Repeat Offenses
7-5 ATE: Over speed
limit 1 through 10
mph
$0 Same as first
offense
ATE: Over speed
limit 11 through 20
mph
$75, $35 late fee if
not paid within $30
days
Same as first
offense
ATE: Over speed
limit 21 through 25
mph
$100, $35 late fee if
not paid within $30
days
Same as first
offense
ATE: Over speed
limit 26 through 30
mph
$250, $35 late fee if
not paid within $30
days
Same as first
offense
ATE: Over speed
limit more than 30
mph
$350, $35 late fee if
not paid within $30
days
Same as first
offense
7-12-3 Storing Vehicles on
City Streets
$10 Same as first
offense
7-12-6 Junked Vehicles $20 Same as first
offense
III. Simple Misdemeanor
A. Standard Penalty:
A person convicted of a simple misdemeanor under this Code of Ordinances shall be
subject to a fine of no less than $65.00 and no more than $625.00. The court may
also order imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days in lieu of a fine or in addition
to a fine.
B. Specified Penalties:
CODE SECTION NO. OFFENSE FIRST OFFENSE REPEAT OFFENSES
3-8 Failure to Comply
with Levees
Ordinance
$100 $100
3-9-2 Failure to Comply
with Notice to Trim
$100 $100
5-2-8 [c] Violation of Persons
Under legal age
punishable as
provided in Iowa
Code Section
123.47.
Not to Exceed $100 Not to Exceed $100
5-10 Violation of Peddlers,
Solicitors, and
Transient Merchant
Ordinance
Not to Exceed $100 Not to Exceed $100
Code Section No. Offense First Offense Repeat Offenses
5-15-7 Failure to License;
salvage or junk yard
or refuse or garbage
collector
Not to Exceed $100 Not to Exceed $100
6-8 Failure to Comply
with Animal
Regulations
$65 $100, unless animal
is altered within 30
days, then $35 shall
be waived.
6-11 Violations of Noise
Regulations
Not to Exceed $100 Not to Exceed $100
Title 7.1 et seq. All State of Iowa
Traffic Violations
that are
incorporated by
reference in the City
Code shall be
prosecuted as
criminal offenses
and all State Code
scheduled fines shall
apply
Title 7.1 et seq. Speed regulations
shall be prosecuted
as simple
misdemeanors with
scheduled fines
adopted from State
Code
7-11 Violation of Load and
Weight Restrictions
$65 Second: $75
Third and
subsequent: $100
13.6.11.3[A] Willful or negligent
violation of Sewer
Use Regulations
Not to Exceed $100 Not more than $100
13.6.11.3[B] Willful or negligent
Introduction of
substance into POTW
No less than $100 Not more than $100
13.6.11.3[C] False Statements or
representation
Not More than $100 Not more than $100
Permits (P)/Licenses (L) Code Section Location Each Daily Weekly
Fees
Monthly Annually Bond Insurance
Sidewalk (P) 3-1-2
Community
Development $ 20.00
General Liability;
$100,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$100,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$200,000 General Aggregate on above
$200,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Commercial Use of City Property in Commercial Zone
(P) 3-1-5 Finance/Clerk
Application
required Dependent on scope of event
Outdoor Restaurant Seating (L) - On Streets 3-1-6
Community
Development $ 20.00
General Liability;
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$1,000,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$2,000,000 General Aggregate on above
$2,000,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 - Work Comp Benefits - Statutory
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits: $100,000 Bodily Injury Each Accident;
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Each
Employee
Dram Shop Liability - if applicable
$1,000,000 Each Common Cause Limit
Outdoor Restaurant Seating (L) - On Sidewalks 3-1-6
Community
Development $ 20.00
Same requirements as above for City Streets;
lower limits may be considered for outdoor
seating on City sidewalks.
Appendix B - Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
(See Appendix D for Building-Related Permit Requirements)
Permits (P)/Licenses (L) Code Section Location Each Daily Weekly
Fees
Monthly Annually Bond Insurance
Appendix B - Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
(See Appendix D for Building-Related Permit Requirements)
Excavation (P) 3-2-2
Community
Development $ 20.00 $5,000
General Liability;
$100,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$100,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$200,000 General Aggregate on above
$200,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each Employee
Business Automobile - owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Accident
Parade (P) 3-3-3 Finance/Clerk
$30.00 (Non-
Profit Exempt
from Fee)
General Liability;
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$1,000,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$2,000,000 General Aggregate on above
$2,000,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Public Assemblies (P) 3-3-3 Finance/Clerk
Application
required
Public Demonstration/PIcketing (P) 3-4-2 Finance/Clerk
Application
required
Amusements in Parks (P) 3-5-5 Parks
Application
required
Bond, if any,
dependent
on scope of
event
Assemblies in Parks (P) 3-5-6 Parks
Application
required
Bond, if any,
dependent
on scope of
event
Permits (P)/Licenses (L) Code Section Location Each Daily Weekly
Fees
Monthly Annually Bond Insurance
Appendix B - Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
(See Appendix D for Building-Related Permit Requirements)
Use of Levees (P) 3-8-1
Community
Development
Application
required; fee
dependent on
use
Tree Removal Business (L) 3-9-5 Finance/Clerk $ 75.00 $5,000
General Liability;
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$1,000,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$2,000,000 General Aggregate on above
$2,000,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each Employee
Business Automobile - owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Accident
Street Tree Removal, Existing (P) 3-9-8 Parks
Application
required
Street Tree Planting, New (P) 3-9-9 Parks
Application
required
Liquor/Wine/Beer Permits and Licenses 5-2-1 Finance/Clerk Per State Code
Dancing (L) 5-2-10 (B) Finance/Clerk
$50.00 per
calendar year
Cigarette Permit (P) 5-3-2 Finance/Clerk Per State Code
Tobacco Permit (P) 5-3-2 Finance/Clerk Per State Code
Amusement Licenses:
Roller Skating Rink (L) 5-4-2 Finance/Clerk $ 125.00
Shooting Gallery (L) 5-4-2 Finance/Clerk $ 125.00
Theatre (L) 5-4-2 Finance/Clerk $ 125.00
Permits (P)/Licenses (L) Code Section Location Each Daily Weekly
Fees
Monthly Annually Bond Insurance
Appendix B - Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
(See Appendix D for Building-Related Permit Requirements)
Pinball Machines/Video Games (L) 5-4-2 Finance/Clerk
$30.00 each
device
Juke Boxes (L) 5-4-2 Finance/Clerk
$30.00 each
device
Billiards/Pocket Billiards 5-5-1 Finance/Clerk
$25.00 each
table
Bowling Alley (L) 5-5-1 Finance/Clerk
$15.00 per
lane
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment (P) 5-6-1 Finance/Clerk $ 20.00
Bill Posting (P) 5-7-2 Finance/Clerk $ 5.00 $ 10.00 $ 25.00 $ 100.00
Circus (L) 5-8-2 Finance/Clerk
$250.00 (nonprofit
sponsor
$125) $ 5,000
General Liability;
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$1,000,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$2,000,000 General Aggregate on above
$2,000,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each Employee
Business Automobile - owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Accident
Permits (P)/Licenses (L) Code Section Location Each Daily Weekly
Fees
Monthly Annually Bond Insurance
Appendix B - Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
(See Appendix D for Building-Related Permit Requirements)
Carnival (L) 5-8-4 Finance/Clerk
$250.00 (nonprofit
sponsor
$125) $ 5,000
General Liability;
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$1,000,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$2,000,000 General Aggregate on above
$2,000,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each Employee
Business Automobile - owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Accident
Pawnbroker (L) 5-9-1 Finance/Clerk $ 100.00 $ 5,000
Peddler (L) 5-10-2 Finance/Clerk $ 25.00 $ 50.00 $ 100.00 $ 2 50.00 $ 5,000
Insurance requirements if on public property
General Liability;
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$1,000,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$2,000,000 General Aggregate on above
$2,000,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each Employee
Business Automobile - owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Accident
Permits (P)/Licenses (L) Code Section Location Each Daily Weekly
Fees
Monthly Annually Bond Insurance
Appendix B - Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
(See Appendix D for Building-Related Permit Requirements)
Solicitor (L) 5-10-2 Finance/Clerk
$15.00 (nonprofit
exempt) $ 5,000
Insurance requirements if on public property
General Liability;
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$1,000,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$2,000,000 General Aggregate on above
$2,000,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each Employee
Business Automobile - owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Accident
Transient Merchant (L) 5-10-2 Finance/Clerk $ 25.00 $ 50.00 $ 100.00 $ 2 50.00 $ 5,000
Insurance requirement if on public property
General Liability;
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$1,000,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$2,000,000 General Aggregate on above
$2,000,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each Employee
Business Automobile - owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Accident
Permits (P)/Licenses (L) Code Section Location Each Daily Weekly
Fees
Monthly Annually Bond Insurance
Appendix B - Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
(See Appendix D for Building-Related Permit Requirements)
Massage Business (L) 5-13-4 Finance/Clerk
$100.00 (3
rooms or
less); $150.00
(more than 3
rooms)
Massage Technician (L) 5-13-6 Finance/Clerk $ 25.00
Taxicab (L) 5-14-3 Finance/Clerk
$50.00 per
vehicle $ 5,000
General Liability;
$500,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Occurrence;
$500,000 Personal Injury & Advertising Injury
Per Occurrence;
$1,000,000 General Aggregate on above
$1,000,000 Products & Completed Operations
General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each Employee
Business Automobile - owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property Damage -
Each Accident
Salvage, Junk Dealers, and Refuse Haulers/Collection
Vehicles (L)
5-15-3 and
5-15-5 Finance/Clerk
$100.00
(business)
plus
$25.00/truck
Ambulance (L) 5-16-2 Finance/Clerk $ 2 50.00
Automobile Liability - owned, non-owned hired
Vehicles 3,000,000 CSL - limit can be met with an
umbrella or excess policy
EMT Professional Liability 1,000,000 Per
Occurrence/2,000,000 Aggregate
Workers Compensation -
part 1 Statutory Benefits
Part 2 - Employers Liabiity Limit 100,000 Bodily
Injury Each Disease/300,000 Bodily Injury Policy
Limit/100,000 Bodily Injury Each Employee
Permits (P)/Licenses (L) Code Section Location Each Daily Weekly
Fees
Monthly Annually Bond Insurance
Appendix B - Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
(See Appendix D for Building-Related Permit Requirements)
Alarm Business (L) 6-2-5 Police $ 100.00
Alarm Agent (L) 6-2-6 Police
$25.00; onetime
fee
Alarm System (P) 6-2-7 Police
$25.00; onetime
fee
Central Station System (L) 6-2-8 Police $ 100.00
Modified Central Station (L) 6-2-9 Police $ 100.00
Telephone Answering Service (L) 6-2-10 Police $ 100.00
Fireworks (P) 6-3-2 & 15-4-1 Fire $ 200.00
$5,000 if on
City
property
Animal Registration/Licenses (L):
Altered 6-8-3(A) Finance/Clerk $ 5.00
Unaltered 6-8-3(A) Finance/Clerk $ 25.00
Senior Owner 65 or over (Altered) 6-8-3(A) Finance/Clerk $ 3.00
Senior Owner 65 or over (Unaltered) 6-8-3(A) Finance/Clerk $ 15.00
Commercial Breeders (L) 6-8-4 Finance/Clerk $ 40.00
Keeping of Pit Bull Dogs (L) 6-9-9 Finance/Clerk
Prohibited
after July 1,
2003
Right-of-Way Parking Request (P) 7-7-4
Community
Development
$50.00
Application fee
plus annual
lease amount
Bicycle License 7-14-1 Police
$1.00 one-time
fee
Building Regulations Permits (P)
Title 8; All
Chapters
Community
Development
See Appendix D
for all Title 8
permits and fees
Permits (P)/Licenses (L) Code Section Location Each Daily Weekly
Fees
Monthly Annually Bond Insurance
Appendix B - Schedule of Permit and Licensing Requirements
(See Appendix D for Building-Related Permit Requirements)
Hauled Wastewater (P) 13-6-3.6
Water Pollution
Control $ 1 00.00
Industrial Wastewater Discharge (P) 13-6-4.2
Water Pollution
Control
$300.00 (for
each permit
period)
Grease Discharge Permit (P) 13-6-16.2 (D)
Community
Development $ 50.00 (Less than $50,000 annual gross sales)
$ 85.00 ($50,000 to less than $100,000)
$ 175.00 ($100,000 to less than $250,000)
$ 200.00 ($250,000 to less than $500,000)
$ 225.00 ($500,000 or more)
Open Burning (P) 15-5-3 Fire
$25.00 for
calendar year
Outdoor Fireplace, Fire Pits, etc. (P) 15-5-3 Fire
Annual
calendar year
permit
required; no
fee
Commercial Burning (Contractor) (P) 15-5-3 Fire
$200.00 for
30-day
period
Appendix C
Schedule of Fees and Charges Approved by Resolution of City Council
Title 13, Chapter 3 – GARBAGE AND RECYCLING
13-3-11 Collection Fees.
Resolution 91540-0211 dated February 17, 2011 established the following monthly fees for
Class I and III domestic refuse collection services effective April 1, 2011:
(A) Class I and III. Twenty dollars and no cents ($20.00) per month for each single-family
dwelling, except persons sixty-five (65) years of age and over shall be charged fifteen
dollars and no cents ($15.00) per month for each single-family dwelling. However, yard
waste fees shall be charged on a per bag basis.
(B) Class I and III. Twenty dollars and no cents ($20.00) per month for each dwelling unit
or apartment unit in a multi-family dwelling or apartment builiding with up to five (5)
units, except persons sixty-five (65) years of age and over shall be charged fifteen
dollars and no cents ($15.00) per month for each dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling
or apartment building with up to five (5) units. However, yard waste fees shall be
charged on a per bag basis.
Title 13, Chapter 4 – SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL LANDFILL AND TRANSFER
STATION
13-4-11 Disposal Charges.
Resolution 90772-0409 dated April 16, 2009 established the following fees effective July 1,
2009:
(A) Refuse disposal fees shall be changed to sixty dollars ($60.00) per ton effective July 1,
2009. Of the refuse disposal fee, forty dollars ($40.00) per ton will be paid from the
Transfer Station Fund to the Landfill Fund for the material deposited in the Landfill.
This landfill rate includes the surcharge required by the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources.
(B) Tires to be disposed of at the Transfer Station shall be at a rate of:
(1) Two dollars ($2.00) per tire for automobile tires;
(2) Two dollars fifty-cents ($2.50) per tire for light truck and implement tires;
(3) Seven dollars ($7.00) per tire for truck tires;
(4) Twelve dollars ($12.00) per tire for tractor tires.
(C) Solid waste which needs special hauling, or where refuse or waste is being disposed of
under a special handling permit issued by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources,
shall be charged a fee of sixty-two dollars ($62.00) per ton.
Appendix C
Schedule of Fees and Charges Approved by Resolution of City Council
Title 13, Chapter 5 – SEWER RATE SYSTEM
13-5-4 Collection and Drainage.
A. From September 1, 2013 through June 30, 2014, $11.20 per bill.
B. From July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015, $11.45 per bill.
C. From July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2016, $11.70 per bill.
D. From July 1, 2016 through June 30, 2017, $11.90 per bill
E. From July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018, $12.15 per bill.
13-5-5 Sewage Rate Component.
A. The sewage rate system shall be determined on the basis of a monthly customer
charge and a sewer user charge for a domestic strength wastewater customer (Class
1 customer). The sewage rate components shall be as follows:
1. From September 1, 2013 through June 30, 2014:
a. Customer charge, $7.06 per bill
b. Volume, $2.42 per 100 cubic feet
2. From July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015:
a. Customer charge, $7.27 per bill
b. Volume, $2.49 per 100 cubic feet
3. From July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2016:
a. Customer charge, $7.49 per bill
b. Volume, $2.57 per 100 cubic feet
4. From July 1, 2016 through June 30, 2017:
a. Customer charge, $7.71 per bill
b. Volume, $2.64 per 100 cubic feet
5. On and after July 1, 2018:
a. Customer charge, $7.94 per bill
b. Volume, $2.72 per 100 cubic feet
6. The minimum charge for service shall be determined based on the customer charge
and the unit rate for up to a minimum quantity of three hundred (300) cubic feet
per month of normal domestic strength wastewater. The minimum charge for
service for each month or fraction thereof shall be:
a. From September 1, 2013 through June 30, 2014, $14.32
b. From July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015, $14.74
c. From July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2016, $15.20
d. From July 1, 2016 through June 30, 2017, $15.63
e. On and after July 1, 2017, $16.10
Appendix C
Schedule of Fees and Charges Approved by Resolution of City Council
Title 13, Chapter 5 – SEWER RATE SYSTEM (CONTINUED)
The minimum charge for sewerage rates as set forth in this Section shall be in addition
to the per bill charge for collection and drainage as set forth in Section 13-5-4.
See City Code section 15-5-5 (B) (2) for rate factors applied to the above domestic sewer
rates based on wastewater strength of non-domestic customers.
13-6-15.1 Pretreatment Charges and Fees.
These fees and charges currently include:
A. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such
applications is $300.
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of
collection and analyzing an industrial user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring
reports submitted by industrial users shall be determined by frequency of service
required and shall follow posted laboratory testing fees for each parameter as
amended. Laboratory fees may be adjusted as needed to reflect cost variables as they
arise. See separate laboratory rates below.
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction
will be based on $50/hour plus any additional labor cost accrued by the City for work
performed in responding to accidental discharges. Review of procedures shall be
included in the permit application process.
D. Fees for the filing and review of appeals shall be $50/hour.
E. Fees for the dumping of hauled wastewater will be $0.03/gallon for standard domestic
discharge and $0.06/gallon for other wastes accepted at the treatment plant.
Hazardous wastes or any wastes not accepted at the treatment plant will be charged
fees as determined by the receiving party.
F. Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained
herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this ordinance and are
separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the City. These fees
shall be determined by the cost of labor for work performed.
13-5-3 (A) Sampling and Analytical Fees.
The sampling and analytical services charges are listed in the following rate sheet.
Muscatine WPCP Laboratory Billing Sheet
Services or Analyses Unit Cost # Total
Miscellaneous Sampler Placement 15.00
Trip Charge 20.00
Sampler Rental 47.00
Routine Analyses % Solids 12.00
% Volatile Solids 12.00
Aldehydes 30.00
Alkalinity 20.00
Ammonia 18.00
BOD, CBOD 20.00
Chlorides 20.00
COD 15.00
Cyanide 40.00
E. coli / Coliform Testing 18.00
Fluoride 20.00
Hex. Chrome 30.00
O&G, Total 40.00
Ortho-Phosphorus 16.00
Nitrites 20.00
Nitrates 20.00
pH 5.00
Phenols 30.00
Phosphorous 27.00
Settleable Solids 5.00
Sulfate 20.00
Sulfides 54.00
Total Dissolved Solids 12.00
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen 20.00
Total Suspended Solids 12.00
Total Volatile Suspended Solid 12.00
Volatile Organic Acids 25.00
Metals Analysis ICP EPA 200.7Metals Digestion 4.00
Copper 12.00
Lead 12.00
Nickel 12.00
Silver 12.00
Zinc 12.00
Chromium 12.00
Arsenic 12.00
Selenium 12.00
Molybdenum 12.00
Cadmium 12.00
Mercury 12.00
Total
Appendix C
Schedule of Fees and Charges Approved by Resolution of City Council
Appendix C
Schedule of Fees and Charges Approved by Resolution of City Council
13-6-2.1 (A)
See Appendix D for permits to make any connections with, or open into, use, alter, or
disturb any public sewer sewer or appurtenance thereof.
Additional sewer connection fees are required in the Sewer Extension Benefit Districts
listed below and shown on the map which follows. More detailed descriptions of the benefit
districts are available in the Community Development department.
1. North Crescent Sanitary Sewer (2013)
Fee: $913.00 per acre
2. Mad Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection (1979)
Fee: $556.00 per acre
3. Dillaway Street Sanitary Sewer Connection (1981)
Fee: $7.85 per lineal foot of lot adjacent to Dillaway
4. Champ De Reves – Tipton Road Sewer Connection (1992)
Fee: $600.00 per dwelling
5. Northeast Sanitary Sewer Connection (1996)
Fee: $357.00 per residential unit
$2,142.00 per acre non-residential (6 units per acre)
6. Northwest Sanitary Sewer Connection (2001)
Fee: $1,370.00 per residential unit
$6,302.00 per acre non-residential (4.6 units per acre)
7. Isett Avenue Sanitary Sewer Connection (1994)
Fee: $500.00 per dwelling
8. Shield Farm / Bethesda Foundation Sewer (1976)
Fee: North side of Mulberry Avenue - $300.00 per connection
South side of Mulberry Avenue - $600.00 per connection
Collected by the City and distributed to original investors within 30
days

Appendix C
Schedule of Fees and Charges Approved by Resolution of City Council
13-6-2.2 Private Sewer Systems.
See Appendix D for Septic Tank, Drain Field, and Private Sewer System permit fees also
referenced in section 8-9-4.
13-6-4.2 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits
See Appendix B for permit fees.
13-6-16.6 Grease Discharge Permits
See Appendix B for permit fees.
Title 15 – FIRE REGULATIONS
15-13-2 Fire Inspection Fees
Fire Inspection and Non-Compliance Fees:
Occupancy Classification Group A, B, E, I, M, S, U
Type Fee
Initial Inspection $45.00
1st Reinspection No Charge (Performed 30 days after initial inspection)
2nd Reinspection $50.00
3rd or More Reinspection $100.00
Occupancy Classification Group F, H
Type Fee
Initial Inspection $75.00 per hour
1st Reinspection No Charge (Performed 30 days after initial inspection)
2nd or More Reinspection $75.00 per hour
Permits Code Section Location Each Bond Insurance
Non-Residential Permits:
Building Permit 8-1-3 Community Development See Schedule 1A
Electrical Permit 8-3-4 Community Development See Schedule 1A
Mechanical Permit 8-7-4 Community Development See Schedule 1A
Plumbing Permit 8-9-4 Community Development See Schedule 1A
Residential Permits:
Building Permit 8-1-3 Community Development See Schedule 1A
Electrical: 8-3-4 Community Development
Service $ 25.00
Temporary Service $ 15.00
Rough-in Inspection $ 15.00
Final Inspection $ 15.00
Garage $ 15.00
Mechanical: 8-7-4 Community Development
Furnace $ 20.00
Central Air $ 20.00
Fireplace $ 20.00
Plumbing: 8-9-4
Opening 8-9-4 Community Development $ 5.00
Sewer Connection 13-6-2.1 Community Development $ 25.00
Septic Tank 13-6-2.2 Community Development $ 25.00
Drain Field 13-6-2.2 Community Development $ 15.00
Private Sewer 13-6-2.2 Community Development
Fee determined
during site plan
review
Appendix D (1) - Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other Requirements
Permits Code Section Location Each Bond Insurance
Appendix D (1) - Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other Requirements
Rental Housing Registration, Inspection, and Related Fees:
Rental Property or Unit Registration 8-5-4 (A) Community Development
$30.00 per rental
unit annually
Rental Property Certificate of Code Compliance: 8-5-4 (D) Community Development
3-Year Certificate
(no additional fee)
Inspection for Year 1 included in Registration Fee
Self-Inspections Certified by Property
Owners for Years 2 and 3
Reinspection Fees:
1st Reinspection 8-5-4 (E) No Fee
2nd Reinspection 8-5-4 (E) $ 60.00
3rd Reinspection 8-5-4 (E) $ 120.00
Other Fees:
Failure to Show for Scheduled Inspection 8-5-4 (E) $ 60.00
License Revocation Reinstatement Fee 8-5-4 (E) $ 200.00
Citation for Non-Registered Unit - 1st Violation 8-5-4 (A) (1) $ 250.00
Citation for Non-Registered Unit - 2nd Violation 8-5-4 (A) (1) $ 500.00
Citation for Non-Registered Unit - 3rd Violation 8-5-4 (A) (1) $ 750.00
Fees for Excessive Use of City Services 8-5-4 (E)
Based on cost of
excessive services
Permits Code Section Location Each Bond Insurance
Appendix D (1) - Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other Requirements
Other Permits:
Moving Buildings 8-8-2 Community Development
Use Schedule 1A
(Based on cost of
moving) $ 5,000
General Liability;
$500,000 Bodily Injury & Property
Damage - Each Occurrence;
$500,000 Personal Injury & Advertising
Injury Per Occurrence;
$1,000,000 General Aggregate on
above
$1,000,000 Products & Completed
Operations General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each
Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease
Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each
Employee
Business Automobile - owned,
non-owned and hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property
Damage - Each Accident
Permits Code Section Location Each Bond Insurance
Appendix D (1) - Schedule of Building-Related Permits and Other Requirements
Building Demolition
8-2-2 and
8-2-5 Community Development
Use Schedule 1A
(Based on cost of
demolition) $ 5,000
General Liability;
$500,000 Bodily Injury & Property
Damage - Each Occurrence;
$500,000 Personal Injury & Advertising
Injury Per Occurrence;
$1,000,000 General Aggregate on
above
$1,000,000 Products & Completed
Operations General Aggregate
Workers Compensation
Part 1 -Workers Compenation Benefits
Part 2 Employers Liability
Limits $100,000 Bodily Injury Each
Accident
$300,000 Bodily Injury by Disease
Policy Limit
$100,000 Bodily Injury Disease Each
Employee
Business Automobile - owned,
non-owned and hired automobiles
$1,000,000 Bodily Injury & Property
Damage - Each Accident
Appendix D (1)
Schedule of Building-Related Permit and Other Requirements
Fees Effective Fees Effective
From: To: 5/1/2005 From: To: 5/1/2005
$ 1.00 $ 500.00 $ 18.00 $ 43,001.00 $ 44,000.00 $ 473.00
$ 501.00 $ 600.00 21.00 $ 44,001.00 $ 45,000.00 482.00
$ 601.00 $ 700.00 25.00 $ 45,001.00 $ 46,000.00 490.00
$ 701.00 $ 800.00 27.00 $ 46,001.00 $ 47,000.00 498.00
$ 801.00 $ 900.00 29.00 $ 47,001.00 $ 48,000.00 507.00
$ 901.00 $ 1,000.00 31.00 $ 48,001.00 $ 49,000.00 514.00
$ 1,001.00 $ 1,100.00 33.00 $ 49,001.00 $ 50,000.00 523.00
$ 1,101.00 $ 1,200.00 36.00 $ 50,001.00 $ 51,000.00 528.00
$ 1,201.00 $ 1,300.00 39.00 $ 51,001.00 $ 52,000.00 534.00
$ 1,301.00 $ 1,400.00 42.00 $ 52,001.00 $ 53,000.00 539.00
$ 1,401.00 $ 1,500.00 44.00 $ 53,001.00 $ 54,000.00 544.00
$ 1,501.00 $ 1,600.00 46.00 $ 54,001.00 $ 55,000.00 551.00
$ 1,601.00 $ 1,700.00 49.00 $ 55,001.00 $ 56,000.00 556.00
$ 1,701.00 $ 1,800.00 52.00 $ 56,001.00 $ 57,000.00 563.00
$ 1,801.00 $ 1,900.00 54.00 $ 57,001.00 $ 58,000.00 568.00
$ 1,901.00 $ 2,000.00 57.00 $ 58,001.00 $ 59,000.00 572.00
$ 2,001.00 $ 3,000.00 68.00 $ 59,001.00 $ 60,000.00 579.00
$ 3,001.00 $ 4,000.00 79.00 $ 60,001.00 $ 61,000.00 584.00
$ 4,001.00 $ 5,000.00 91.00 $ 61,001.00 $ 62,000.00 590.00
$ 5,001.00 $ 6,000.00 102.00 $ 62,001.00 $ 63,000.00 596.00
$ 6,001.00 $ 7,000.00 113.00 $ 63,001.00 $ 64,000.00 602.00
$ 7,001.00 $ 8,000.00 125.00 $ 64,001.00 $ 65,000.00 608.00
$ 8,001.00 $ 9,000.00 136.00 $ 65,001.00 $ 66,000.00 612.00
$ 9,001.00 $ 10,000.00 147.00 $ 66,001.00 $ 67,000.00 618.00
$ 10,001.00 $ 11,000.00 159.00 $ 67,001.00 $ 68,000.00 624.00
$ 11,001.00 $ 12,000.00 171.00 $ 68,001.00 $ 69,000.00 630.00
$ 12,001.00 $ 13,000.00 181.00 $ 69,001.00 $ 70,000.00 636.00
$ 13,001.00 $ 14,000.00 192.00 $ 70,001.00 $ 71,000.00 642.00
$ 14,001.00 $ 15,000.00 204.00 $ 71,001.00 $ 72,000.00 647.00
$ 15,001.00 $ 16,000.00 216.00 $ 72,001.00 $ 73,000.00 652.00
$ 16,001.00 $ 17,000.00 227.00 $ 73,001.00 $ 74,000.00 658.00
$ 17,001.00 $ 18,000.00 238.00 $ 74,001.00 $ 75,000.00 664.00
$ 18,001.00 $ 19,000.00 249.00 $ 75,001.00 $ 76,000.00 670.00
$ 19,001.00 $ 20,000.00 261.00 $ 76,001.00 $ 77,000.00 675.00
$ 20,001.00 $ 21,000.00 272.00 $ 77,001.00 $ 78,000.00 681.00
$ 21,001.00 $ 22,000.00 283.00 $ 78,001.00 $ 79,000.00 687.00
$ 22,001.00 $ 23,000.00 295.00 $ 79,001.00 $ 80,000.00 691.00
$ 23,001.00 $ 24,000.00 306.00 $ 80,001.00 $ 81,000.00 698.00
$ 24,001.00 $ 25,000.00 318.00 $ 81,001.00 $ 82,000.00 703.00
$ 25,001.00 $ 26,000.00 325.00 $ 82,001.00 $ 83,000.00 710.00
$ 26,001.00 $ 27,000.00 334.00 $ 83,001.00 $ 84,000.00 715.00
$ 27,001.00 $ 28,000.00 341.00 $ 84,001.00 $ 85,000.00 720.00
$ 28,001.00 $ 29,000.00 350.00 $ 85,001.00 $ 86,000.00 727.00
$ 29,001.00 $ 30,000.00 359.00 $ 86,001.00 $ 87,000.00 731.00
City of Muscatine, Iowa
Building Permit Fee Schedule
Schedule 1-A
Effective 5-1-2005
Appendix D (1)
Schedule of Building-Related Permit and Other Requirements
$ 30,001.00 $ 31,000.00 366.00 $ 87,001.00 $ 88,000.00 738.00
$ 31,001.00 $ 32,000.00 375.00 $ 88,001.00 $ 89,000.00 743.00
$ 32,001.00 $ 33,000.00 382.00 $ 89,001.00 $ 90,000.00 748.00
$ 33,001.00 $ 34,000.00 391.00 $ 90,001.00 $ 91,000.00 755.00
$ 34,001.00 $ 35,000.00 399.00 $ 91,001.00 $ 92,000.00 760.00
$ 35,001.00 $ 36,000.00 407.00 $ 92,001.00 $ 93,000.00 767.00
$ 36,001.00 $ 37,000.00 415.00 $ 93,001.00 $ 94,000.00 772.00
$ 37,001.00 $ 38,000.00 423.00 $ 94,001.00 $ 95,000.00 777.00
$ 38,001.00 $ 39,000.00 432.00 $ 95,001.00 $ 96,000.00 783.00
$ 39,001.00 $ 40,000.00 440.00 $ 96,001.00 $ 97,000.00 788.00
$ 40,001.00 $ 41,000.00 448.00 $ 97,001.00 $ 98,000.00 794.00
$ 41,001.00 $ 42,000.00 457.00 $ 98,001.00 $ 99,000.00 800.00
$ 42,001.00 $ 43,000.00 465.00 $ 99,001.00 $ 100,000.00 806.00
$ 100,000.00 and over $ 806.00
Plus $3.50 per
$1,000 over $100,000
Permits and Fees Code Section Location Each
Planning and Zoning Filing Fees:
Rezoning Application Title 10 Community Development $ 200.00
Subdivision Requests Title 11 Community Development
$200.00 plus $25.00
per lot
Public Right-of-Way Vacation Requests Title 10 Community Development $ 200.00
Zoning Board of Adjustment Fees:
Variance Request Title 10 Community Development $ 150.00
Conditional Use Request Title 10 Community Development $ 200.00
Other Permits and Fees:
Sign Permits Title 10 Community Development $ 50.00
Site Plan Review Title 10 Community Development $ 100.00
Handicap Review Title 10 Community Development $ 50.00
Appendix D (2) - Schedule of Title 10 and 11 Zoning, Subdivision, and Related Fees
INDEX
SECTION
Abandoned Vehicles
Definitions .............................................................................. 7-13-1
Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicle ....................... 7-13-2
Notice by Mail .......................................................................... 7-13-3
Notification in Newspaper .......................................................... 7-13-4
Fees for Impoundment .............................................................. 7-13-5
Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles ................................................. 7-13-6
Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles ........................................ 7-13-7
Proceeds from Sales ................................................................. 7-13-8
Duties of Demolisher ................................................................ 7-13-9
Ad Hoc Committees and Task Forces
Authority to Form Ad Hoc Committees and Task Forces ................. 2-10-1
Appointment ........................................................................... 2-10-2
Council to Establish Duties ........................................................ 2-10-3
Governing Rules and Procedures ................................................ 2-10-4
Authority to Refer .................................................................... 2-10-5
Recommendations to Council ..................................................... 2-10-6
Authority of Council; Generally ................................................... 2-10-7
Addressing
Numbers Required ................................................................... 8-6-1
Location of Numbers ................................................................. 8-6-2
Numbers Obtained from the Community Development Department . 8-6-3
Material; Size .......................................................................... 8-6-4
Allowing Buildings Without Numbers ........................................... 8-6-5
Failure to Comply ..................................................................... 8-6-6
Numbers Designated ................................................................ 8-6-7
System; Base Lines .................................................................. 8-6-8
Numbers Assigned ................................................................... 8-6-9
Street Names .......................................................................... 8-6-10
Parking Violations; Simple Notice of Fine ..................................... 7-1-10
Presumption in Reference to Parking Violations ............................ 7-1-11
Impounding Vehicles ................................................................ 7-1-12
Airport Advisory Commission
Creation ................................................................................. 2-1-1
Number of Members ................................................................. 2-1-2
Appointment ........................................................................... 2-1-3
Ex-officio Members ................................................................... 2-1-4
Officers .................................................................................. 2-1-5
Term Duration and Limits .......................................................... 2-1-6
Removal – Vacancies ................................................................ 2-1-7
INDEX
SECTION
Residence Requirements ........................................................... 2-1-8
Responsibilities and Duties ........................................................ 2-1-9
Alarm Regulations
General Provision
Purpose .................................................................................. 6-2-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 6-2-2
Automatic Protection Devices ..................................................... 6-2-3
Alarm System Restrictions ......................................................... 6-2-4
Licensing Requirements and Procedures
Alarm Business -- License Required ............................................ 6-2-5
Alarm Agent -- License Required ................................................ 6-2-6
Alarm System -- Permit Required ............................................... 6-2-7
Central Station System -- License Required ................................. 6-2-8
Modified Central Station -- License Required ................................ 6-2-9
Telephone Answering Service -- License Required ......................... 6-2-10
License and Permit Applications and Fees .................................... 6-2-11
License and Permit Renewal, Modifications ................................... 6-2-12
Issuance of License, Permit, or Renewal ...................................... 6-2-13
Revocation and Suspension of Licenses and Permits ...................... 6-2-14
Notice of Decision .................................................................... 6-2-15
Appeal Notice .......................................................................... 6-2-16
Appeal Procedure ..................................................................... 6-2-17
Business License Tax ................................................................ 6-2-18
Posting of Licenses and Permits.................................................. 6-2-19
Transfer of License or Permit Prohibited ...................................... 6-2-20
Failure to Pay Ad Valorem Taxes ................................................ 6-2-21
Service Available ...................................................................... 6-2-22
Responsibility for Alarm Response .............................................. 6-2-23
Enforcement and Administration
Generally ................................................................................ 6-2-24
Testing of Equipment ................................................................ 6-2-25
False Fire Alarms ..................................................................... 6-2-26
False Police Alarms ................................................................... 6-2-27
Change of Location ................................................................... 6-2-28
Regulation of Charges ............................................................... 6-2-29
Liability of the City Limited ......................................................... 6-2-30
Conflict of Interest Prohibited .................................................... 6-2-31
Violations and Penalties ............................................................ 6-2-32
INDEX
SECTION
Alcohol Control
Article A: Liquor, Wine, and Beer Permits and Licenses
Application, License, and Permit Requirement .............................. 5-2-1
General Prohibition ................................................................... 5-2-2
Investigation ........................................................................... 5-2-3
Action by Council ..................................................................... 5-2-4
Prohibited Sales and Acts of License or Permit Holder .................... 5-2-5
Article B: Prohibited Acts Generally
Amateur Fighting and Boxing ..................................................... 5-2-6
Consumption in Public Places; Possession of Open Containers;
Intoxication .......................................................................... 5-2-7
Persons Under Legal Age ........................................................... 5-2-8
Persons Under the Legal Age in Licensed or Permitted Establishments 5-2-9
Dancing Permitted; License ....................................................... 5-2-10
Removal from Licensed or Permitted Premises Prohibited ................ 5-2-11
Article C: Penalties
Penalties ................................................................................. 5-2-12
Ambulance Service License
Definitions .............................................................................. 5-16-1
License and Fee Required .......................................................... 5-16-2
Exemptions ............................................................................. 5-16-3
Application for License .............................................................. 5-16-4
Criteria for License ................................................................... 5-16-5
Standards for Ambulance Service ............................................... 5-16-6
Liability Insurance .................................................................... 5-16-7
Revocation of License ............................................................... 5-16-8
Fees for Assistance ................................................................... 5-16-9
Amusements
Definitions .............................................................................. 5-4-1
License Required ...................................................................... 5-4-2
Duration of License .................................................................. 5-4-3
Fire Inspections ....................................................................... 5-4-4
Animal Regulations
Definitions .............................................................................. 6-8-1
Vaccination and Identification Required ....................................... 6-8-2
Registration and License ........................................................... 6-8-3
Commercial Breeders ................................................................ 6-8-4
Actions Constituting a Nuisance .................................................. 6-8-5
At Large Prohibited ................................................................... 6-8-6
INDEX
SECTION
Impoundment, Notice, Disposition .............................................. 6-8-7
Animal Care ............................................................................ 6-8-8
Rabies Suspects and Animal Bites ............................................... 6-8-9
Vicious Animals; Guard or Attack Dogs ........................................ 6-8-10
Dogs in Heat ........................................................................... 6-8-11
Keeping of Dangerous Animals ................................................... 6-8-12
Seizure, Impoundment, and Disposition of Dangerous Animals ....... 6-8-13
Penalties ................................................................................. 6-8-14
Exemption for Police Service Dogs (K9s). .................................... 6-8-15
Art Center Board of Trustees
Creation ................................................................................. 2-6-1
Number of Members ................................................................. 2-6-2
Appointment ........................................................................... 2-6-3
Ex-officio Member .................................................................... 2-6-4
Term Duration and Limits .......................................................... 2-6-5
Removal – Vacancies ................................................................ 2-6-6
Residence Requirements ........................................................... 2-6-7
Responsibilities and Duties ........................................................ 2-6-8
Establishment of Art Center ....................................................... 2-6-9
Bicycles
Registration Required ............................................................... 7-14-1
Application .............................................................................. 7-14-2
License Type ........................................................................... 7-14-3
Second Hand Sales Report ........................................................ 7-14-4
Destroying Frame Number or License .......................................... 7-14-5
Lost or Destroyed License ......................................................... 7-14-6
License Fees ............................................................................ 7-14-7
Riding on Sidewalks ................................................................. 7-14-8
Parking on Sidewalks (Business District) ...................................... 7-14-9
Number of Persons ................................................................... 7-14-10
Riding Two Abreast .................................................................. 7-14-11
Method of Riding; Rate of Speed ................................................ 7-14-12
Lamps: Reflective Devices ......................................................... 7-14-13
Traffic Regulations ................................................................... 7-14-14
Bill Posting
Definitions .............................................................................. 5-7-1
Permit Required ....................................................................... 5-7-2
Requirements .......................................................................... 5-7-3
Merchants Requirements ........................................................... 5-7-4
Billposters, Restrictions ............................................................. 5-7-5
Consent Required ..................................................................... 5-7-6
INDEX
SECTION
Use of Nails or Tacks ................................................................ 5-7-7
Removal ................................................................................. 5-7-8
Billiards; Bowling
License Required ...................................................................... 5-5-1
Application .............................................................................. 5-5-2
Display of License .................................................................... 5-5-3
Gambling ................................................................................ 5-5-4
Exemption .............................................................................. 5-5-5
Fire and Building Inspections ..................................................... 5-5-6
Board of Water, Electric and Communications Trustees
Creation ................................................................................. 2-8-1
Number of Members ................................................................. 2-8-2
Appointment ........................................................................... 2-8-3
Term Duration and Limits .......................................................... 2-8-4
Compensation ......................................................................... 2-8-5
Removal – Vacancies ................................................................ 2-8-6
Trustee Requirements ............................................................... 2-8-7
Responsibilities and Duties ........................................................ 2-8-8
Building Code
Adoption of Code ..................................................................... 8-1-1
Building Official ........................................................................ 8-1-2
Building Permits ....................................................................... 8-1-3
Amendments ........................................................................... 8-1-4
Reserved ................................................................................ 8-1-5
Reserved ................................................................................ 8-1-6
Applicability ............................................................................ 8-1-7
Violation ................................................................................. 8-1-8
Business Licenses Generally
License Required .................................................................... 5-1-1
Application Fees, Bonds, and Insurance Requirements ................ 5-1-2
Application for License ............................................................ 5-1-3
Issuance of License ................................................................ 5-1-4
Record of Licenses ................................................................. 5-1-5
Transferability; Changes in Location ......................................... 5-1-6
License Suspension or Revocation ............................................ 5-1-7
Hearing................................................................................. 5-1-8
Cable Television Systems ........................................................... 14-2-1
INDEX
SECTION
Cemeteries; City
Scope ..................................................................................... 3-6-1
Trusteeship ............................................................................. 3-6-2
Records .................................................................................. 3-6-3
Sale of Interment Rights ........................................................... 3-6-4
Rules and Regulations............................................................... 3-6-5
Perpetual Care ......................................................................... 3-6-6
Cigarette and Tobacco Permits
Definitions .............................................................................. 5-3-1
Permit Required ....................................................................... 5-3-2
Application .............................................................................. 5-3-3
Fees ....................................................................................... 5-3-4
Application; Approval of ............................................................ 5-3-5
Mayor to Sign Permit; Term ....................................................... 5-3-6
Reporting ................................................................................ 5-3-7
Refunds .................................................................................. 5-3-8
Persons Underage .................................................................... 5-3-9
Permit Revocation .................................................................... 5-3-10
Circuses; Carnivals
Definitions .............................................................................. 5-8-1
License Required; Circus ........................................................... 5-8-2
Circus License; Fee .................................................................. 5-8-3
License Required; Carnival ........................................................ 5-8-4
Carnival License; Fee ................................................................ 5-8-5
Right of Entry for Inspection ...................................................... 5-8-6
Public Property ........................................................................ 5-8-7
Amusement Rides; State Reports and Permits Required ................. 5-8-8
City Boundaries
Designation of Boundaries ......................................................... 1-4-1
Boundaries; Record of .............................................................. 1-4-2
City Charter
Purpose .................................................................................. 1-1-1
Charter ................................................................................... 1-1-2
Form of Government ................................................................ 1-1-3
Powers and Duties ................................................................... 1-1-4
Number and Term of Council .................................................... 1-1-5
Term of Mayor ........................................................................ 1-1-6
Copies on File ......................................................................... 1-1-7
INDEX
SECTION
City Code
Title ......................................................................................... 1-2-1
Definitions ................................................................................. 1-2-2
Rules of Construction .................................................................. 1-2-3
Severability ................................................................................ 1-2-4
City Powers ................................................................................ 1-2-5
Indemnity .................................................................................. 1-2-6
Personal Injuries ......................................................................... 1-2-7
Extension of Authority ................................................................. 1-2-8
Amendments .............................................................................. 1-2-9
Catchlines and Notes ................................................................... 1-2-10
Altering Codes ............................................................................ 1-2-11
Warrants ................................................................................... 1-2-12
General Standards for Action ........................................................ 1-2-13
Standard Penalty ........................................................................ 1-2-14
Appendix to this Code of Ordinances ............................................. 1-2-15
City Departments
Departments Created ............................................................... 1-11-1
Department Heads; Appointment and Removal ............................ 1-11-2
Duties .................................................................................... 1-11-3
Other Departments .................................................................. 1-11-4
Creation of New Departments .................................................... 1-11-5
City Officers and Employees
Bond Requirements and Amounts ............................................... 1-10-1
City Administrator; Clerk ........................................................... 1-10-2
City Attorney ........................................................................... 1-10-3
Succession requirements ........................................................... 1-10-4
Civil Service Commission
Creation ................................................................................. 2-2-1
Applicability ........................................................................... 2-2-2
Qualifications .......................................................................... 2-2-3
Number of Members ................................................................. 2-2-4
Appointment ........................................................................... 2-2-5
Term Duration and Limits .......................................................... 2-2-6
Officers .................................................................................. 2-2-7
Ex-Officio Members .................................................................. 2-2-8
Vacancies ............................................................................... 2-2-9
Responsibilities and Duties ........................................................ 2-2-10
INDEX
SECTION
Controlled Access Facility
Exercise of Police Power ............................................................ 7-3-1
Definition ................................................................................ 7-3-2
Exceptions .............................................................................. 7-3-3
Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility ..................................... 7-3-4
Council
Number and Term of Years ........................................................ 1-9-1
Powers and Duties of the Council ................................................ 1-9-2
Exercise of Powers ................................................................... 1-9-3
Salary of Council Members ........................................................ 1-9-4
Meetings of City Council ............................................................ 1-9-5
Qualifications of Council Members ............................................... 1-9-6
Vacancies ............................................................................... 1-9-7
Removal of Council Members ..................................................... 1-9-8
Demolition of Buildings
Permit Required ....................................................................... 8-2-1
Permit Application .................................................................... 8-2-2
Supervision of Work ................................................................. 8-2-3
Condition of Site ...................................................................... 8-2-4
Requirements .......................................................................... 8-2-5
Drawings for Certain Buildings .................................................... 8-2-6
Aprons, Canopies, Streets, and Sidewalks .................................... 8-2-7
Time ...................................................................................... 8-2-8
Adjacent Frontage Consents ...................................................... 8-2-9
Party Walls .............................................................................. 8-2-10
Night Work.............................................................................. 8-2-11
Exemption .............................................................................. 8-2-12
Burning .................................................................................. 8-2-13
Elections
Municipal Elections ................................................................... 1-6-1
Offices to be Filled .................................................................... 1-6-2
Nominating Method to be Used .................................................. 1-6-3
Nomination by Petition .............................................................. 1-6-4
Adding Name by Petition ........................................................... 1-6-5
Preparation of Petition and Affidavit ............................................ 1-6-6
Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections ............................... 1-6-7
Persons Elected ....................................................................... 1-6-8
Permanent Registration ............................................................. 1-6-9
Use of Public Resources for Political Purposes Prohibited ................ 1-6-10
INDEX
SECTION
Electrical Code
Adoption of Code ..................................................................... 8-3-1
Supplemental Electrical Regulations ............................................ 8-3-2
Plans and Specifications ............................................................ 8-3-3
Permits ................................................................................... 8-3-4
Inspections ............................................................................. 8-3-5
Turning Off Electric Current ....................................................... 8-3-6
Connection to Power Source ...................................................... 8-3-7
Explosives
Explosives ............................................................................... 15-4-1
Storage Requirements, Explosive Gunpowder ............................... 15-4-2
Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Storage
of Explosives and Blasting Agents is to be Prohibited .................. 15-4-3
Fire Department
Establishment and Purpose ........................................................ 15-1-1
Organization ............................................................................. 15-1-2
Duties .................................................................................... 15-1-3
Departmental Authority ............................................................ 15-1-4
False Information ..................................................................... 15-1-5
Outside City Limits ................................................................... 15-1-6
Priorities ................................................................................. 15-1-7
Fire in Public Places; Notice ....................................................... 15-1-7
Required Training ..................................................................... 15-1-8
Fire Inspections
Inspections ............................................................................. 15-3-1
Fees ....................................................................................... 15-3-2
Notice of Violation .................................................................... 15-3-3
Nationally Recognized Standards ................................................ 15-3-4
Alternate Materials and Methods ................................................. 15-3-5
Technical Assistance ................................................................. 15-3-6
Liability .................................................................................. 15-3-7
Knox Box; Requirements, Definition, and Costs ............................ 15-3-8
Validity ................................................................................... 15-3-9
Fire Prevention Codes
Adoption of Fire Prevention Codes .............................................. 15-2-1
Establishment and Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention .................. 15-2-2
Definitions .............................................................................. 15-2-3
Amendments Made in the International Fire Code ......................... 15-2-4
INDEX
SECTION
Appeals .................................................................................. 15-2-5
Penalties ................................................................................. 15-2-6
Hazardous Materials ................................................................. 15-2-7
Fiscal Management
Purpose .................................................................................. 1-12-1
Fiscal Year ............................................................................. 1-12-2
Finance Director ......................................................................... 1-12-3
Cash Control ........................................................................... 1-12-4
Fund Control .............................................................................. 1-12-5
Operating Budget Preparation....................................................... 1-12-6
Budget Amendments ................................................................ 1-12-7
Accounting .............................................................................. 1-12-8
Financial Reports ........................................................................ 1-12-9
Bidding and Requests for Proposals .............................................. 1-12-10
Flood Channel FC (Floodway) District
Intent and Purpose ................................................................... 10-5-1
District Boundaries ................................................................... 10-5-2
General Provisions ................................................................... 10-5-3
Permissive Uses ....................................................................... 10-5-4
Conditional Uses ...................................................................... 10-5-5
Responsibility for Studies .......................................................... 10-5-6
Administration ......................................................................... 10-5-7
Definitions .............................................................................. 10-5-8
Flood Plain FP District
Intent and Purpose ................................................................... 10-4-1
District Boundaries ................................................................... 10-4-2
General Provisions ................................................................... 10-4-3
Permissive Uses ....................................................................... 10-4-4
Conditional Uses ...................................................................... 10-4-5
Height, Area, Parking Requirements ............................................ 10-4-6
Flood Control Manual ................................................................ 10-4-7
Administration ......................................................................... 10-4-8
Definitions .............................................................................. 10-4-9
Fuel Gas Code
Fuel Gas Code ......................................................................... 8-4-1
Enforcement ............................................................................ 8-4-2
INDEX
SECTION
Garbage and Recycling Collection
Definitions .............................................................................. 13-3-1
Sanitation District .................................................................... 13-3-2
Deposit, Accumulation, and Burning ............................................ 13-3-3
Preparation of Refuse and Recycling for Collection ........................ 13-3-4
Refuse Containers .................................................................... 13-3-5
Removal of Container Lids ......................................................... 13-3-6
Cleaning of Containers .............................................................. 13-3-7
Prohibited Materials .................................................................. 13-3-8
Containers – Location ............................................................... 13-3-9
Collection of Refuse and Recycling .............................................. 13-3-10
Collection Fees ........................................................................ 13-3-11
Notice of Multiple Dwellings ....................................................... 13-3-12
Violation Declared Nuisance ....................................................... 13-3-13
Responsibility of Owner to Terminate Service ............................... 13-3-14
Assessment of Unpaid Charges .................................................. 13-3-15
Preparation of Delinquent List .................................................... 13-3-16
Gas Franchise
Granting of Franchise ............................................................... 14-1-1
Non-Exclusive .......................................................................... 14-1-2
General Offenses
Penalty ................................................................................... 6-3-1
Firecrackers; Explosives ............................................................ 6-3-2
False Information as to Incendiary Devices ...................................................... 6-3-3
False Reports to or Communications with Public Safety Entities ..................... 6-3-4
Threats of Incendiary or Explosive Devises ...................................................... 6-3-5
Assault ............................................................................................................... 6-3-6
Theft .................................................................................................................. 6-3-7
Criminal Mischief .............................................................................................. 6-3-8
Defacing Notices ............................................................................................... 6-3-9
Trespass ............................................................................................................. 6-3-10
Obstructing Public Officials .............................................................................. 6-3-11
Drug Paraphernalia ............................................................................................ 6-3-12
Disorderly Conduct ........................................................................................... 6-3-13
Permitting Disorderly Conduct .......................................................................... 6-3-14
Urinating or Defecating ..................................................................................... 6-3-15
Unlawful Assembly ........................................................................................... 6-3-16
Failure to Disperse ............................................................................................. 6-3-17
INDEX
SECTION
Nudity .................................................................................... 6-3-18
Police Dogs; Willful Mistreatment- Interference ............................ 6-3-19
Weapons ................................................................................ 6-3-20
Graffiti
Definitions .............................................................................. 6-4-1
Graffiti Prohibited ..................................................................... 6-4-2
Graffiti Declared a Nuisance ....................................................... 6-4-3
Implements of Graffiti – Restrictions ........................................... 6-4-4
Penalties ................................................................................. 6-4-5
Health and Sanitary Regulations
Food Establishments and Hotel Sanitation .................................... 9-1
Health Regulations ................................................................... 9-2
Historic Preservation Commission
Purpose .................................................................................. 2-4-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 2-4-2
Muscatine Historic Preservation Commission ................................ 2-4-3
Appointment and Terms ............................................................ 2-4-4
Removal/Vacancies .................................................................. 2-4-5
Qualifications .......................................................................... 2-4-6
Compensation ......................................................................... 2-4-7
Chairperson and Secretary ........................................................ 2-4-8
Meetings and Quorum ............................................................... 2-4-9
Responsibilities and Duties ........................................................ 2-4-10
Hotel-Motel Tax
Definitions .............................................................................. 4-1-1
Imposition of Tax ..................................................................... 4-1-2
Exemptions ............................................................................. 4-1-3
Housing Code
Title, Scope, and Enforcement ................................................... 8-5-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 8-5-2
Permits and Inspection ............................................................. 8-5-3
Registration and Inspections of Rental Properties .......................... 8-5-4
Minimum Structural Standards for All Dwellings ............................ 8-5-5
Minimum Structural Standards for All Rental Housing .................... 8-5-6
Owners Responsibilities ............................................................. 8-5-7
Occupants Responsibilities ......................................................... 8-5-8
Substandard Buildings .............................................................. 8-5-9
INDEX
SECTION
Notices and Orders of Building Official ......................................... 8-5-10
Appeals .................................................................................. 8-5-11
Procedures for Conduct of Hearing Appeals .................................. 8-5-12
Enforcement of Orders from Building Official or Board of Appeals .... 8-5-13
Performance of Demolition and Cost Recovery .............................. 8-5-14
Industrial Property; Value Added Exemption
Partial Exemption ..................................................................... 4-2-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 4-2-2
Amount Eligible for Partial Exemption .......................................... 4-2-3
Duration of Partial Exemption .................................................... 4-2-4
Assessment of Restriction.......................................................... 4-2-5
Application .............................................................................. 4-2-6
Repeal .................................................................................... 4-2-7
Dual Exemptions Prohibited ....................................................... 4-2-8
Levees
Permit Required ....................................................................... 3-8-1
Application .............................................................................. 3-8-2
Fees ....................................................................................... 3-8-3
Approval of Use ....................................................................... 3-8-4
New Permit ............................................................................. 3-8-5
Injuring or Diverting – Damages ................................................ 3-8-6
Anchoring, Mooring or Tying-up Along Riverbank .......................... 3-8-7
Penalty ................................................................................... 3-8-8
Library Board of Trustees
Creation ................................................................................. 2-5-1
Appointment ........................................................................... 2-5-2
Terms .................................................................................... 2-5-3
Removal – Vacancies ................................................................ 2-5-4
Residence Requirements ........................................................... 2-5-5
Powers and Duties ................................................................... 2-5-6
Power to Contract with Others for the Use of the Library ................ 2-5-7
Termination of Contracts ........................................................... 2-5-8
Library Account........................................................................ 2-5-9
Report .................................................................................... 2-5-10
Injury to Books or Property ....................................................... 2-5-11
Theft ...................................................................................... 2-5-12
Notice; Failure to Return and Detention ....................................... 2-5-13
Violation ................................................................................. 2-5-14
INDEX
SECTION
Load and Weight Restrictions
Weight Embargo ...................................................................... 7-11-1
Signs Posted ........................................................................... 7-11-2
Load Limits Upon Certain Streets ................................................ 7-11-3
Exceptions .............................................................................. 7-11-4
Permits for Excess Size and Weight ............................................ 7-11-5
Truck Routes .......................................................................... 7-11-6
Employer’s Responsibility .......................................................... 7-11-7
Violation ................................................................................. 7-11-8
Loading and Unloading Zones
Curb Loading Zones.................................................................. 7-8-1
Curb Painted Yellow .................................................................. 7-8-2
Standing in Loading Zone .......................................................... 7-8-3
Public Carrier Stops and Stands ................................................. 7-8-4
Parking of Buses and Taxicabs ................................................... 7-8-5
Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands ................................................... 7-8-6
Massage Establishments and Technicians
Definitions .............................................................................. 5-13-1
Compliance with Chapter Required ............................................. 5-13-2
Exemptions ............................................................................. 5-13-3
Licenses for Massage Business ................................................... 5-13-4
Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of License ............................... 5-13-5
Massage Technician License ....................................................... 5-13-6
Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of Massage Technician Licenses .. 5-13-7
Health Standards ..................................................................... 5-13-8
Unlawful Acts .......................................................................... 5-13-9
Mayor
T erm of Office ................................................................................. 1-7-1
Powers and Duties of the Mayor ......................................................... 1-7-2
Compensation .................................................................................... 1-7-3
Voting ................................................................................................ 1-7-4
Qualifications of the Mayor ................................................................... 1-7-5
Removal of the Mayor ......................................................................... 1-7-6
Mayor Pro Tem
Vice President of Council ........................................................... 1-8-1
Powers and Duties ................................................................... 1-8-2
Voting Rights ........................................................................... 1-8-3
Compensation ......................................................................... 1-8-4
INDEX
SECTION
Mechanical Code
Adoption of International Mechanical Code ................................... 8-7-1
Plans and Specifications ............................................................ 8-7-2
Inspections ............................................................................. 8-7-3
Permits ................................................................................... 8-7-4
Minors
Curfew Definitions .................................................................. 6-5-1
Cigarettes and Tobacco ........................................................... 6-5-2
Contributing to Delinquency .................................................... 6-5-3
Moving Buildings
House Mover Defined ................................................................ 8-8-1
Permit Required ....................................................................... 8-8-2
Application .............................................................................. 8-8-3
Bond Required ......................................................................... 8-8-4
Insurance Required .................................................................. 8-8-5
Permit Fee .............................................................................. 8-8-6
Inspection; Structure to be Moved; Route .................................... 8-8-7
Reporting Application to Council ................................................. 8-8-8
Supervision by Building Department ............................................ 8-8-9
Damages .................................................................................. 8-8-10
Permit Revocation ..................................................................... 8-8-11
Municipal Infractions
Municipal Infractions ........................................................................... 1-3-1
Penalties ............................................................................................ 1-3-2
Civil Citations ....................................................................................... 1-3-3
Alternative Relief .................................................................................. 1-3-4
Criminal Penalties ................................................................................ 1-3-5
Natural Water Course; Drains and Drainage
Natural Water Courses .............................................................. 9-4-1
Owner to Construct Draining ...................................................... 9-4-2
Authority of City ...................................................................... 9-4-3
Failure to Construct Drain ......................................................... 9-4-4
Penalty ................................................................................... 9-4-5
Noise Regulations
Definitions .............................................................................. 6-11-1
Disturbing the Peace ................................................................ 6-11-2
Permitting Disturbing the Peace ................................................. 6-11-3
Disturbing the Peace by a Person, Association, Firm, or Corporation 6-11-4
INDEX
SECTION
Motor Vehicle Maximum Sound Levels ......................................... 6-11-5
Motorized Vehicles Operating Off of Public Right-of-Way ................. 6-11-6
Noise Measurement Procedures .................................................. 6-11-7
Exceptions .............................................................................. 6-11-8
Penalty ................................................................................... 6-11-9
Nuisance
Nuisance Defined ..................................................................... 9-3-1
Definitions Generally ................................................................ 9-3-2
Nuisances Enumerated ............................................................. 9-3-3
Nuisances Prohibited and Authority to Abate ................................ 9-3-4
Notice to Abate. ....................................................................... 9-3-5
Contents of Notice to Abate ....................................................... 9-3-6
Method of Notice ...................................................................... 9-3-7
Request for Hearing ................................................................. 9-3-8
Abatement by the City .............................................................. 9-3-9
Report to Council; Abatement Costs ............................................ 9-3-10
Assessment of Costs ................................................................. 9-3-11
Failure to Abate ....................................................................... 9-3-12
Penalty ................................................................................... 9-3-13
Abatement in Emergency .......................................................... 9-3-14
Open Burning
No Open Burning; Permit Required ............................................. 15-5-1
Open Burning Permit Purposes ................................................... 15-5-2
Permit Fees ............................................................................. 15-5-3
Hours Open Burning Permitted ................................................... 15-5-4
Open Burning Restrictions ......................................................... 15-5-5
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment Establishment Permit
Outdoor Commercial Entertainment Establishment Permit .............. 5-6-1
Hours Restriction .................................................................... 5-6-2
Duration of License .................................................................. 5-6-3
Renewal Application ................................................................. 5-6-4
Panhandling (Aggressive); Prohibited
Purpose .................................................................................. 6-10-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 6-10-2
Prohibited Acts ........................................................................ 6-10-3
Penalty ................................................................................... 6-10-4
INDEX
SECTION
Parades and Public Assemblies Regulated
Parades and Public Assemblies Regulated .................................... 3-3-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 3-3-2
Permit Required ....................................................................... 3-3-3
Permit Application .................................................................... 3-3-4
Standards for Issuance ............................................................. 3-3-5
Hours ..................................................................................... 3-3-6
Permit Fees and Insurance Requirements .................................... 3-3-7
Parade/ Public Assembly Not a Street Obstruction ......................... 3-3-8
Control by Police and Firemen .................................................... 3-3-9
Notice and Appeals ................................................................... 3-3-10
Alternative Permit .................................................................... 3-3-11
Revocation .............................................................................. 3-3-12
Parental Responsibilities
Title and Purpose ..................................................................... 6-6-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 6-6-2
Parental Duties ........................................................................ 6-6-3
Parental Violation and Penalty .................................................... 6-6-4
Notification of Parents; Record of Notification ............................... 6-6-5
Liability of Parents; Record of Notification .................................... 6-6-6
Parking Meters and Lots
Definitions .............................................................................. 7-9-1
Individual Parking Spaces .......................................................... 7-9-2
Installation and Construction; Control and Maintenance of Meters ... 7-9-3
Zones Established .................................................................... 7-9-4
Coin Operation of Meters ........................................................... 7-9-5
On-Street Meter Rates .............................................................. 7-9-6
Municipal Parking Facility Rates .................................................. 7-9-7
Hours Meters and Lots to be Operated ........................................ 7-9-8
Parking Meter Violations; Expired Meter, Overtime Parking ............. 7-9-9
Administration ......................................................................... 7-9-10
Parking Meter Funds ................................................................. 7-9-11
Ticketing and Payment of Parking Violation .................................. 7-9-12
Compliance ............................................................................. 7-9-13
Reservation of Powers .............................................................. 7-9-14
Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission
Creation ................................................................................. 2-3-1
Number of Members ................................................................. 2-3-2
Appointment ........................................................................... 2-3-3
Term Duration and Limits .......................................................... 2-3-4
INDEX
SECTION
Removal – Vacancies ................................................................ 2-3-5
Residence Requirements ........................................................... 2-3-6
Responsibilities and Duties ........................................................ 2-3-7
Department Established ............................................................ 2-3-8
Parks; Public
Scope ..................................................................................... 3-5-1
Enforcement ............................................................................ 3-5-2
Hours of Operation ................................................................... 3-5-3
Regulate Activities .................................................................... 3-5-4
Amusements ........................................................................... 3-5-5
Assemblies .............................................................................. 3-5-6
Permits ................................................................................... 3-5-7
Traffic .................................................................................... 3-5-8
Animals .................................................................................. 3-5-9
Other Regulations .................................................................... 3-5-10
Pawnbrokers
License Required ...................................................................... 5-9-1
License Fees and Bond Requirements .......................................... 5-9-2
License; Expiration Date ........................................................... 5-9-3
Transfer of License ................................................................... 5-9-4
Dealing with Minors .................................................................. 5-9-5
Record of Transaction ............................................................... 5-9-6
Police Order to Hold Property ..................................................... 5-9-7
Memorandum Required ............................................................. 5-9-8
Sales by Pawnbrokers ............................................................... 5-9-9
Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants
Definitions .............................................................................. 5-10-1
License Required ...................................................................... 5-10-2
Application for License .............................................................. 5-10-3
License Fees ............................................................................ 5-10-4
Bonds Required ....................................................................... 5-10-5
Insurance Required .................................................................. 5-10-6
Hardship Exception .................................................................. 5-10-7
License Issued ......................................................................... 5-10-8
Display of License .................................................................... 5-10-9
License Not Transferable ........................................................... 5-10-10
Time Restriction ....................................................................... 5-10-11
Suspension or Revocation of License ........................................... 5-10-12
Penalty ................................................................................... 5-10-13
Rebates .................................................................................. 5-10-14
License Exemptions .................................................................. 5-10-15
Prohibited Activities .................................................................. 5-10-16
INDEX
SECTION
Personnel Procedures
Declaration of Policy ................................................................. 1-13-1
Applicability ............................................................................ 1-13-2
Civil Service Provisions ............................................................. 1-13-3
Union Contracts ....................................................................... 1-13-4
Prohibitive Activities ................................................................. 1-13-5
Permitted Activities .................................................................. 1-13-6
Personnel Records .................................................................... 1-13-7
Rules and Regulations - Employee Benefits .................................. 1-13-8
Department Regulations ............................................................ 1-13-9
Classification Plan .................................................................... 1-13-10
Pay Plan ................................................................................. 1-13-11
Grievance Procedures ............................................................... 1-13-12
Pit Bull Dogs; Keeping of
Purpose .................................................................................. 6-9-1
Keeping of Pit Bull Dogs Prohibited .............................................. 6-9-2
Definition ................................................................................ 6-9-3
Spayed or Neutered ................................................................. 6-9-4
Leash Requirement .................................................................. 6-9-5
Confinement ........................................................................... 6-9-6
Confinement Indoors ................................................................ 6-9-7
Signs ..................................................................................... 6-9-8
Financial Responsibility ............................................................. 6-9-9
Identification Photographs and Microchips .................................... 6-9-10
Reporting Requirements ............................................................ 6-9-11
Sale or Transfer of Ownership Prohibited ..................................... 6-9-12
Irrebuttable Presumptions ......................................................... 6-9-13
Failure to Comply ..................................................................... 6-9-14
Violation – Penalty ................................................................... 6-9-15
Planning and Zoning Commission
Creation ................................................................................. 2-7-1
Qualifications .......................................................................... 2-7-2
Number of Members ................................................................. 2-7-3
Appointment ........................................................................... 2-7-4
Term Duration and Limits .......................................................... 2-7-5
Removal and Vacancies ............................................................. 2-7-6
Compensation ......................................................................... 2-7-7
Relation to Community Development Director .............................. 2-7-8
Responsibilities and Duties ........................................................ 2-7-9
INDEX
SECTION
Plumbing Code
Adoption of International Plumbing Code ..................................... 8-9-1
Plans and Specifications ............................................................ 8-9-2
Inspections ............................................................................. 8-9-3
Permits ................................................................................... 8-9-4
Police Department
Department Established ............................................................ 6-1-1
Organization ........................................................................... 6-1-2
Chain of Command ................................................................... 6-1-3
Sergeant at Arms ..................................................................... 6-1-4
Peace Officer Qualifications ........................................................ 6-1-5
Peace Officers Appointed ........................................................... 6-1-6
Required Training ...................................................................... 6-1-7
Duties of Chief of Police ............................................................ 6-1-8
Uniforms ................................................................................. 6-1-9
Obedience to Superior Officials .................................................... 6-1-10
Rules ....................................................................................... 6-1-11
Taking Weapons ........................................................................ 6-1-12
Precincts and Wards
Precincts Established ................................................................ 1-5-1
Wards Established .................................................................... 1-5-2
Polling Places Established .......................................................... 1-5-3
Correction of Errors .................................................................. 1-5-4
Publication of Changes .............................................................. 1-5-5
Private Hydrants
Purpose .................................................................................. 15-7-1
Inspections ............................................................................. 15-7-2
Winterization ........................................................................... 15-7-3
Penalty Provision ..................................................................... 15-7-4
Public Demonstrations
Definitions .............................................................................. 3-4-1
Use of Sidewalks for Picketing .................................................... 3-4-2
Interference with Business or Public Facility ................................. 3-4-3
Focused Residential Picketing Prohibited ....................................... 3-4-4
Duty to Disperse as Directed by Police ........................................ 3-4-5
Criminal Trespass for Obstruction of Public Ways, Buildings or Property 3-4-6
INDEX
SECTION
Railroads
Definitions .............................................................................. 3-7-1
Warning Signals ....................................................................... 3-7-2
Obstructing Streets .................................................................. 3-7-3
Crossing Maintenance ............................................................... 3-7-4
Residential Code
Adoption of the International Residential Code .............................. 8-10-1
Amendments ............................................................................ 8-10-2
Residential Sales
Purpose .................................................................................. 5-11-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 5-11-2
Signs ..................................................................................... 5-11-3
Residential Sales Regulations ..................................................... 5-11-4
Enforcement ............................................................................ 5-11-5
Revenue and Taxation
Urban Renewal Tax Increment Areas .......................................... 4-3
Urban Revitalization Areas ......................................................... 4-4
Sales on City Property
Selling on City Property ............................................................ 5-12-1
Selling of Merchandise .............................................................. 5-12-2
Soliciting for Worthy Cause ........................................................ 5-12-3
Salvage, Junk Dealers and Refuse Haulers
Purpose .................................................................................. 5-15-1
Scope ..................................................................................... 5-15-2
License Required ...................................................................... 5-15-3
Screening ............................................................................... 5-15-4
Collection Vehicles License ........................................................ 5-15-5
Disposal ................................................................................. 5-15-6
Violation ................................................................................. 5-15-7
Sewage Rate System
Purpose .................................................................................. 13-5-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 13-5-2
Analytical Requirements ............................................................ 13-5-3
Unit Rates ............................................................................... 13-5-4
Sewerage Rate System ............................................................. 13-5-5
INDEX
SECTION
General Provisions.................................................................... 13-5-6
Collection ................................................................................ 13-5-7
Sewer Use Regulations
General Provisions ................................................................... 13-6-1.0
Purpose & Policy ...................................................................... 13-6-1.1
Administration ......................................................................... 13-6-1.2
Definitions .............................................................................. 13-6-1.3
Abbreviations .......................................................................... 13-6-1.4
General Sewer Use Requirements ............................................... 13-6-2.0
Use of POTW Required .............................................................. 13-6-2.1
Private Sewer Systems ............................................................. 13-6-2.2
Prohibited Discharge Standards .................................................. 13-6-2.3
Federal Pretreatment Standards ................................................. 13-6-2.4
State Requirements .................................................................. 13-6-2.5
Specific Pollutant Limitations ..................................................... 13-6-2.6
City's Right of Revision ............................................................. 13-6-2.7
Special Agreements .................................................................. 13-6-2.8
Dilution .................................................................................. 13-6-2.9
Pretreatment of Wastewater ...................................................... 13-6-3.0
Pretreatment Facilities .............................................................. 13-6-3.1
Additional Pretreatment Measures .............................................. 13-6-3.2
Accidental Discharge ................................................................ 13-6-3.3
Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans ...................................... 13-6-3.4
Tenant Responsibility ................................................................ 13-6-3.5
Hauled Wastewater .................................................................. 13-6-3.6
Vandalism ............................................................................... 13-6-3.7
Wastewater Discharge Permit Eligibility ....................................... 13-6-4.0
Wastewater Survey .................................................................. 13-6-4.1
Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement .................................. 13-6-4.2
Wastewater Discharge Permitting, Existing Connections ................. 13-6-4.3
Wastewater Discharge Permitting, New Connections ...................... 13-6-4.4
Wastewater Discharge Permitting, Extra Jurisdictional Industrial Users 13-6-4.5
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application .................................... 13-6-4.6
Application Signatories and Certification ....................................... 13-6-4.7
Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions ...................................... 13-6-4.8
Wastewater Discharge Permit .................................................... 13-6-5.0
Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration ....................................... 13-6-5.1
Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents ....................................... 13-6-5.2
Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals ......................................... 13-6-5.3
Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification ................................... 13-6-5.4
Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer ........................................ 13-6-5.5
INDEX
SECTION
Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation .................................... 13-6-5.6
Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance .................................... 13-6-5.7
Reporting Requirements ............................................................ 13-6-6.0
Baseline Monitoring Reports ....................................................... 13-6-6.1
Compliance Schedule Progress Report ......................................... 13-6-6.2
Report on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline ............................................................................... 13-6-6.3
Periodic Compliance Reports ...................................................... 13-6-6.4
Report of Changed Conditions .................................................... 13-6-6.5
Reports of Potential Problem Discharges ...................................... 13-6-6.6
Reports from Nonsignificant Industrial Users ................................ 13-6-6.7
Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting ....................... 13-6-6.8
Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste ......................... 13-6-6.9
Analytical Requirements ............................................................ 13-6-6.10
Monitoring and Sample Collection Facilities .................................. 13-6-6.11
Timing of Reports ..................................................................... 13-6-6.12
Record Keeping ....................................................................... 13-6-6.13
Compliance Monitoring .............................................................. 13-6-7.0
Inspection and Sampling ........................................................... 13-6-7.1
Search Warrants ...................................................................... 13-6-7.2
Confidential Information ............................................................ 13-6-8.0
Publication of Industrial Users in Significant Noncompliance ............ 13-6-9.0
Administrative Enforcement Remedies ........................................ 13-6-10.0
Notification of Violation ............................................................. 13-6-10.1
Consent Orders ........................................................................ 13-6-10.2
Show Cause Hearing ................................................................. 13-6-10.3
Compliance Orders ................................................................... 13-6-10.4
Cease and Desist Orders ........................................................... 13-6-10.5
Administrative Fines ................................................................. 13-6-10.6
Emergency Suspensions ............................................................ 13-6-10.7
Termination of Discharge .......................................................... 13-6-10.8
Judicial Enforcement Remedies .................................................. 13-6-11.0
Injunctive Relief ....................................................................... 13-6-11.1
Civil Penalties .......................................................................... 13-6-11.2
Criminal Prosecution ................................................................. 13-6-11.3
Remedies Nonexclusive ............................................................. 13-6-11.4
INDEX
SECTION
Supplemental Enforcement Actions ............................................. 13-6-12.0
Performance Bonds .................................................................. 13-6-12.1
Liability Insurance .................................................................... 13-6-12.2
Water Supply Severance ........................................................... 13-6-12.3
Public Nuisance ........................................................................ 13-6-12.4
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations ................................ 13-6-13.0
Upset ..................................................................................... 13-6-13.1
General/Specific Prohibitions...................................................... 13-6-13.2
Bypass ................................................................................... 13-6-13.3
Surcharge Costs ...................................................................... 13-6-14.0
Miscellaneous Provisions ........................................................... 13-6-15.0
Pretreatment Charges and Fees ................................................. 13-6-15.1
Severability ............................................................................. 13-6-15.2
Conflicts ................................................................................. 13-6-15.3
Fats, Oils, and Grease Control .................................................... 13-6-16.0
Scope and Purpose ................................................................... 13-6-16.1
Definitions .............................................................................. 13.6-16.2
Grease Traps and Interceptors ................................................... 13-6-16.3
Food Service Establishment Permitting Program ........................... 13-6-16.4
Grace Period ........................................................................... 13-6-16.5
Fees ....................................................................................... 13-6-16.6
Schedule of Fees ...................................................................... 13-6-16.7
Separate Storm Sewers and Watercourses ................................... 13-6-17.0
Control of Pollutant Discharges to Separate Storm
Sewers and Watercourses ....................................................... 13-6-17.1
Prohibited Discharges to Separate Storm
Sewers and Watercourses ....................................................... 13-6-17.2
Flow Obstruction Prohibited ....................................................... 13-6-17.3
Prohibition of Illicit Connections ................................................. 13-6-17.4
Smoke Detectors
Detectors Required ................................................................... 15-6-1
General Requirements .............................................................. 15-6-2
Non-compliance ....................................................................... 15-6-3
Snow Emergency Regulations
Definitions .............................................................................. 7-10-1
Snow Emergency Route ............................................................ 7-10-2
Standing and Parking ............................................................... 7-10-3
Notice of Snow Emergency ........................................................ 7-10-4
Duration of Snow Emergency ..................................................... 7-10-5
INDEX
SECTION
“Alternate Side of Street” Parking ............................................... 7-10-6
Conflict of Ordinances ............................................................... 7-10-7
Solid Waste Disposal Landfill and Transfer Station
Definitions .............................................................................. 13-4-1
Disposal Permit Required .......................................................... 13-4-2
Depositing Refuse .................................................................... 13-4-3
Use of Authorized Disposal Sites ................................................ 13-4-4
Supervision of Disposal ............................................................. 13-4-5
Hours for Disposal .................................................................... 13-5-6
Removal of Refuse ................................................................... 13-5-7
Dumping in Public Places ........................................................... 13-5-8
Responsibility of Owner; Occupant .............................................. 13-5-9
Garbage; Waste; Depositing on Riverfront ................................... 13-5-10
Disposal Charges ..................................................................... 13-5-11
Prohibited Waste ...................................................................... 13-5-12
Specified Crime Property
Definitions .............................................................................. 6-7-1
Specified Crime Property ........................................................... 6-7-2
Penalties ................................................................................. 6-7-3
Procedure for Enforcement ........................................................ 6-7-4
Notice .................................................................................... 6-7-5
Service of Notice ...................................................................... 6-7-6
Administrative Appeal ............................................................... 6-7-7
Conduct of Hearing .................................................................. 6-7-8
Effect of Notice ........................................................................ 6-7-9
Speed Limits
General .................................................................................. 7-6-1
Parks Cemeteries and Parking Lots ............................................. 7-6-2
Special Speed Zones ................................................................ 7-6-3
Minimum Speed ....................................................................... 7-6-4
Stopping, Standing, Parking
Standing, Parking Close to Curb ................................................. 7-7-1
Markings Indicating Angle Parking .............................................. 7-7-2
Angle Parking Signs, Markings ................................................... 7-7-3
Parking Restrictions Generally .................................................... 7-7-4
Moving Other Vehicles into Prohibited Area .................................. 7-7-5
Unattended Motor Vehicle ......................................................... 7-7-6
Parking in Alleys ...................................................................... 7-7-7
All-night Parking Prohibited ....................................................... 7-7-8
INDEX
SECTION
Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited ....................................... 7-7-9
Hazardous or Congested Places .................................................. 7-7-10
Parking on Private Property ....................................................... 7-7-11
Persons with Disabilities; Parking ............................................... 7-7-12
Streets and Sidewalks
Definitions .............................................................................. 3-1-1
Sidewalk Installation and Repair; Right-of-Way Maintenance .......... 3-1-2
Encroaching Steps .................................................................... 3-1-3
Sidewalk Snow and Ice Removal ................................................ 3-1-4
Commercial Use of Sidewalk in Commercial Zones ........................ 3-1-5
Outdoor Restaurant Seating License ........................................... 3-1-6
Street Obstructions .................................................................. 3-1-7
Location of Steps, Cellarways, and Spouts ................................... 3-1-8
Playing in Streets ..................................................................... 3-1-9
Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley........................................ 3-1-10
Removal of Barricades .............................................................. 3-1-11
Taxicabs
Definition ................................................................................ 5-14-1
Exemption .............................................................................. 5-14-2
License and Fee Required .......................................................... 5-14-3
Term of License ....................................................................... 5-14-4
Insurance Policy....................................................................... 5-14-5
General Liability Exception ........................................................ 5-14-6
Soliciting Passengers ................................................................ 5-14-7
Filing; Posting; Rate Schedule ..................................................... 5-14-8
Traffic Code; Administrative and Enforcement
Definitions .............................................................................. 7-1-1
Administration and Enforcement ................................................. 7-1-2
Power to Direct Traffic .............................................................. 7-1-3
Obedience to Peace Officer ........................................................ 7-1-4
Scheduled Violations................................................................. 7-1-5
Parking Violations; Uncontested ................................................. 7-1-6
Administrative Review of Parking Violations ................................. 7-1-7
Parking Violations; Contested .................................................... 7-1-8
Parking Violations; Vehicle Unattended ........................................ 7-1-9
Traffic Control Devices
Authority to Install ................................................................... 7-4-1
Crosswalks; Safety Zones; Traffic Lanes ...................................... 7-4-2
Authority to Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys .............................. 7-4-3
INDEX
SECTION
Traffic Enforcement; Automated
General .................................................................................. 7-5-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 7-5-2
Offense .................................................................................. 7-5-3
Exceptions to Owner Liability ..................................................... 7-5-4
Penalty and Appeal ................................................................... 7-5-5
Traffic Regulations in General
Parades; Processions ................................................................ 7-2-1
Clinging to Vehicles .................................................................. 7-2-2
Riding on Parts of Vehicles Not for Passengers .............................. 7-2-3
Operation of Golf Carts ............................................................. 7-2-4
Avoidance of Traffic Control Devices ........................................... 7-2-5
All-Terrain Vehicles .................................................................. 7-2-6
Driving through Funeral or Other Procession ................................ 7-2-7
Driving on Sidewalks ................................................................ 7-2-8
Careless Driving ....................................................................... 7-2-9
Driving on Private Property ........................................................ 7-2-10
State Law; Law of the Road ....................................................... 7-2-11
Traffic: Junk, Obsolete, Stored Vehicles
Definitions .............................................................................. 7-12-1
Storing on Streets Illegal .......................................................... 7-12-2
Violation ................................................................................. 7-12-3
Removal ................................................................................. 7-12-4
Junked Vehicles ....................................................................... 7-12-5
Owner Subject to Fine .............................................................. 7-12-6
Junked Vehicles; Removal ......................................................... 7-12-7
Trees and Shrubs
Removal and Trimming of Dangerous Tree; Compliance ................. 3-9-1
Abutting Property Owners ......................................................... 3-9-2
Notice to Trim; Failure to Comply ............................................... 3-9-3
Trimming by City; Recovery of Cost ............................................ 3-9-4
Liability Insurance; Tree Removal ............................................... 3-9-5
Obstructing Streets; Barricades .................................................. 3-9-6
Removal of Debris .................................................................... 3-9-7
Street Trees (Existing) .............................................................. 3-9-8
Street Trees (New) ................................................................... 3-9-9
New Street Trees (City Program) ................................................ 3-9-10
Injuring; Defacing; Removing .................................................... 3-9-11
Reserved ................................................................................ 3-9-12
INDEX
SECTION
Use of City Right of Way
Excavation Compliance ............................................................. 3-2-1
Permit Required ...................................................................... 3-2-2
Public Convenience .................................................................. 3-2-3
Barricades, Fencing and Lighting ............................................... 3-2-4
Bond Required ........................................................................ 3-2-5
Insurance ............................................................................... 3-2-6
Pre-Construction Conference ..................................................... 3-2-7
Commencement Period ............................................................ 3-2-8
Steel Tracks; Cleated Equipment .............................................. 3-2-9
Tunneling Under Street ............................................................ 3-2-10
Compliance ............................................................................. 3-2-11
Excavation Material ................................................................. 3-2-12
Protect Adjoining Property ........................................................ 3-2-13
Restoration of Public Property ................................................... 3-2-14
Inspection .............................................................................. 3-2-15
Backfill .................................................................................. 3-2-16
Supervision of Connections and Repairs to Sewers ....................... 3-2-17
Completion by the City ............................................................ 3-2-18
Responsibility for Costs ............................................................ 3-2-19
Notification ............................................................................ 3-2-20
Permit Fee ............................................................................. 3-2-21
Permit Issued ......................................................................... 3-2-22
Permits May be Examined ........................................................ 3-2-23
Save Harmless ........................................................................ 3-2-24
Payment Failure after Excavation Repair ..................................... 3-2-25
Emergency Excavations ........................................................... 3-2-26
Emergency Detours or Closings ................................................ 3-2-27
Curb Cuts .............................................................................. 3-2-28
Penalty ................................................................................... 3-2-29
Utility Connections
Duty of Abutting Owners Generally ............................................. 13-1-1
Connections After Improvement is Made ...................................... 13-1-2
Connections to be Made by Resolution ........................................ 13-1-3
Publication and Form of Notice of Resolution Requiring Connection .. 13-1-4
Procedure When Abutting Property Owner Fails
to Make Connection Generally ................................................. 13-1-5
Cost; Expense Collection; Lien ................................................... 13-1-6
Assessment Resolution; Notice ................................................... 13-1-7
INDEX
SECTION
Water Supply
Quality ................................................................................... 13-2-1
Separation of Distribution Systems ............................................. 13-2-2
Water Service Pipe ................................................................... 13-2-3
Flushometers .......................................................................... 13-2-4
Shut-offs ................................................................................ 13-2-5
Setting Water Meters ................................................................ 13-2-6
Pumps and Hydrants; Surface Water ........................................... 13-2-7
Unauthorized Opening; Use ....................................................... 13-2-8
Tapping Water Mains; Distributing Pipes ...................................... 13-2-9
Breaking Seals ......................................................................... 13-2-10
Throwing Substances into Reservoirs; Water Mains ....................... 13-2-11
Outlets Kept Closed; Repair of Fixtures ....................................... 13-2-12
Compliance ............................................................................. 13-2-13
Breaking, Defacing Hydrants ...................................................... 13-2-14
Defacing Reservoirs; Tanks ....................................................... 13-2-15
Authorized Inspectors; Right of Entry .......................................... 13-2-16
Plumbers Permit ...................................................................... 13-2-17
Weeds
Purpose .................................................................................. 9-5-1
Definitions .............................................................................. 9-5-2
Noxious Weeds ........................................................................ 9-5-3
Duties of Owners ..................................................................... 9-5-4
Notice .................................................................................... 9-5-5
Proof of Service ....................................................................... 9-5-6
Work Done by City ................................................................... 9-5-7
Cost of Work Done by City ......................................................... 9-5-8
Zoning Board of Adjustment
Creation ................................................................................. 2-9-1
Number of Members ................................................................. 2-9-2
Appointment ........................................................................... 2-9-3
Composition ............................................................................ 2-9-4
Term Duration and Limits .......................................................... 2-9-5
Removal – Vacancies ................................................................ 2-9-6
Residence Requirements ........................................................... 2-9-7
Responsibilities and Duties ........................................................ 2-9-8