CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 1 -
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title 1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions 1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers 1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity 1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries 1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction 1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the
Code of Ordinances of the City of Marengo, Iowa, 2006.
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of
Ordinances are defined in the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use
in this Code of Ordinances unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision.
Other words and phrases used herein have the following meanings, unless
specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances or
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provision:
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
2. “City” means the City of Marengo, Iowa.
3. “Clerk” means the city clerk of Marengo, Iowa.
4. “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in
which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word
(such as the Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5. “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Marengo, Iowa, 2006.
6. “Council” means the city council of Marengo, Iowa.
7. “County” means Iowa County, Iowa.
8. “May” confers a power.
9. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
10. “Must” states a requirement.
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 2 -
11. “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes
any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.
12. “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Marengo, Iowa,
as embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the
ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
13. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or
foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association,
trust, or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or
similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
14. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway,
highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
15. “Shall” imposes a duty.
16. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the
edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
17. “State” means the State of Iowa.
18. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa,
as amended.
19. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property
lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of
vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the
Iowa Constitution, and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General
Assembly, exercise any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to
protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and of its
residents, and preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort
and convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and
the performance of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 3 -
1.04 INDEMNITY. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code
of Ordinances, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all
injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or
damage to property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident
thereto, however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the
issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the
failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant,
to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or
the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by
making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers,
agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all
claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or
death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the
foregoing. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any
permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance
of the City whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for
personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may
notify in writing any person by whose negligence it claims the injury was
caused. The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the
plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief
statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes
that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City,
and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is
conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the
existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability
of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the
damage or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified
to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred
by the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of this Code of
Ordinances, the rules of statutory construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the
Code of Iowa shall be utilized to ascertain the intent of the Council with the
understanding that the term “statute” as used therein will be deemed to be
synonymous with the term “ordinance” when applied to this Code of
Ordinances.
1.07 EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever an officer or employee is
required or authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code of Ordinances,
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 4 -
the provision shall be construed as authorizing performance by a regular
assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any
manner affect this Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter,
section, subsection or paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of
ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of
the Code of Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection),
editor’s notes, cross references and State law references, unless set out in the
body of the section itself, contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute
any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or
clarify the contents of a section.
1.10 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of
Ordinances, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper
with the Code of Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the
law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of the Code of
Ordinances is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not
affect the validity of the Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section,
provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12 WARRANTS. If consent to enter upon or inspect any building,
structure or property pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any
person having the lawful right to exclude, the City officer or employee having
the duty to enter upon or conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District
Court in and for the County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa,
for an administrative search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant or any
other person having charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit,
structure, building or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a
search warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION. Whenever this Code of
Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the Council or any commission,
board or officer or employee of the City and does not specify standards to
govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be exercised in light of the
following standard: The discretionary power to grant, deny or revoke any
matter shall be considered in light of the facts and circumstances then existing
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 5 -
and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due consideration shall be given to
the impact upon the public health, safety and welfare, and the decision shall be
that of a reasonably prudent person under similar circumstances in the exercise
of the police power.
1.14 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided
by the Code of Ordinances for any particular provision, section or chapter, any
person failing to perform a duty, or obtain a license required by, or violating
any provision of the Code of Ordinances, or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2])
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CHAPTER 2 CHARTER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 9 -
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
2.01 Title 2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties 2.06 Copies on File
2.01 TITLE. This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Marengo, Iowa.
2.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City is the Mayor-
Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Council and Mayor and other City officers have
such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and
by the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City.
2.04 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of five (5)
Council Members elected at large for overlapping terms of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05 TERM OF MAYOR. The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06 COPIES ON FILE. The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file
with the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of
the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CHAPTER 3 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 11 -
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
3.01 Municipal Infraction 3.04 Civil Citations
3.02 Environmental Violation 3.05 Alternative Relief
3.03 Penalties 3.06 Criminal Penalties
3.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any
ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any
act or duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of
Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
3.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction which is a violation
of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in
consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an
environmental violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable
until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or
to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or
manufacturing of grain products.
3. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production or
manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
3.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil
penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
CHAPTER 3 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 12 -
1. Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First Offense – Not to exceed $750.00
B. Each Repeat Offense – Not to exceed $1,000.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat
offense.
2. Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues.
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each occurrence. However, an environmental violation is not subject to
such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or
conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or
the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
(2) The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time that the violation begins.
(3) The violation does not continue in existence for more than
eight (8) hours.
3.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of
Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction.
The citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure
1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing
address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of
Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A
copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and one copy shall be sent to
the Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense
has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [4])
CHAPTER 3 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 13 -
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing
the citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought,
or both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
3.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter
does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same
action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [8])
3.06 CRIMINAL PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from
issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if
criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the
authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal
sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CHAPTER 4
SCHEDULED FINES
4.01 SCHEDULED FINES. The violation of the following provisions of
this Code of Ordinances shall be subject to the scheduled fines provided herein
for each offense, plus all applicable court costs and surcharges, except that the
scheduled fine shall not apply, and a court appearance shall be required, when a
violation involves or results in an accident or injury to property and the total
damages are equal to or exceed $500.00, or in the event of injury to a person, or
when the violation created an immediate threat to the safety of other persons or
property.
1. Section 46.01 — Curfew ................................................. $ 20.00
2. Section 55.24(1) — Animals at Large
First Offense ........................................ $ 30.00
Second Offense .................................... $ 50.00
Third Offense ....................................... $ 100.00
Fourth Offense ..................................... $ 100.00
3. Section 55.24(5) — Barking Dogs ................................... $ 30.00
4. Section 55.24(10) — Rabies Vaccination ........................ $ 200.00
5. Section 55.16 — Confinement of Female Dogs .............. $ 30.00
6. Section 47.05 — Park Curfew ......................................... $ 15.00
7. Section 62.03 — Vehicle on Sidewalk ............................ $ 15.00
8. Section 62.04 — Clinging to Vehicle .............................. $ 15.00
9. Section 62.05 — Quiet Zones .......................................... $ 15.00
10. Section 76.10 — Bicycle Towing .................................... $ 15.00
11. Section 76.11 — Improper Riding ................................... $ 15.00
12. Section 41.11 — Urinating in Public ............................... $ 50.00
13. Section 45.01 — Persons Under Legal Age..................... $ 100.00
14. Section 45.02 — Public Consumption or Intoxication .... $ 50.00
15. Section 62.07 — Open Container .................................... $ 50.00
16. Section 135.11 — Street Littering (Not including Grass Clippings)
.......................................................................................... $ 25.00
17. Section 105.05 — Illegal Open Burning .......................... $ 25.00
18. Section 40.03(2) — Disturbing the Peace and Quiet ....... $ 25.00
CHAPTER 4 SCHEDULED FINES
19. Chapter 48 — Excessive Noise - Vehicle .........................$ 25.00
20. Chapter 65 — Failure to Stop/Yield .................................$ 20.00
21. Section 46.02 — Possession of Tobacco by a Minor
First Offense .........................................$ 50.00
Second Offense .....................................$ 100.00
Each Subsequent Offense .....................$ 250.00
22. Section 40.06 — Loitering
First Offense .........................................$ 25.00
Each Subsequent Violation ..................$ 50.00
23. Section 42.07 — Littering.................................................$ 25.00
24. Section 66.05(4) — Non-rubber Tread Vehicles ..............$ 100.00
25. Section 135.03 — Grass Clippings in Street
First Offense .......................................$ 5.00
Second Offense ...................................$ 25.00
Each Subsequent Offense ...................$ 25.00
26. Section 135.08 — Burning Prohibited ..............................$ 25.00
27. Section 69.13 — Parking on Snow Route ........................$ 25.00
28. Section 69.14 — Parking on a Designated Parade Route$ 25.00
29. Section 122.20 — Failure to Purchase Peddler’s Permit ..$ 75.00
30. <blank>
31. Section 51.06 – Parking of Junk Vehicles
First Offense………………………... $50.00
Second Offense………………….. …$100.00
Third or subsequent Offense..............$500.00
For purposes of enhancement in this section, any guilty plea or
conviction occurring within two (2) years of a subsequent offense may
be used to enhance the level of offense.
[The next page is 21]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
-iCODE
OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 21 -
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01 Oaths 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Duties: General 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records 5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings 5.12 Nepotism
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in
accordance with the following:
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify
for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a
bond. The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being certified
as elected but not later than noon of the first day which is not a Sunday
or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the
officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly
swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and
impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of
(name of office) in Marengo as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are
empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter
pertaining to the business of their respective office:
A. Mayor
B. City Clerk
C. Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety
bond or blanket position bond running to the City and covering the
Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and such other officers and employees as may
be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 22 -
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be
filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record
of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all
City officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03 DUTIES: GENERAL. Each municipal officer shall exercise the
powers and perform the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances,
or as otherwise directed by the Council unless contrary to State law or City
charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept
by law or ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request,
unless some other provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such
records to be kept confidential. Access to public records which are combined
with data processing software shall be in accordance with policies and
procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to his or
her successor in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the
officer’s custody and appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or
any multi-membered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing
bodies shall be held in accordance with the following:
1. Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law,
of the time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda shall
be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless
closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date,
time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each
meeting. The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 23 -
information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present. The
vote of each member present shall be made public at the open session.
The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative
vote of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the
meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or
recording devices at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic
means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is
impossible or impractical and then only in compliance with the
provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not
have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or
the profits thereof or services to be furnished or performed for the City, unless
expressly permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this section
is void. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation
of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office or
position, the holding of which is not incompatible with another public
office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[1])
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company
as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[2])
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who
serves as Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3])
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has
an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are
made by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of
the contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 24 -
procurement or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive
bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for
professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5])
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[6])
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or
employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the
officer or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not
be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[7])
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer fire fighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[8])
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City
officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less
than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or
the spouse or immediate family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[9])
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in
writing, publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[4])
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this
section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a City officer
or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not
exceed a cumulative total purchase price of twenty-five hundred dollars
($2500.00) in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[11])
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City
and a utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of
essential City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[12])
12. Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the
City but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may
not be the original underwriter, purchaser or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[13])
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 25 -
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so
by submitting a resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly
recorded and considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not
eligible for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person
was elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been
increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City
office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent by
certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a
public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal.
The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is
filed, unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of
office shall be filled, at the Council’s option, by one of the two following
procedures:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2])
1. Appointment. By appointment following public notice by the
remaining members of the Council within forty (40) days after the
vacancy occurs, except that if the remaining members do not constitute a
quorum of the full membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an
election, the Council shall call a special election as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2a])
2. Election. By a special election held to fill the office for the
remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2b])
5.11 GIFTS. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of
Iowa, a public official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s
immediate family member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive
any gift or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B
and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly
with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts
to a public official, public employee or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 26 -
5.12 NEPOTISM. No person shall be appointed or hired to any office,
position or employment with the City if such person is related by consanguinity
or affinity within the third degree to any other person employed by or holding
office with the City, except as follows:
1. The Council may appoint or hire related persons if the Council
determines that the employment or hiring is necessary by virtue of the
particular qualifications of the applicant, the special requirements of the
position, or the unavailability of other suitable applicants.
2. This prohibition shall not apply to seasonal, part-time or
temporary employees, nor to independent contractors and their
employees.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 29 -
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
6.01 Nominating Method to be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition 6.05 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition 6.06 Persons Elected
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED. All candidates for elective
municipal offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION. Nominations for elective municipal
offices of the City may be made by nomination paper or papers signed by not
less than ten (10) eligible electors, residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03 ADDING NAME BY PETITION. The name of a candidate placed
upon the ballot by any other method than by petition shall not be added by
petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04 PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT. Nomination
papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy. The petition and
affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the State Commissioner
of Elections, shall include information required by the Code of Iowa, and shall
be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)
6.05 FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS. The
time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity
thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such
withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or
to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the appropriate
provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06 PERSONS ELECTED. The candidates who receive the greatest
number of votes for each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary
to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 6 CITY ELECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 30 -
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 35 -
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
7.01 Purpose 7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control 7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control 7.08 Financial Reports
7.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
provide for rules and regulations governing the management of the financial
affairs of the City.
7.02 FINANCE OFFICER. The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer
of the City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this
chapter.
7.03 CASH CONTROL. To assure the proper accounting and safe custody
of moneys the following shall apply:
1. Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose
by any City officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance
officer. If any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the
officer by check drawn by the finance officer and approved by the
Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports relating
thereto as required by law, ordinance or Council directive.
2. Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall
be promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts
not exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the
Council or invested in accordance with the City’s written investment
policy and State law, including joint investments as authorized by
Section 384.21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
3. Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty
cash fund for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collecton-
delivery transportation charges and small fees customarily paid at the
time of rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer shall
obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor
or agent. At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion,
the finance officer shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of
the accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall
be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 36 -
charged to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary
payments or other personal services or personal expenses.
7.04 FUND CONTROL. There shall be established and maintained separate
and distinct funds in accordance with the following:
1. Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to
the proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.
2. Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless
such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was
properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
3. Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the
Emergency Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5 [384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
4. Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State
law, moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt
Service Fund to meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers
must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
5. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically
prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund
to the Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be
authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
6. Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise
Fund may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency
Fund and Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council. A surplus
may exist only after all required transfers have been made to any
restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and provisions of any
revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the Utility or Enterprise
Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating account
or the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles in excess of:
A. The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating
and maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3)
months, and
B. The amount necessary to make all required transfers to
restricted accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 37 -
7. Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the
close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION. The annual operating
budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with the following:
1. Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for
preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and
Council and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives of the
Mayor and Council.
2. Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance
officer for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such
form as required by the Council.
3. Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the
completed budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of
each year.
4. Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget
and may make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate
before accepting such proposal for publication, hearing and final
adoption.
5. Notice of Hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council
shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and
cause notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be
published not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before
the date established for the hearing. Proof of such publication must be
filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
6. Copies of Budget on File. Not less than twenty (20) days before
the date that the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not
less than ten (10) days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make
available a sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the
requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for
distribution at the offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
7. Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall
adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the
Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the
County Auditor and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy
certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 38 -
proposed budget. Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and
of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06 BUDGET AMENDMENTS. A City budget finally adopted for the
following fiscal year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the City
appropriation for each program and purpose specified therein until amended as
provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1. Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a
program must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same
manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2 [384, 388])
2. Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one
program to another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in
the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3 [384, 388])
3. Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity
to another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of
the Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
4. Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the
authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated
within a specific activity without prior Council approval.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
7.07 ACCOUNTING. The accounting records of the City shall consist of not
less than the following:
1. Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and
maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of
cash received and disbursed.
2. General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a
general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and
for recording unappropriated surpluses.
3. Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Clerk
and Mayor following Council approval, except as provided by subsection
5 hereof.
4. Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual
accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program, subCHAPTER
7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 39 -
program and activity as will provide adequate information and control
for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the Council. Each
individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept
that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with revenue
estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the
appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense was
incurred.
5. Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution
authorize the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts
due, which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty
for late payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made
shall be reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the
same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such
payment. The resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify
the type of payment so authorized and may include but is not limited to
payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll and bond
principal and interest.
6. Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08 FINANCIAL REPORTS. The finance officer shall prepare and file the
following financial reports:
1. Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each
month a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program,
sub-program and activity for the preceding month.
2. Annual Report. Not later than December first of each year there
shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the
preceding fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the
City, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the
legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the
annual report must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than
December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 45 -
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
8.01 Purpose 8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions 8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption 8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
8.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial
exemption from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real
estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service
facilities, warehouses and distribution centers.
8.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first
year for which the exemption is received.
2. “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily
for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to
retail outlets. Distribution center does not mean a building or structure
used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a
manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process,
used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used for the
retail sale of goods.
3. “New construction” means new buildings and structures and
includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions
to existing buildings and structures. New construction does not include
reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not
constitute complete replacement of an existing building or structure or
refitting of an existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of
an existing building or structure is required due to economic
obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement
recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of
specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the
building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process
those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from
the City Council of the City upon the recommendation of the Iowa
Department of Economic Development.
4. “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of
buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities,
including, but not limited to, the design and production or manufacture
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 46 -
of prototype products for experimental use, and corporate research
services which do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site
services to the public.
5. “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public
warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of
the Code of Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure
used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are
sold at retail.
8.03 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION. The actual value added to
industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, researchservice
facilities, warehouses and distribution centers is eligible to receive a
partial exemption from taxation for a period of five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION. The amount of actual
value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1. For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)
2. For the second year, sixty percent (60%)
3. For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)
4. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)
5. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
8.05 LIMITATIONS. The granting of the exemption under this chapter for
new construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or
structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being
reduced below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of
the new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06 APPLICATIONS. An application shall be filed for each project
resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the
property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in
which the value added is first assessed for taxation.
2. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by
the Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 47 -
nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed
necessary by the Director of Revenue.
8.07 APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to
receive prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction.
If the City Council resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice
and hold a public hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least thirty (30) days after
such hearing the City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a
tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance
with City zoning. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption
from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be
qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08 EXEMPTION REPEALED. When in the opinion of the City Council
continuation of the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to
the City, the City Council may repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions
shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED. A property tax exemption
under this chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption
is claimed has received any other property tax exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 49 -
CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted and provide for Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect, for division of tax levied on taxable property.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
273 December 9, 1991 Marengo Urban Renewal Area
296 August 30, 1994 1994 Addition to the Marengo Urban
Renewal Area
422 December 23, 2008 Deleting Property from Urban Renewal
Area
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 51 -
CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
386 December 22, 2003 Revitalization Area No. 1
425 January 10, 2011 Update to Revitalization Area No. 1
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 71 -
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
15.01 Term of Office 15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
15.01 TERM OF OFFICE. The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor are as
follows:
1. Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the
City and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of
the City, except for supervisory duties delegated to the City
Administrator, give direction to department heads concerning the
functions of the departments, and have the power to examine all
functions of the municipal departments, their records and to call for
special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2. Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of
the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a
determination that a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within
the City limits, the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff
to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
3. Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the
Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4. Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance,
amendment or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an
ordinance, amendment or resolution within fourteen days after passage.
The Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written message to
the Council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
5. Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the
Council as required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs
generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for
Council action.
CHAPTER 15 MAYOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 72 -
6. Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly
entered into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not
represent the City where this duty is specifically delegated to another
officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.
7. Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on
behalf of the City.
8. Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the
City such specialized and professional services not already available to
the City. In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in
accordance with the Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
9. Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits which have
been granted by the Council, except those designated by law or
ordinance to be issued by another municipal officer.
10. Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense,
any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
11. Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any
absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03 APPOINTMENTS. The Mayor shall appoint the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1. Mayor Pro Tem
2. Police Chief, with Council approval
3. Library Board of Trustees, with Council approval
4. Recreation Commission, with Council approval
15.04 COMPENSATION. The salary of the Mayor is one hundred dollars
($100.00) per month, plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each Council
meeting attended.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05 VOTING. The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not
vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 73 -
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties 16.04 Compensation
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor Pro Tem is vice
president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise
provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in
cases of absence or inability of the Mayor to perform such duties. In the
exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to
appoint, employ or discharge from employment, officers or employees that the
Mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge without the approval of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote
as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the
Mayor during the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of
fifteen (15) days or more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the
compensation as determined by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s
performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CHAPTER 17
COUNCIL
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties 17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power 17.06 Compensation
17.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of five (5)
Council members elected at large for overlapping terms of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 376.2)
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Council include, but
are not limited to the following:
1. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2. Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based
upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or create new
wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
3. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds,
and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment
thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements,
sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which may be specially
assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38 [1])
4. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
5. Requirement of Proposal Guaranties at Time of Submitting Bids.
A. For all projects which are estimated to be in excess of $25,000, bids
shall be accompanied by a proposal guaranty bid bond in the amount of five
percent (5%) of said project estimate. The proof of bond shall accompany
the sealed bid at the time stated in the City Solicitation of Bids.
B. Failure to show proof of a proposal guaranty at the time the bids are
opened in public may be grounds for disqualification from consideration for
the project.
C. The Council may, by a majority vote, in its discretion, waive the
requirement of a proposal guaranty when it solicits sealed bids for a project.
Said waiver shall be clearly stated in the City’s Solicitation of Bids.
6. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts.
No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless approved by the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 38.10)
7. Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties,
term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise provided
for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
8. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall
prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected
City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become
effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not
adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during
the months of November and December in the year of a regular City election. A
change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council
members at the beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the
election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03 EXERCISE OF POWER. The Council shall exercise a power only by the
passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the following
manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a motion
requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must be passed
to spend public funds in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) on
any one project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A
measure which fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2. Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s veto,
the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
A. An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective
when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
B. A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately
upon signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
C. A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the
motion by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
D. If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment
becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
E. If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date
of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the
ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than
fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective
date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council including a
vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the
Council member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
17.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS. Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the
Council and other provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in
Section 5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:
1. Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council are on the second
(2nd) and fourth (4th) Wednesdays of each month at six o’clock (6:00) p.m. in the
Council Chambers at City Hall. If such day falls on a legal holiday, the meeting is
held on the next succeeding Thursday at the same time unless a different day or
time is determined by the Council.
2. Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or
upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and
maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5. Compelling Attendance. Any three (3) members of the Council can compel
the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05 APPOINTMENTS. The Council shall appoint the following officials and
prescribe their powers, duties, compensation and term of office:
1. City Administrator
2. City Attorney
3. City Clerk
4. Deputy City Clerk
5. Planning and Zoning Commission
6. Hospital Board
7. Zoning Board of Adjustment
8. Zoning Administrator
17.06 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council member is twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each meeting of the Council attended.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
[The next page is 83]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 83 -
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General 18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes 18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures 18.11 Notify Appointees
18.05 Publication 18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication 18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certify Measures
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. At its first meeting in
January following the regular city election the Council shall appoint by majority
vote a City Clerk to serve for a term of two (2) years. The Clerk shall receive
such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk, or in the Clerk’s
absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk, has the powers and duties as
provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances and the law.
18.03 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES. The Clerk shall attend all regular
and special Council meetings and within fifteen (15) days following a regular or
special meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be
published. Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a
summary of all receipts and shall show the gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES. The Clerk shall promptly record each
measure considered by the Council and record a statement with the measure,
where applicable, indicating whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action
on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])
18.05 PUBLICATION. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances,
enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published
at least once, not less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before
the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise
provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 84 -
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once
weekly and having general circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
18.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all measures
except motions with the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of
publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07 CERTIFY MEASURES. The Clerk shall certify all measures
establishing any zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing
the district, lines, or limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected
parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the
following manner:
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City
ordinances and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of
all writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless
otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances,
resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption
or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least
eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or
obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and
documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property
transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a
copy of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control
when it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such
officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon
payment of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the
Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 85 -
public documents or instruments which by ordinance and Code of
Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and
petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered
in such communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. At the direction of the Council,
the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The
Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such
meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10 ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke
licenses and permits when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a
record of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license
or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term
of license or permit and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11 NOTIFY APPOINTEES. The Clerk shall inform all persons
appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices in the City government of their
position and the time at which they shall assume the duties of their office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform the following duties relating to
elections and nominations:
1. Certify to the County Commissioner of Elections the type of
nomination process to be used by the City no later than ninety (90) days
before the date of the regular City election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
2. Accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a City office for
filing if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of signatures
and is timely filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
3. Designate other employees or officials of the City who are
ordinarily available to accept nomination papers if the Clerk is not
readily available during normal working hours.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 86 -
4. Note upon each petition and affidavit accepted for filing the date
and time that the petition was filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
5. Deliver all nomination petitions, together with the text of any
public measure being submitted by the Council to the electorate, to the
County Commissioner of Elections not later than five o’clock (5:00) p.m.
on the day following the last day on which nomination petitions can be
filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
18.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be
attached by the Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be
necessary or proper to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the
center of which are the words “MARENGO, IOWA” and around the margin the
words “CITY SEAL.”
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 91 -
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
19.01 Appointment 19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation
19.01 APPOINTMENT. The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all
functions required of the position of Treasurer.
19.02 COMPENSATION. The Clerk receives no additional compensation
for performing the duties of the Treasurer.
19.03 DUTIES OF TREASURER. The duties of the Treasurer are as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all
funds of the City in the manner provided by law, and Council direction.
2. Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
3. Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or
securities received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the
date, from whom, and for what purpose received.
4. Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all
disbursements, money or property, specifying date, to whom, and from
what fund paid.
5. Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money
received by the Treasurer from special assessments.
6. Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the
Treasurer’s custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in
depositories selected by the Council.
7. Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the
Treasurer’s books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash
and investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
8. Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record
all payments of interest and principal.
9. Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 93 -
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.05 Review and Comment
20.02 Attorney for City 20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.03 Power of Attorney 20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04 Ordinance Preparation 20.08 Prepare Documents
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall
appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the discretion of the
Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as established by
resolution of the Council.
20.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY. The City Attorney shall act as attorney for
the City in all matters affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the
City before any court, tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall
prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall sign the name of
the City to all appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that
may be essential to the prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed
the City shall be bound upon the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION. The City Attorney shall prepare
those ordinances which the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and
report to the Council upon all such ordinances before their final passage by the
Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT. The City Attorney shall, upon request,
make a report to the Council giving an opinion on all contracts, documents,
resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s
notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION. The City Attorney shall give advice
or a written legal opinion on City contracts and all questions of law relating to
City matters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 20 CITY ATTORNEY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 94 -
20.07 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Attorney
shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08 PREPARE DOCUMENTS. The City Attorney shall, upon request,
formulate drafts for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required
for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 95 -
CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
21.01 Appointment and Term 21.04 Attendance at Meetings
21.02 Compensation 21.05 Appointments
21.03 Powers and Duties: General 21.06 Powers and Duties: Specific
21.01 APPOINTMENT AND TERM. The Council shall appoint by
majority vote a City Administrator to serve at the discretion of the Council.
21.02 COMPENSATION. The City Administrator shall receive such
compensation as shall be established by resolution. If the City Administrator is
also the City Clerk, the City Administrator shall receive no compensation for
also acting as the City Clerk.
21.03 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The City Administrator has
the powers and duties as provided in this Code of Ordinances and by the law.
21.04 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. The City Administrator shall
attend all regular and special Council meetings, and report to the Council as
required. The City Administrator shall attend meetings of committees, boards
and commissions if requested to do so.
21.05 APPOINTMENTS. The City Administrator shall appoint all
department supervisors, including Public Works Director. All appointments
made by the City Administrator shall be approved by a majority vote of the
Council, and the Council shall determine and approve by resolution
compensation of the department supervisors and their staff.
21.06 POWERS AND DUTIES: SPECIFIC. The City Administrator has
the following specific duties:
1. Act as chief administrative officer for the City.
2. Supervise enforcement and execution of the City laws.
3. Recommend to the Council such measures necessary or expedient
for the general welfare of the City.
4. Supervise the official conduct of all officers of the City appointed
by the City Administrator, and take active control of the street, water and
utilities departments.
5. Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for
the City.
CHAPTER 21 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 96 -
6. Supervise the financial and personnel operations of the City.
7. Employ, reclassify, suspend or discharge all employees, subject to
Council approval, except the City Clerk, Deputy City Clerk, City
Attorney and Police Chief.
8. Supervise the activities of City Hall.
9. Supervise the processing and issuing of permits and licenses
required by the State Code or this Code of Ordinances.
10. Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance and
management of all City property, capital improvements and undertakings
of the City.
11. Conduct the business affairs of the City.
12. Perform other duties at the discretion of the Mayor or Council.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 105 -
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
22.01 Public Library 22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees 22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees 22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board 22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties 22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted
22.01 PUBLIC LIBRARY. The public library for the City is known as the
Marengo Public Library. It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Library,
hereinafter referred to as the Board, consists of seven (7) County members. All
members are to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
22.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES. All members of the Board
shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the County. Members shall be over
the age of twenty-one (21) years.
22.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. The organization of the Board
shall be as follows:
1. Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six (6)
years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July first.
Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the
total number or as near as possible, to stagger the terms.
2. Vacancies. The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if such
member moves permanently from the County and shall be deemed
vacated if such member is absent from six (6) consecutive regular
meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or temporary
absence from the County. Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in the
same manner as an original appointment except that the new Trustee
shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
3. Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services.
22.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the
following powers and duties:
1. Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a
Secretary, and such other officers as it deems necessary.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 106 -
2. Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the
Library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
3. Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4. Hiring of Personnel. To employ a librarian, and authorize the
librarian to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary
for the proper management of the Library, and fix their compensation;
provided, however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of
the librarian, assistants and employees shall have been fixed and
approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting in favor
thereof.
5. Removal of Personnel. To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds
vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the
assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetency or inattention to
duty, subject however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of
Iowa.
6. Purchases. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and
make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers,
maps, journals, other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and
supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
7. Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify or
repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of
Ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and management
of the Library and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing
penalties for violations.
8. Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all
funds allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys
available by gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of
all other moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals
collected under the rules of the Board.
9. Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or
mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take
the title to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and
bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds
received by them from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
10. Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests
accepted by the City by action against the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
11. Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 107 -
12. County Historical Association. To have authority to make
agreements with the local County historical association where such
exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as
may come into the possession of the association. The Trustees are
further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the
preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a
historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds
allocated for Library purposes.
22.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES. The Board has
power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the following:
1. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of
trustees of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation,
private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning,
township, or County, or with the trustees of any County library district
for the use of the Library by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
2. Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by
mutual consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a
majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting
parties. Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors
by the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not
less than five (5) percent in number of the electors who voted for
governor in the territory of the contracting party at the last general
election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less
than forty (40) days before the election. The proposition may be
submitted at any election provided by law that is held in the territory of
the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.07 NONRESIDENT USE. The Board may authorize the use of the
Library by persons not residents of the City or County in any one or more of the
following ways:
1. Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library
to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the
City, or County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2. Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or
other materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
3. Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library
so that books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 108 -
4. Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending
books or other Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08 EXPENDITURES. All money appropriated by the Council for the
operation and maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the
Library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by
its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
22.09 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall make a report to the Council
immediately after the close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain
statements as to the condition of the Library, the number of books added, the
number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money
expended in the maintenance of the Library during the year, together with such
further information as may be required by the Council.
22.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY. It is unlawful for a person
willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in
whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture
or other property belonging to the Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.11 THEFT. No person shall take possession or control of property of the
Library with the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
22.12 NOTICE POSTED. There shall be posted in clear public view within
the Library notices informing the public of the following:
1. Failure To Return. Failure to return Library materials for two (2)
months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library
materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one (1) month or
more after the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is
evidence of intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt,
including the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such
material or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has
been made to reclaim the materials or equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may
be detained and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 111 -
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies
23.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The City Planning and
Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consists of nine
(9) members, seven (7) of whom are residents of the City. The resident
members shall be appointed by the Council and shall not hold any elective
office in the City government. The additional two members of the Commission
are one member of the County Board of Supervisors, or a person designated by
the Board, and one resident of the area outside the City over which the zoning
jurisdiction of the City has been extended, both appointed by the County Board
of Supervisors. A person designated by the Board shall also be a resident of the
County in which such extended area is located.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6, 414.23 & 392.1)
23.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the
Commission shall be five (5) years. The terms of not more than one-third of the
members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by
resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be
appointed in the same manner as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to
the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise
the following powers and duties:
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at
its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and
another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the
Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 112 -
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such
rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may
deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3. Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers
and duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and
other related matters and may from time to time recommend to the
Council amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as
provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4. Recommendations of Improvements. No statuary, memorial or
work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct,
street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or
erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any
department of the City for the erection or location thereof until and
unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall
have been submitted to the Commission and its recommendations
thereon obtained, except such requirements and recommendations shall
not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement when the
Commission after thirty (30) days’ written notice requesting such
recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5. Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent
thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions
of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first
be submitted to the Commission and its recommendations obtained
before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6. Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements. No plan
for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other
public improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by
the City or the character or location thereof determined, unless such
proposal shall first have been submitted to the Commission and the
Commission shall have had thirty (30) days within which to file its
recommendations thereon.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7. Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full,
complete and exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City
all sums of money appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts,
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 113 -
donations or payments whatsoever which are received by the City for
City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8. Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no
power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
9. Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to
the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its
receipts, disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding
fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 115 -
CHAPTER 24
RECREATION COMMISSION
24.01 Creation 24.04 Funding
24.02 Officers and Meetings 24.05 Rule Making
24.03 Powers 24.06 Budget and Annual Reports
24.01 CREATION. The Marengo Recreation Commission is hereby created,
to be composed of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor subject to
approval of the Council to serve for terms of three (3) years. All members shall
be residents of the Iowa Valley Community School District. Members may be
removed at any time by a majority vote of the Council. The terms of office of
members of the Commission are staggered so that in one year, three members
are appointed and in each of the next two years two members are appointed.
Commission members shall serve without compensation.
24.02 OFFICERS AND MEETINGS. The Commission shall choose from
its members annually at its first regular meeting, or as soon thereafter as
practicable, a person to act as Chairperson, a person to act as Vice Chairperson,
a person to act as Secretary and a person to act as Treasurer. The Commission
shall hold a meeting whenever called by the Chairperson or any two
Commission members, at a time and place determined by the Chairperson, but
the Commission shall hold a meeting at least once a month. Four members
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Secretary shall
take the minutes of all the meetings.
24.03 POWERS. The Commission shall have the power to provide,
administer and oversee public recreational programs, activities and facilities of
the City, except that the Commission shall not have the authority or
responsibility for the operations of the City swimming pool, tennis courts or
parks.
24.04 FUNDING. The operations, programs and activities administered by
the Commission shall be funded by such gifts, bequests, user fees or other selfgenerated
income or funds as are acquired by the Commission in the course of
its operations. The Council may from time to time appropriate additional funds
for specific or general operations of the Commission. The Commission may
solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other property to be used for
the recreational programs of the City, but if acceptance thereof shall subject the
City to an expense for improvements or maintenance, or to any liability
whatsoever, the acceptance shall be subject to approval of the Council.
CHAPTER 24 RECREATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 116 -
24.05 RULE MAKING. The Commission may adopt rules and regulations
to govern the activities and programs it administers and may set such user and
participation fees as are reasonably necessary to provide and maintain the
recreational services and activities of the Commission.
24.06 BUDGET AND ANNUAL REPORTS. The Commission is
authorized to prepare and administer a budget, and shall submit a budget
proposal to the Clerk in accordance with Section 7.05(2) of this Code of
Ordinances. In addition, the Commission shall file with the Clerk at the end of
each fiscal year a report of the activities and expenditures of the Commission of
the preceding fiscal year. The Commission shall also provide any other report
that may be requested from time to time by the Mayor or Council.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 117 -
CHAPTER 25
HOSPITAL BOARD
25.01 Hospital Established 25.06 Rules
25.02 Membership 25.07 Annual Report
25.03 Organization 25.08 Discrimination
25.04 Powers and Duties 25.09 Gifts
25.05 Compensation and Expenses 25.10 Depreciation Fund
25.01 HOSPITAL ESTABLISHED. Pursuant to an election held June 28,
1955, the Marengo Memorial Hospital was created under Chapter 37 of the
Code of Iowa and authorized to operate as an instrumentality of the City as
provided for by the laws of the State.
25.02 MEMBERSHIP. The Board of Commissioners consists of not less
than five (5) members and not more than eleven (11) members appointed by the
City Council. The exact number of commissioners shall be set by separate
resolution by the Marengo Council as requested by the Marengo Memorial
Hospital. All the members of the board shall be bonafide citizens or residents of
Iowa County and shall be over the age of eighteen (18).
25.03 ORGANIZATION. All appointments to the Board shall be for three
(3) years except to fill vacancies. Appointments shall be made every year of
one-third of the total number to stagger the terms. The position of any
Commissioner shall be vacant if said Commissioner moves permanently from
the City or if said Commissioner is absent from six (6) consecutive regular
meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from
the City. Vacancies in the Board shall be filled by appointment of the Council,
and the new Commissioner shall fill out the unexpired term for which the
appointment is made.
25.04 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall meet and elect from its
members a Chairperson, a Secretary and such other officers as it deems
necessary and shall have and exercise all of the powers and duties necessary for
the management, control and government of the City’s hospital.
25.05 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES. No Commissioner shall
receive any compensation for any services performed but may receive
reimbursement for any cash expenses actually made for personal expenses
incurred as a Commissioner, but an itemized statement of all expenses and
moneys paid out shall be made under oath by each of the Commissioners and
filed with the Secretary and allowed only by the affirmative vote of the full
Board.
CHAPTER 25 HOSPITAL BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 118 -
25.06 RULES. The Board shall provide all needed rules for the economic
conduct of the facilities under its jurisdiction.
25.07 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall annually prepare a condensed
statement of the total receipts and expenditures for the hospital or health care
facility and cause the same to be published as required by law.
25.08 DISCRIMINATION. No discrimination in the management of the
hospital shall be made against practitioners of any school of medicine
recognized by the laws of the State.
25.09 GIFTS. As a part of the Board’s authority, it may accept property by
gift, devise, bequest or otherwise; and, if the Board deems it advisable, may, at
public sale, sell or exchange any property so accepted upon a concurring vote of
a majority of all members of the Board, and apply the proceeds thereof or
property received in exchange therefor, to any legitimate hospital purpose.
25.10 DEPRECIATION FUND. The Board may, in its discretion, establish
a fund for depreciation as a separate fund. Said funds may be invested in
United States Government Bonds and when so invested the accumulation of
interest on the bonds so purchased shall be used for the purposes of the
Depreciation Fund; an investment when so made shall remain in the United
States Government Bonds until such time as, in the judgment of the Board, it is
deemed advisable to use the funds for hospital purposes.
25.11 TAX EXEMPT STATUS. The tax exempt status of the hospital is
affirmed as follows:
1. The memorial hospital known as Marengo Memorial Hospital is
organized exclusively for charitable, education, and scientific
purposes, including, for such purposes the making of distributions
to organizations that qualify as exempt organizations under
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or
corresponding sections of any future federal tax code.
2. No part of the net earnings of the Marengo Memorial Hospital
shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable to its members,
trustees, officers, or other private persons, except that the Hospital
shall be authorized and empowered to distributions in furtherance
of the purposes set forth in this ordinance. No substantial part of
the activities of the Hospital shall be the carrying on of
propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, and
the Hospital shall not participate in (including the publishing or
distribution of statements) any political campaign on behalf of any
CHAPTER 25 HOSPITAL BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 119 -
candidate for public office. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this ordinance, the Hospital shall not carry on any other
activities not permitted to be carried on (a) by an organization
exempt from federal income tax under section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code, or corresponding section of any future
federal tax code, or (b) by an organization, contributions to which
are deductible under section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code, or corresponding section of any future federal tax code.
3. Upon the dissolution of the Marengo Memorial Hospital, the
assets shall be distributed to the City of Marengo for a public
purpose.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 151 -
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
30.01 Department Established 30.06 Peace Officers Appointed
30.02 Organization 30.07 Police Chief: Duties
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.04 Required Training 30.09 Summoning Aid
30.05 Compensation 30.10 Taking Weapons
30.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City
is established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law
and ordinances within the corporate limits of the City.
30.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Police Chief and
such other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as
may be authorized by the Council.
30.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person
be selected or appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets
the minimum qualification standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement
Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the
minimum training required by law at an approved law enforcement training
school within one year of employment. Peace officers shall also meet the
minimum in-service training as required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11 [2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
30.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department are designated by
rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the
Council.
30.06 PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED. The Mayor shall appoint and
dismiss the Police Chief subject to the consent of a majority of the Council, and
the Mayor shall select, subject to the approval of Council, the other members of
the department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 152 -
30.07 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following
powers and duties subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
1. General. Perform all duties required of the police chief by law or
ordinance.
2. Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and
bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3. Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to
the Police Chief.
4. Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated
to the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5. Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
6. Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City
officers, boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7. Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be
necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any
law or ordinance.
8. Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City
by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law
or City ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the
disposition of the charge.
9. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual
report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or
Council.
10. Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police
work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all
vehicles, equipment and materials of the department.
30.08 DEPARTMENTAL RULES. The Police Chief shall establish such
rules, not in conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of
the Council, as may be necessary for the operation of the department.
30.09 SUMMONING AID. Any peace officer making a legal arrest may
orally summon as many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid
the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 153 -
30.10 TAKING WEAPONS. Any person who makes an arrest may take
from the person arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm
which the arrested person may have within such person’s control to be disposed
of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 161 -
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.08 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.02 Organization 35.09 Constitution
35.03 Approved by Council 35.10 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.04 Training 35.11 Liability Insurance
35.05 Compensation 35.12 Calls Outside City
35.06 Election of Officers 35.13 Mutual Aid
35.07 Fire Chief: Duties 35.14 Authority to Cite Violations
35.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A volunteer fire department is
hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and
property against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer
all emergency calls for which there is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Fire Chief and
such other officers and personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03 APPROVED BY COUNCIL. No person having otherwise qualified
shall be appointed to the department until such appointment is submitted to and
approved by a majority of the Council members.
35.04 TRAINING. All members of the department shall meet the minimum
training standards established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively
participate in regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the
Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department shall be designated
by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06 ELECTION OF OFFICERS. The department shall elect a Fire Chief
and such other officers as its constitution and bylaws may provide, but the
election of Fire Chief shall be subject to the approval of the Council. In case of
absence of the Fire Chief, the officer next in rank shall be in charge and have
and exercise all the powers of Fire Chief.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 162 -
35.07 FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Fire Chief shall perform all duties
required of the Fire Chief by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the
following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire
prevention and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances
of fires.
2. Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning
private fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and
exits and development of fire emergency plans.
3. Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an
operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue
operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas
leak, or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed
necessary in the reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4. Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle,
vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of
the fire department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5. Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or
erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley,
right-of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or
emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the fire
fighting efforts of the fire department, to control the scene until any
required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the
fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6. Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the
efficiency, discipline and control of the fire department. The members of
the fire department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the
Fire Chief.
7. Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of
all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or
belonging to the fire department.
8. Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property
damage in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has
occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 163 -
Marshal’s Division immediately. For all fires causing an estimated
damage of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more or emergency responses by the
Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within ten
(10) days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all
fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants
of the property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the
estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by
investigation, and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning
the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
9. Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter
any building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the
purpose of making such investigation or inspection which under law or
ordinance may be necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10. Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners,
occupants, caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate
fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11. Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire
Marshal, and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of
duties by investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
12. Records. Cause to be kept records of the fire department
personnel, fire fighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and
apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause and location,
and an analysis of losses by value, type and location of buildings.
13. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual
report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other
reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.08 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF. No person shall willfully fail or
refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief.
35.09 CONSTITUTION. The department shall adopt a constitution and
bylaws as they deem calculated to accomplish the object contemplated, and
such constitution and bylaws and any change or amendment to such constitution
and bylaws before being effective, must be approved by the Council.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 164 -
35.10 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract
to insure the City against liability for worker’s compensation and against
statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention
for volunteer fire fighters injured in the performance of their duties as fire
fighters whether within or outside the corporate limits of the City. All volunteer
fire fighters shall be covered by the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.11 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure
against liability of the City or members of the department for injuries, death or
property damage arising out of and resulting from the performance of
departmental duties within or outside the corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
35.12 CALLS OUTSIDE CITY. The department shall answer calls to fires
and other emergencies outside the City limits if the Fire Chief determines that
such emergency exists and that such action will not endanger persons and
property within the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
35.13 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the
department may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted
fire departments. Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
35.14 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under
the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in
accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for violations of state and/or
local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 165 -
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
36.01 Purpose 36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required 36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
36.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety
and welfare from the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations
are promulgated to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and
cleanup of hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
36.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter the following terms are
defined:
1. “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control,
identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a
hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2. “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous
substance onto the land, into a water of the State or into the atmosphere
which creates an immediate or potential danger to the public health or
safety or to the environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of
substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety and
includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or
flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means. “Hazardous substance” may
include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of
the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid
Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under section 307 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977,
or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under
the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 166 -
4. “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces,
handles, stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous
substance, the release of which creates a hazardous condition, including
bailees, carriers, and any other person in control of a hazardous
substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns
the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other
agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED. Whenever a hazardous condition is created
by the deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous
substance, so that the hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous
substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged
into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the
condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as
rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall
be borne by the responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the
cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and
circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give
reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice
setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will
proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs
associated with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the
deadline. In the event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary
as a result of the present danger to the public health, safety and welfare, then no
notice shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and
bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill
for those services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall
proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is
beyond the capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report
to the Council and immediately seek any State or Federal funds available for
said cleanup.
36.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall
be strictly liable for all of the following:
1. The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City as a result of
the failure of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance
involved in a hazardous condition.
2. The reasonable costs incurred by the City to evacuate people from
the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 167 -
3. The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction
of, or loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a
hazardous condition caused by that person, including the costs of
assessing the injury, destruction or loss.
36.05 NOTIFICATIONS.
1. A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or
disposing of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of
Natural Resources and the Police Chief of the occurrence of a hazardous
condition as soon as possible but not later than six (6) hours after the
onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition.
The Police Chief shall immediately notify the Department of Natural
Resources.
2. Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall
notify the Police Chief, which shall then notify the Department of
Natural Resources.
36.06 POLICE AUTHORITY. If the circumstances reasonably so require,
the law enforcement officer or an authorized representative may:
1. Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of
a hazardous condition, and
2. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under
this section.
36.07 LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of
damages, injuries, or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the
City is the responsible person as defined in Section 36.02(4).
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 185 -
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
40.01 Assault 40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.02 Harassment 40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.03 Disorderly Conduct 40.06 Loitering
40.01 ASSAULT. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the
following:
1. Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury
to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [1])
2. Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to place
another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful,
injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [2])
However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such
other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in
itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or
activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk or serious injury or breach of
the peace, the act is not an assault. Provided, where the person doing any of the
above enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other
disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff
member performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds
or at an official school function regardless of the location, the act is not an
assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is
between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the
intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of
those assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02 HARASSMENT. No person shall commit harassment.
1. A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate,
annoy or alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 186 -
A. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph,
writing or via electronic communication without legitimate
purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other person
annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
B. Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary
device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine
or railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
C. Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or
to be delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge
or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
D. Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal
activity, knowing that the information is false, or reports the
alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the same did not
occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2. A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and
without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person,
with the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used
in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact”
means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or
physical proximity to each other. “Personal contact” does not require a
physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these
types of contacts.
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. No person shall do any of the following:
1. Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public
place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that
participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is
reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [1])
2. Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any
residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the
occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [2])
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 187 -
3. Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any
threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know
is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [3])
4. Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [4])
5. False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or
circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe,
knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [5])
6. Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the
United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a
symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation
that such use will provoke or encourage another to commit a public
offense.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [6])
7. Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct
any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to
prevent or hinder its lawful use by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [7])
8. Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 500 feet of the building or
other location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or
within 500 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
A. Make loud and raucous noise which causes unreasonable
distress to the persons attending the funeral or memorial service
or participating in the funeral procession.
B. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to
provoke a violent reaction by another.
C. Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the
funeral, memorial service, funeral procession or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during
and within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession or burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 188 -
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. It is unlawful for three (3) or more
persons to assemble together, with them or any of them acting in a violent
manner, and with intent that they or any of them will commit a public offense.
No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an unlawful assembly,
knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE. A peace officer may order the
participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity
of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse. No person within hearing distance of
such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.06 LOITERING. No person shall, without authority or justification,
loiter or remain on public property or private property of another.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 189 -
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances 41.07 Antenna and Radio Wires
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public 41.08 Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
Safety Entities 41.09 Discharging Weapons
41.03 Refusing to Assist Officer 41.10 Throwing and Shooting
41.04 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees 41.11 Urinating and Defecating
41.05 Interference with Official Acts 41.12 Fireworks
41.06 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators 41.13 Drug Paraphernalia
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES. No person shall
distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic,
poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person delivers such into the
hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the
substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place where the
substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC
SAFETY ENTITIES. No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1. Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire
department, a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity,
knowing that the information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of
a criminal act knowing the act did not occur.
2. Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing
that he or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing
emergency information or assistance.
3. Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer
who enters the information on a citation.
41.03 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER. Any person who is requested or
ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer
assistance in making or attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the
commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as required. No person
shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render
assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 190 -
41.04 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or
employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.05 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS. No person shall
knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a peace officer,
emergency medical care provider or fire fighter, whether paid or volunteer, in
the performance of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or
authority of that officer, emergency medical care provider or fire fighter, or
shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any authorized
person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The terms “resist”
and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal harassment unless
the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and apparent
intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.06 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. No
person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or
similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of buildings and
accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such refrigerator, ice box,
or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on premises in the person’s
possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.07 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES. It is unlawful for a person to
allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist
over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public
building without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.08 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES. It is unlawful for a
person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the City
limits without the written consent of the Council unless such land consists of ten
(10) acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.09 DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
1. It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except
by written consent of the Council.
2. No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless
manner.
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 191 -
41.10 THROWING AND SHOOTING.
1. It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks or missiles of any
kind or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles,
BB guns or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street,
alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public
building, without written consent of the Council.
2. No bow and arrow or crossbow, regardless of make and design shall
be discharged within City limits unless:
a. The person engaged in target practice has written consent from
the Police Chief.
b. Only arrows specifically designed for target practice are used.
c. The arrow is drawn back and released parallel to the ground
and discharged toward a backdrop composed of a substance
which will not allow the arrow to pass through, and such
backdrop must extend at least five feet beyond the target on
the top and bottom and both sides and must extend from the
bottom of the target to the ground.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.11 URINATING AND DEFECATING. It is unlawful for any person to
urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto
any public or private building, including but not limited to the wall, floor,
hallway, steps, stairway, doorway or window thereof, or onto any public or
private land.
41.12 FIREWORKS. The sale, use or exploding of fireworks within the City
is subject to the following:
1. Definition. The term “fireworks” includes any explosive
composition, or combination of explosive substances, or articles
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and specifically
includes blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman
candles, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks
containing any explosive or flammable compound, or other device
containing any explosive substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
2. Regulations. It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose
for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks; provided the City
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 192 -
may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the display of
fireworks by a City agency, fair associations, amusement parks and other
organizations or groups of individuals approved by City authorities when
such fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator. No
permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring
organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance in the
following amounts:
A. Personal Injury: ....................... $250,000 per person.
B. Property Damage: .................... $50,000
C. Total Exposure: ....................... $1,000,000
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
3. Exceptions. This section does not prohibit the sale by a resident,
dealer, manufacturer or jobber of such fireworks as are not prohibited; or
the sale of any kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of State; or
the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theatre, or for signal
purposes in athletic sports or by railroads or trucks for signal purposes,
or by a recognized military organization. This section does not apply to
any substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or
fumigation purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
41.13 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 124.414)
1. As used in this section “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment,
products or materials of any kind used or attempted to be used in
combination with a controlled substance, except those items used in
combination with the lawful use of a controlled substance, to knowingly
or intentionally and primarily do any of the following:
A. Manufacture a controlled substance.
B. Inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance.
C. Test the strength, effectiveness or purity of a controlled
substance.
D. Enhance the effect of a controlled substance.
Drug paraphernalia does not include hypodermic needles or syringes if
manufactured, delivered, sold or possessed for a lawful purpose.
2. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally
manufacture, deliver, sell or possess drug paraphernalia.
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 193 -
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 195 -
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.01 Trespassing 42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Littering
42.04 Unauthorized Entry
42.01 TRESPASSING. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass
upon the property of another. As used in this section, the term “property”
includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary
or permanent structure whether publicly or privately owned. The term
“trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8)
1. Entering Property Without Permission. Entering upon or in
property without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person
in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use,
remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2a])
2. Entering or Remaining on Property. Entering or remaining upon
or in property without justification after being notified or requested to
abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner,
lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer,
magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or
maintenance of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2b])
3. Interfering with Lawful Use of Property. Entering upon or in
private property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering
with the lawful use of the property by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2c])
4. Using Property Without Permission. Being upon or in property
and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging,
harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate,
without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person
in lawful possession.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2d])
None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of
another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 196 -
accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the
property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes the
most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits
the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with the
lawful use of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(3))
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no
right to do so, to intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for
a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in
part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of the United States or the
State, or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place
within the City by authority of the law or by order of any court, during the time
for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or
remain in or upon any public building, premises or grounds in violation of any
notice posted thereon or when said building, premises or grounds are closed and
not open to the public. When open to the public, a failure to pay any required
admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry.
42.05 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice
as defined in Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in
Section 714.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07 LITTERING. No person shall dump, throw, place, deposit or leave, or
cause to be dumped, thrown, deposited or left, any refuse of any kind or any
object or substance which tends to pollute, harm or deface into, upon or about
(i) any public street, highway, alley, road, right-of-way, park or other public
place, except by direction of some public officer or employee authorized by law
to direct or permit such acts, or (ii) any private property without the consent of
the owner or occupant of such property.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 225 -
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or Intoxication
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal
age” means twenty-one (21) years of age or more.
1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt
to purchase or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer
in their possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer
given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and
with the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for
beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by
either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the
extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages,
wine, and beer during the regular course of the person’s employment by
a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
2. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age
for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic
beverage, wine or beer from any licensee or permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the
Code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section
232.19 of the Code of Iowa.
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or
urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified
person using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner
of Public Safety.
C. “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section
801.4 of the Code of Iowa.
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion
of a public or private school which provides teaching for any
grade from kindergarten through grade twelve.
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 226 -
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer
upon the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume
alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor
control license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors,
wine or beer on public school property or while attending any public or
private school-related function. A person shall not be intoxicated or
simulate intoxication in a public place.
3. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person
that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s
own expense. If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public
Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine the person’s
blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be
offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication,
evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection
is admissible upon proof of a proper foundation. The percentage of
alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the
results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s
arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage
of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
4. No person shall be under the influence of an illegal drug as
defined in the State of Iowa Code, in a public place.
5. It is unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia in a
public place. Drug paraphernalia shall be defined as any material which
can be used to administer, inhale or ingest illegal drugs as defined in the
State of Iowa Code.
45.03 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. (See Section 62.07
of this Code of Ordinances.)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 227 -
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01 Curfew 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco 46.04 Minors in Establishments Primarily Serving Alcohol
46.01 CURFEW. A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be
enforced as follows:
1. Definition. The term “minor” means in this section, any
unmarried person below the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. Time Limits. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon
any of the alleys, streets or public places or to be in places of business
and amusement in the City between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m.
and five o’clock (5:00) a.m. of the following day, except that curfew
hours commence at twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight on Friday, to five
o’clock (5:00) a.m. Saturday, and at twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight on
Saturday, to five o’clock (5:00) a.m. Sunday.
3. Exceptions. The restriction provided by subsection 46.01(2) shall
not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a guardian, parent or
other person charged with the care and custody of such minor, or other
responsible person over eighteen (18) years of age, nor shall the
restriction apply to any minor who is traveling between his or her home
or place of residence and the place where any approved employment,
church, municipal or school function is being held.
4. Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian
or other person charged with the care and custody of any minor to allow
or permit such minor to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, places of
business, or amusement or other public places within the curfew hours
set by subsection 46.01(2), except as otherwise provided in subsection
46.01(3).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 613.16)
5. Responsibility of Business Establishments. It is unlawful for any
persons operating a place of business or amusement to allow or permit
any minor to be in or upon any place of business or amusement operated
by them within the curfew hours set by subsection 46.01(2) except as
otherwise provided in subsection 46.01(3).
6. Enforcement. Any peace officer of the City while on duty is
hereby empowered to arrest any minor who violates any of the
provisions of Subsections 46.01(2) and (3). Upon arrest, the minor shall
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 228 -
be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person charged
with the care and custody of the minor.
46.02 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under
eighteen (18) years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase or attempt to
purchase any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes. Possession of cigarettes
or tobacco products by a person under eighteen years of age shall not constitute
a violation of this section if said person possesses the cigarettes or tobacco
products as part of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a
person who holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa and
lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any person
to encourage any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act
of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
46.04 MINORS IN ESTABLISHMENTS PRIMARILY SERVING
ALCOHOL. It is unlawful for any person who keeps an establishment where
alcohol is its primary business, or the agent or employee of any such person, or
any persons having charge or control of any such establishment, to permit any
minor under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to remain in such
establishment after ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. This time limitation shall apply to
Friday and Saturday nights, regardless of the City-wide curfew.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 229 -
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
47.01 Purpose 47.04 Littering
47.02 Use of Drives Required 47.05 Parks Closed
47.03 Fires 47.06 Camping
47.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment
of park facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations
governing the use of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02 USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED. No person shall drive any car, cycle
or other vehicle, or ride or lead any horse, in any portion of a park except upon
the established drives or roadways therein or such other places as may be
officially designated by the City.
47.03 FIRES. No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and
such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be
immediately used by some other party.
47.04 LITTERING. No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste,
refuse, litter or foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those
provided for that purpose.
47.05 PARKS CLOSED. No person, except those camping in designated
areas, shall enter or remain within any park between the hours of twelve o’clock
(12:00) midnight and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. except with prior permission of the
Council.
47.06 CAMPING. No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in
portions prescribed or designated by the Council, and the City may refuse
camping privileges or rescind any and all camping privileges for cause.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 231 -
CHAPTER 48
NOISE
48.01 Definitions 48.03 Enforcement
48.02 Noise Prohibitions and Limited Sound Sources 48.04 Jake Brakes
48.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this
chapter:
1. “A-weighted sound level” means the sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted
network. The level so read is designated dBA.
2. “Commercial” or “commercial district” means any property which
is zoned for any commercial use as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, and
on which there is no residential use.
3. “Decibel” means a unit of measuring the volume of sound, equal
to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
micronewtons per square meter).
4. “Exhaust system” means the device or combination of devices
that collects the exhaust from the engine or motor, delivers the exhaust to
the atmosphere, and reduces the noise emissions. “Exhaust system”
includes manifold or headers, exhaust pipe, muffler and tail pipe.
5. “Gross vehicle weight rating” means the value specified by the
manufacturer as the recommended maximum weighted load of a single
motor vehicle. When trailers and tractors are separable, the gross
combination weight rating is the value specified by the manufacturer as
the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combined vehicle.
6. “Industrial” or “industrial district” means any property zoned for
any industrial use as defined in the Zoning Ordinance and on which there
is no commercial use or residential use.
7. “Motor vehicle” means any vehicle which is self-propelled.
8. “Noise disturbance” means any transmission of sound across a
real property boundary from a source specifically limited by this chapter,
which exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Table 1 (at the end of
this section).
9. “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along the
ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real
CHAPTER 48 NOISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 232 -
property owned by another person, but not including intra-building real
property divisions.
10. “Receiving land use,” for the purpose of this chapter, means the
use or occupancy of the property which receives the transmission of
sound.
11. “Residential” or “residential district” means any property on
which is located a building or structure used wholly or partially for living
or sleeping purposes.
12. “Sound” means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement,
particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal
forces which cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The
description of sound may include any characteristic of sound, including
duration, density and frequency.
13. “Sound level” means the weighted sound pressure level contained
by the use of the sound level meter and A-weighted network, such as A, B
or C as specified in American National Standards Institute Specifications
for Sound Level Meters, ANSI S1, 4-1971. If the frequency weighting
employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
14. “Sound level meter” means an instrument used to measure sound
pressure.
15. “Sound pressure” means the instantaneous difference between the
actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in
space, as pressure of 20 micropascals.
16. “Sound pressure level” means twenty times the logarithm to the
base 10 of the ratio of the root mean squared sound pressure to the
reference pressure of 20 micropascals.
17. “Used or occupied,” where it appears herein, shall be deemed to
include the words “intended, designed or arranged to be used or
occupied.”
TABLE 1
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels From Limited Sources by Receiving Land Use
Zoning Category of Receiving
Land Use
Legal Times
Sound Level Limit
(dBA)
Residence District 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 60
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 50
Commercial District
At all times 65
Industrial District At all times 75
(20-83)
CHAPTER 48 NOISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 233 -
48.02 NOISE PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITED SOUND SOURCES.
The following sound sources are limited by this chapter:
1. No person shall perform, create, cause or permit a radio,
television set, musical instrument or any other device to produce,
reproduce or amplify sound to create a noise in excess of 86 dBA at 25
feet from such device when operated on a motor vehicle.
2. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device on
a motor vehicle on a public highway.
3. Every motor vehicle shall be at all times equipped with an exhaust
system in good working order and in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke. (The intent of this
provision is that it is necessary to prevent both noise and smoke, and
either one constitutes a violation.) Noise which is measured at a distance
of at least 25 feet from the near side of the nearest lane being monitored
at a height of at least 4 feet above the immediate surrounding surface as
follows shall be excessive or unusual noise:
Motor Vehicle Designation
Speed of 35 MPH
or less
Speed Over 35
MPH
Motor vehicle or a combination of
vehicles towed by a motor vehicle
with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
rating or gross combination weight
rating of 10,000 pounds or more
90 dBA
or more
94 dBA
or more
Any other motor vehicle or any
combination of vehicle towed by any
motor vehicle
80 dBA
or more
84 dBA
or more
4. Sound level measurement from limited sound sources, for purpose
of this chapter, shall be measured using a sound level meter at the real
property boundary of the receiving property, or a point reasonably
proximate to the real property boundary and shall be measured at a
height of 4 feet from the immediate ground surface.
5. No person shall own, possess or harbor any animal or bird which
frequently or for continued duration emits sounds native to the species
which are a noise disturbance. Excepted from the provision of this
subsection are guide dogs for the blind and deaf.
6. No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of
any radio, television, phonograph, drum musical instrument, sound
amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies
CHAPTER 48 NOISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 234 -
sound at a level which creates a noise disturbance. Church or clock
carillons, bells or chimes, parades or processions (provided the
conditions of the permit are met), mobile radios or telephone signal
devices and sanctioned racing events are all excepted from the provisions
of this subsection.
7. No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of a
power lawn mower, power trimmer or other gasoline or electric powered
devices intended for mowing or trimming a lawn between the hours of
ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. the following
morning if such use or operation creates a noise disturbance as defined
by this chapter. No person shall use or operate or permit the use or
operation of a gasoline powered lawn mower which does not have a
muffler if such use or operation created a noise disturbance as defined by
this chapter.
8. No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of a
power chain saw between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and
seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. the following morning if such use or operation
creates a noise disturbance as defined in this chapter.
9. Governmental fire department equipment and devices used by
emergency vehicles or by governmental officials or organizations for
authorized public purposes are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
10. No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of
any radio, tape deck or player, sound amplifier or similar device which
produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in a motor vehicle so as to
create a sound 50 or more feet from the device which endangers or
injures the welfare, safety or health of a human being, or disturbs a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities or devalues or injures personal
or real property.
48.03 ENFORCEMENT. The provisions of this chapter which prohibit the
making, continuing or causing the making or continuance of a noise disturbance
may be enforced upon receipt of a complaint made or filed with City officials
by a person disturbed by such noise disturbance. Certification by an official
charged with enforcement of the provisions of this chapter that such complaint
was made shall be sufficient to establish the fact of the complaint. However,
peace officers may enforce violations of this chapter without the necessity of a
complaint if sufficient evidence exists in the judgment of the peace officer to
establish a violation of the provision of this chapter.
CHAPTER 48 NOISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 235 -
48.04 JAKE BRAKES. All trucks being operated on any street or highway
within the City may not use the engine back-pressure braking systems
commonly known as “Jake Brakes.” Any such use shall be deemed a violation
of this section and shall be a simple misdemeanor.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 251 -
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.08 Request for Hearing
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated 50.09 Abatement in Emergency
50.03 Other Conditions 50.10 Abatement by City
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited 50.11 Collection of Costs
50.05 Nuisance Abatement 50.12 Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement
50.06 Notice to Abate: Contents 50.13 Failure to Abate
50.07 Method of Service
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health,
indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free
use of property so as essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property is a nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED. The following subsections include,
but do not limit, the conditions which are deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1. Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or
other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture,
which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive
smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the
health, comfort or property of individuals or the public.
2. Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth
or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the
prejudice of others.
3. Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding
without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or
collection of water.
4. Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure
the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same
from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
5. Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering,
by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds.
6. Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct
and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue,
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 252 -
highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to
render dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section 62.08)
7. Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable
junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers
in such articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of
fireproof construction. (See also Chapter 51)
8. Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash.
9. Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or other
vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
10. Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease.
(See also Chapter 151)
11. Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or
regularly established airport or landing place, which may endanger or
obstruct aerial navigation including take-off and landing, unless such
object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on
which the same is located.
12. Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by
persons participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter
723A of the Code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using
controlled substances, as defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of
Iowa, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling,
fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the
disturbance of others.
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of
Ordinances contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions which
are deemed to be nuisances:
1. Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
2. Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
3. Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
4. Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a
nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the
manner provided for in this chapter or State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 253 -
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever the Mayor or other
authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall
cause to be served upon the property owner a written notice to abate the
nuisance within a reasonable time after notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06 NOTICE TO ABATE: CONTENTS. The notice to abate shall
contain:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
2. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
3. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary
to abate the nuisance.
4. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete
the abatement.
5. Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made
within the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs
against such person.
50.07 METHOD OF SERVICE. The notice may be in the form of an
ordinance or sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.08 REQUEST FOR HEARING. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance
may have a hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request
for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time
stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists
and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council at a
time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within
a reasonable time under the circumstances.
50.09 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY. If it is determined that an
emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or
condition, the City may perform any action which may be required under this
chapter without prior notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in
Section 50.11 after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions
of Sections 50.05, 50.06 and 50.07 and hearing as provided in Section 50.08.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 254 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.10 ABATEMENT BY CITY. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.
The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.11 COLLECTION OF COSTS. The Clerk shall send a statement of the
total expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to
abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not
been paid within one (1) month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County
Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner,
as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.12 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT. If the
amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds one hundred
dollars ($100.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten
(10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same
interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property under State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
50.13 FAILURE TO ABATE. Any person causing or maintaining a
nuisance who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the
reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of
this Code of Ordinances.
50.14. MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE. In lieu
of or in addition to the provisions set forth in Section 50.05, the requirements of
this chapter may be enforced as a municipal infraction as set forth below.
1. MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this chapter or any
ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to
perform any act or duty required by the same, is a municipal in fraction
punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.
2. PENALTIES. A municipal infraction under this chapter is
punishable by the following civil penalties:
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 255 -
A. First Offense: Not to exceed $100.00.
B. Second Offense: Not to exceed $250.00.
C. Third and Subsequent Offense: Not to exceed $500.00.
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate
offense. Any person violating this chapter may also be required to pay all costs
and expenses involved in the prosecution of the violation.
3. CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to
enforce this chapter may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a
municipal infraction. The citation may be served by personal service as
provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the
defendant at the defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt
requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.311. A Copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer,
and one copy shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall
serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain
the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
A. The name and address of the defendant.
B. The name and description of the infraction attested to by
the officer issuing the citation.
C. The location and date or time of the infraction.
D. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the
alternative relief sought, or both.
E. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may
be paid.
F. The time and place of court appearance.
G. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 256 -
4. ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized
in this chapter does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from
the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not
limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief.
A. For any violation of this chapter, the City may, in addition
to other remedies, institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate
lawful action necessary to prevent, correct, or abate such violation.
5. CRIMINAL PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace
officer from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of
Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the
violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the
provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful
means.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
51.01 Definitions 51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance 51.06 Parking of Junk Vehicles
51.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous
metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used
lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of
such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous
materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods
or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not
considered junk.
2. “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle or motor vehicle located within the
corporate limits of the City, whether licensed or unlicensed, which has any of the
following characteristics:
A. Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken windshield, window,or
other broken glass.
B. Broken, Loose or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk lid.
C. Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle which has
become the habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
D. Inoperable. Any motor vehicle which lacks an engine or one or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or which cannot be moved under its own power or has not been
used as an operating vehicle for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
E. Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle which, because
of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety.
3. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and includes without
limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm
machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to
store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any private property within the corporate limits of the
City any junk or junk vehicle.
51.03 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE. It is hereby declared that any junk
or junk vehicle located upon private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a
threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section
CHAPTER 51 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in
violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall
be prima facie liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04 EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk
vehicle stored within:
1. Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
2. Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operated within the
City.
3. Vehicle Repair. A vehicle under active repair parked upon the driveway of a
residentially zoned property not having a garage, provided the owner has notified the
Police Department in writing of the owner’s intent to actively repair the vehicle and
the repairs are completed within thirty (30) days of the notification.
51.05 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon
private property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days initiate
abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.06 PARKING OF JUNK VEHICLES. Parking of junk vehicles shall be prohibited
unless excepted under Section 51.04.
Parking of junk vehicles violations shall be punishable by a scheduled fine as listed in Chapter
4.01 Scheduled Fines:
31. Section 51.06 – Parking of Junk Vehicles
First Offense………………………..…. $50.00
Second Offense………………….….… $100.00
Third or subsequent Offense…………$500.00
For purposes of enhancement in this section, any guilty plea or conviction occurring
within two (2) years of a subsequent offense may be used to enhance the level of
offense.
[The next page is 275]
CHAPTER 51 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES

CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
-iCODE
OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 275 -
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions 55.15 Operation of Ordinance from the General Fund
55.02 Dogs and Cats to be Restrained 55.16 Pound of Shelter and Collector
55.03 Apprehension and Impounding 55.17 Notice to Owner of Licensed Animal
55.04 Disposition of Impounded Dogs & Cats 55.18 Dogs Disturbing the Peace
55.05 Redemption of Impounded Dogs & Cats 55.19 Disposition of Dead Dogs and Cats
55.06 Licensing of Dogs and Cats 55.20 Animal Neglect
55.07 Exception to License Requirements 55.21 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs
55.08 Applications for License 55.22 Animal Enclosures, Pens or Hutches
55.09 Delinquent Fee List 55.23 Offenses
55.10 Public Hearing-Delinquent Fee List 55.24 Violation of Ordinance
55.11 Display of License Tag 55.25 Requirement When Animal has Bitten a Person
55.12 Duplicate License Tag 55.26 Report of Person Whose Animal Has Been Bitten
55.13 Non-Transfer of License or License Tag 55.27 Quarantine For A Minimum Period of 14 Days
55.14 Expiration of License and License Tag
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Dog” shall mean any member of the canine species, whether
male, female, or altered.
2. “Cat” shall mean any member of the feline species, whether male,
female, or altered.
3. “Household Pets and Hobby Animals” shall mean animals
normally maintained in a small tank or cage in or near a residence,
including but not limited to a rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot,
canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish, goldfish.
4. “Birds” shall mean parakeets, pigeons, birds of prey, pheasants,
quail or other similar birds that are kept as pets for hobby purposes.
Chickens, geese, and ducks are considered “farm animals” and may not
be kept as household pets.
5. “Fish and Amphibians” shall include frogs, toads, and aquatic
animals that are kept as pets or for hobby purposes.
6. “Mammals” shall mean rabbits, ferrets, mongoose and mink that
are kept as pets or for hobby purposes.
7. “Reptiles” shall mean non-constrictor and non-venomous snakes,
lizards, geckos, salamanders, chameleons, or iguanas less than thirty
inches (30”) in length, and similar reptiles that are kept as pets or for
hobby purposes.
8. “Owner” shall mean any person, association, or corporation which
owns, harbors, shelters, or keeps a dog or cat.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 276 -
9. “Running at Large” shall mean off the premises of the owner, or
upon premises of someone other than the owner or upon the public
streets, sidewalks, alleys, public grounds, school grounds or parks within
the city. Any animal shall not be deemed at large if:
A. The animal is on the premises of the owner or premises of
a person given charge of the animal by the owner and is either:
i. Accompanied by and obedient to the commands of
the owner or the person given such charge, or
ii. Restrained on those premises by an adequate
protective fence or by leash, cord, chain or other
similar restrain of sufficient strength to restrain the
animal and does not allow the animal to go beyond
the real property line of the owner or person in
charge.
10. “Leash” or “leashed” means on a cord or chain or other similar
restraint of sufficient strength to restrain the animal and at all tmes in
control of a person competent to restrain or control said animal.
11. “Vicious animal” shall be defined as set forth in Marengo
Ordinance #57.2(4).
12. “Dangerous Animal” shall be defined as set forth in Marengo
Ordinance #57.2(1).
55.02 DOGS AND CATS TO BE RESTRAINED. It shall be unlawful for
any dog or cat to run at large within the corporate limits of the City of Marengo,
Iowa.
55.03 APPREHENSION AND IMPOUNDING. It shall be the duty of
police officers of this City, and lawful for any other person, to apprehend any
dog or cat found running at large within the corporate limits of this City. All
dogs and cats so apprehended shall be delivered promptly to the City shelter or
pound and where such dog or cat bears identification as to its owner, a good
faith effort shall be made by the Police Department to notify the owner within
twenty-four (24) hours.
This ordinance shall not be construed to restrict the right of any person under
Iowa Code §§351.25 and 351.27 to kill any dog or cat when such dog or cat is
caught in the act of worrying, chasing, maiming, or killing any domestic animal
or fowl, or when such dog or cat is attacking or attempting to bite a person.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 277 -
Any dog or cat that has been reported to the Police Department as having bitten
a person shall be treated as a vicious animal pursuant to Marengo Ordinance
#57.2 (4).
55.04 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS. The following
disposition shall apply to all animals except for such animals are either vicious
or dangerous.
1. If the owner is unknown, an impounded animal shall be kept a
minimum of three (3) business days (Monday through Friday except
holidays) and thereafter may be adopted or humanely destroyed.
2. If the owner is known or determined, and has not reclaimed or
redeemed an impounded animal within three (3) business days, the
owner will then be sent notice by registered mail to said owner’s last
known address that the impounded animal will be put up for adoption or
disposed of in accordance with law within seven (7) days of the date of
the notice. If the owner has not reclaimed or redeemed the animal within
said seven-day period, the animal thereafter may be adopted or disposed
of in accordance with law. If the animal is destroyed, it must be
destroyed by euthanasia. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37{1}).
3. Upon impoundment an animal shall immediately be put up for
adoption but shall not be adopted out until the waiting periods set forth in
subsection 1 and 2 expire.
55.05 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS. Except in
such cases where the dog or cat is determined to be vicious or dangerous, any
owner may redeem a dog or cat by immediately having it vaccinated and by
purchasing current license tags and by paying the fine and costs imposed by this
ordinance. No dog or cat shall be redeemed which has not been licensed as
herein provided. In cases of a vicious or dangerous animal, Marengo Ordinance
#57.4 shall apply.
55.0 LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS. The owners of all cats and all
dogs within the corporate limits of this City except dogs and cats under the age
of six (6) months and guide dogs for blind persons are hereby required to obtain
a dog or cat license annually and the cost of said license is $5.00 set by
Resolution #10-18 of the City Council.
Every owner of a dog or cat under the age of six (6) months on January 1 of any
year shall apply for an annual license for each such dog or cat on or before the
first day of the first month after each such dog or cat reaches the age of six (6)
months, at which time the license fee will be prorated on a monthly basis. New
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 278 -
residents and new owner of a dog or cat will be eligible for a monthly prorated
license fee if they provide proof of purchase or transfer of ownership.
The license fee herein provided shall be paid on or before January 1st of every
year. A penalty for failure to license an animal by January 1st shall result in a
$5.00 per month penalty was set by Resolution #10-18 of the City Council.
The City Clerk of the City shall each year provide numbered metal tags which
shall be issued to the owner upon payment of the license fee herein provided;
said Clerk shall maintain a record of all tags issued the owner of the dog or cat,
the owner’s address and the license tag number. The license tag issued by the
City Clerk shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of the dog or cat
for which issued and the collar or harness securely fastened to the dog or cat
when outside of it normal place of confinement. Al dogs and cats kept outside
on a chain must have a collar or harness with license tag displayed at all times.
55.07 EXCEPTION TO LICENSE REQUIREMENTS. The requirements
for licensing dogs and cats shall not apply to such animals if one or more of the
following situations apply:
1. In transit through the City only.
2. First thirty (30) days of residency by owner.
3. Housed in veterinary hospital
4. Housed temporarily in an animal grooming shop.
5. Housed in an establishment licensed kennel.
6. Housed in an accredited institution for research purposed only.
7. Animal sitting for a period of fourteen (14) days or less with prior
notification to City Hall.
8. Animal housed in a temporary foster home until it can be adopted.
55.08 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE. Except as provided herein for
animals six months of age or younger, the owner of a dog or cat, for which a
license is required, shall on the first day of November of the preceding year and
prior to the first day of January of each year apply to the City Clerk for a license
for each dog or cat owned by him or her. Applications made on or after January
1 of that year shall be delinquent. An application for an annual license for a dog
or cat, which is under the age of six (6) months on January 1 of any year, shall
be delinquent if made on or after the first day of the sixth month after such dog
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 279 -
or cat reaches the age of six (6) months. Applications for licenses shall be in
writing on forms provided by the City Clerk, and shall state the breed, sex, age,
color, markings, and name, if any, of the dog or cat, the address at which the
owner regularly keeps, shelters or harbors the dog or cat, and the name and
address of the owner, and be signed by the owner. Such application shall also
state the date of the most recent rabies vaccination; the type of vaccine
administered and the date the dog or cat shall be revaccinated.
Such application shall be accompanied by a certificated of vaccination issued by
a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog or cat described in the application
has been vaccinated against rabies.
55.09 DELINQUENT FEE LIST. The City Clerk may, in the Clerk’s
discretion or at the request of the City Council, prepare and submit to the
Council a delinquent fee list, which shall show the following:
1. The name and residence address of each person within the
City who is the owner of a dog or cat which is not licensed in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter for the current year
and the amount of fees, including delinquency fees, due from such
owner.
2. The name and residence address of each person within the
City who licensed a dog or cat in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter in the previous year which is not licensed in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter for the current year
and the amount of fees, including delinquency fees, due from such
owner.
The foregoing list shall not include the owner of any dog or cat who, upon
the death, transfer of ownership or disappearance for more than sixty (60)
days of said animal, within the ten (10) days of such event, notifies the
City Clerk of such event and surrenders the license and license tag, if
available, issued to the owner.
55.10 PUBLIC HEARING – DELINQUENT FEE LIST. Upon
submission of the delinquent fee list to the Council, the Council may be
resolution fix a date, time and place for a public hearing thereon. The
Clerk shall mail a written notice of such public hearing to the owner of
each dog or cat which appears on such list by ordinary mail at least ten
(10) days prior to the date fixed for such public hearing. The notice shall
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 280 -
state the date, time and place of such public hearing and shall advise the
owner of each dog or cat which appears on the list that he or she may
appear at such hearing and show cause why the delinquent fees shown
thereon for each such dog or cat should not be paid. After such public
hearing, the Council shall enforce such fees by any legal means permitted
under this Code or release obligation for payment of fees if sufficient
cause is shown for nonpayment.
55.11 DISPLAY OF LICENSE TAG. Upon issuance of the license tag,
the owner of the dog or cat shall cause the license tag to be securely
fastened to a collar or harness which shall be worn by the dog or cat for
which the license tag is issued when outside of its normal place of
confinement or outside on a chain.
55.12 DUPLICATE TAG LICENSE. Upon proof by the owner of the
dog or cat that a license tag issued to such dog or cat in accordance with
the provision of this Chapter has been lost or destroyed, the City Clerk
shall issued a duplicate tag to the owner of such dog or cat. Such duplicate
license tag shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of such dog
or cat in accordance of the provisions of this Chapter. A duplicate license
tag fee of one (1) dollar shall be charged for all duplicate tags.
55.13 NON-TRANSFER OF LICENSE OR LICENSE TAG. No license
or license tag issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
shall be transferred to any other person, dog, or cat.
55.14 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE AND LICENSE TAG. All licenses
and license tags issued in accordance with the provision of this Chapter
shall expire on January 1 of the year following the year for which they
were issued.
55.15 OPERATION OF ORDINANCE FROM THE GENERAL FUND.
All tags, record books and other expenses provided by this ordinance shall
be furnished by the City Clerk and paid for from the general fund and all
license fees and redemption fees received shall be paid into the general
fund of this City.
55.16 POUND OR SHELTER AND COLLECTOR. The City Council
may designate any suitable place as a shelter or pound and pay the
necessary expenses of operation and maintenance and the City may
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 281 -
require the owner of the dog or cat to pay all expenses of capture and
impoundment.
55.17 NOTICES TO OWNER OF LICENSED ANIMAL. The owner of
any animal licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter,
which has been seized and impounded, shall be notified of such seizure
and impounding within twenty-four (24) hours thereof by such person in
such manner as the City Council may direct by resolution.
55.18 DOGS DISTURBING THE PEACE. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of any dog, whether kenneled or not, to permit such dog to disturb
the peace of any person by frequent, regular or habitual barking, howling
or yelping. If the owner of the dog is not available to contact the Marengo
Police Department may post notice on the residence and may impound the
dog, if there has been more than two complaints, verified by the Police
Department, within the last thirty (30) days in regards to said animal. An
owner that has been cited for a dog disturbing the peace more than two (2)
times in any given thirty (30) day period may be subject to having their
animal impounded by the Marengo Police Department.
55.19 DISPOSITION OF DEAD DOGS AND CATS. It shall be the duty
of the owner of any dog or cat that has died or has been killed to dispose
of the dog or cat in an effective and sanitary method or dispose of the dog
or cat by delivery thereof to any duly licensed person engaged in the
business of disposing of the bodies of dead animals. Disposal as herein
provided shall be performed within twenty-four (24) hours after the death
of said dog or cat.
55.20 ANIMAL NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds
or confines, in any place, an animal, to fail to supply the animal during
confinement with a sufficient quantity of food or water, fails to provide a
confined dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of
necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means
which causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering.
55.21 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS. A person who has
ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog,
except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will
accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to
an animal shelter or pound.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 282 -
55.22 ANIMAL ENCLOSURES, PENS OR HUTCHES. Any enclosure,
pen, coup, or hutch in which pets are maintained shall be cleaned at lease
every other day or oftener if deemed advisable or necessary by a health
officer or the Chief of Police. Said enclosures shall be located at a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from the neighboring residential dwelling. No
animal may be enclosed or fenced in the front yard, or in the public rightof-
way. Any kennel that is in except those located in the front yard or in
the public right-of-way.
55.23 OFFENSES. No owner of any dog, cat or other animals, or person
having control or responsibility thereof, shall;
1. Allow or permit such animal to run at large.
2. Allow or permit such animal to defecate on private property
without the express consent of the owner of such property. Fail to
pick up and dispose of any feces deposited by such animal on
private property without the express consent of the owner thereof.
3. Allow or permit such animal to defecate on public property,
including, but not limited to, public property located between curb
lines of public streets, parking, adjacent property lines and public
property located within parks. Fail to pick up and dispose of the
feces deposited by such animal of public property.
4. Allow or permit animal to pass upon public or private
property thereby causing damages to or interference with such
property.
5. Allow or permit a dog to cause annoyance or disturbance to
any person by frequent and habitual barking, howling or yelping.
6. Allow or permit a dog to run after, chase, or attack any
person, vehicle or domesticated animal or place any person in
reasonable fear of attack or injury.
7. Keep, shelter, harbor any unlicensed dog, or cat.
8. Keep, shelter or harbor any dog or cat without a license tag
attached to its collar or harness when outside of its normal
confinement or on a chain as required by this Chapter.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 283 -
9. Keep, shelter or harbor any dog or cat with an expired license
tag attached to its collar or harness.
10. Keep, shelter, harbor any unvaccinated dog, or cat.
11. Keep, shelter or harbor any dog or cat with an expired
vaccination tag attached to its collar or harness.
12. Allow or permit animal to destroy or damage property other
than the property of the owner of such animal.
13. Abandon any animal within the corporate limits of the City.
55.24 VIOLATIONS OF ORDINANCE. Commission of any act named
or defined in this Chapter by a person shall be a misdemeanor, punishable
by a scheduled fine as follows:
1. Allow or permit such animal to run at large - $30.00 first
offense, $50.00 second offense, $100 third offense and for any
subsequent offenses thereafter.
2. Allow or permit such animal to defecate on private property
without the express consent of the owner of such property. Fail to
pick up and dispose of any feces deposited by such animal on
private property without the express consent of the owner thereof -
$30.00.
3. Allow or permit such animal on public property, including,
but not limited to, public property located between curb lines of
public streets, parking, adjacent property lines and public property
located with parks. Fails to pick up and deposit of any feces
deposited by such animal on public property - $30.00.
4. Allow or permit such animal to pass upon public or private
property thereby causing damages to or interference with such
property - $200.00.
5. Allow or permit a dog to cause annoyance or disturbance to
any person by frequent and habitual barking, howling or yelping -
$30.00.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 284 -
6. Allow or permit a dog to run after, chase, or attack any
person, domesticated animal (while latter is on public property) or
vehicle or place any person in reasonable fear of attack or injury -
$200.00.
7. Keep, shelter or harbor any unlicensed dog or cat - $200.00.
8. Keep, shelter or harbor any dog or cat without a license tag
attached to its collar or harness when outside of its normal
confinement or on a chain as required by this Chapter - $30.00.
9. Keep, shelter or harbor any dog or cat with an expired license
tag attached to its collar or harness - $30.00.
10. Keep, shelter or harbor any unvaccinated dog or cat -
$200.00.
11. Keep, shelter or harbor any dog or cat with an expired
vaccination tag attached to its collar or harness. $200.00.
12. Allow or permit such animal to destroy or damage property
other than the property of the owner of such animal - $200.00.
13. Abandon any animal within the corporate limits of the City -
$200.00.
55.25 REQUIREMENTS WHEN ANIMAL HAS BITTEN A PERSON.
The owner of an animal shall report at once to the Police Department the
fact that his or her animal has bitten or attached a person or domestic
animal, and all persons having knowledge of such fact shall report the
same to the Police Department. Any person claiming to have been bitten
by an animal must go in person to the Police Department or to a physician
to show proof of a bite if deemed necessary by the director of public
health. A parent or legal guardian must accompany children claiming to
have been bitten by an animal.
55.26 REPORT OF PERSON WHO’S ANIMAL HAS BEEN BITTEN.
Every person owning or having possession, custody, or control of an
animal, which is known to have been bitten, by an animal infected with
rabies shall immediately report this fact to the Police Department and
shall have the exposed animal placed in isolation and quarantined as
provided by this Code.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 285 -
55.27 QUARANTINE FOR A MINIMUM PERIOD OF 14 DAYS. It shall
be the duty of the Chief of Police to order the owner of any animal which
has bitten a person or another animal, or any animal suspected of being
infected with rabies to confine such animal for a period of fourteen (14)
days at the animal shelter, a veterinary clinic, or a registered kennel.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
Revised 5/14/18
CHAPTER 56
EXOTIC PETS AND FARM ANIMALS
56.01 Definitions 56.05 Animal Suspected of Communicable Diseases
56.02 Registration Required 56.06 Animals Not Allowed
56.03 Failure to Register Animal 56.07 Exemptions
56.04 Responsibility to Control Animal 56.08 Violations
56.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an
exotic animal.
2. “Farm Animal” means any animal commonly associated with a farm or
performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, the animals
shall include members of the equine family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows,
bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine (including
Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs and other miniature breeds), goats, bees and other
animals associated with a farm, ranch or stable
3. “Wild Animal” means Any animal commonly considered to be naturally
wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which is commonly considered
to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of people. Unless
otherwise defined, the animals shall include:
a. Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including lions,
tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, African Serval, but
excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats;
b. Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canide)
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes and jackals, but excluding
commonly accepted domesticated dogs;
c. Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house
pet;
d. Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk
(whether or not descented), raccoon or squirrel, but excluding those
members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated
pets;
Revised 5/14/18
e. Any poisonous, venomous, constricting or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes,
boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators; and
f. Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can
be reasonably defined by the terms of this section, including but not
limited to bears, deer, monkeys and game fish
4. “Temporary Housing” means a period of time not exceeding the time
reasonably required to set up, operate, and tear down the associated event.
56.02 REGISTRATION REQUIRED The owner of wild or farm animals exempted
in Chapter 56.08(1) or 56.08(3) of this code shall, within 24 hours, shall register the
animal with the Clerk and indicate the type of animal it is, the location of the animal,
whether the animal is confined or not confined and whether the animal is vaccinated
against rabies. Upon receipt of the information, the Clerk shall enter the information in a
book, along with the owner’s name, which will be kept at City Hall.
56.03 FAILURE TO REGISTER ANIMAL. Failure to register an exotic animal will
be punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
56.04 RESPONSIBILITY TO CONTROL ANIMAL. It is the responsibility of the
owner to control the exotic animal at any time services are required at the residence or
business, including but not limited to police, utilities maintenance or repair, medical and
fire. If the owner fails to control the exotic animal, creating a hazard to those persons
required to be on the premises, the animal shall be taken away and destroyed, and costs
for destroying the animal shall be assessed to the owner.
56.05 ANIMAL SUSPECTED OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASES. It is the duty
of any police officer or other person authorized by the Mayor to cause to be destroyed
any farm or wild suspected of being infected with rabies or other diseases communicable
to humans. The expense of destroying the exotic animal shall be paid by the owner, if
known.
56.06 ANIMALS NOT ALLOWED. Animals of the following types are not allowed
within the city limits of the City of Marengo:
1. All types of wild animals as defined above
2. Farm animals as defined above except for those exempted in section
56.08 of this code
56.07 EXEMPTIONS. The following exemptions are allowed within the city limits of
the City of Marengo with the limitations designated in the corresponding subsection of
the code:
Revised 5/14/18
1. Temporary housing and display of farm or wild animals for the use of
educational purposes or circuses.
2. Temporary housing, display, and showing of farm or wild animals for the
use in the county fair.
3. Temporary housing, display, and showing of farm or wild animals for the
purposes of community festivals.
4. Temporary transportation or overnight housing of farm animals due to the
transportation or movement of farm animals. Temporary housing in these
circumstances should not exceed seventy-two (72) hours.
5. Domestic chickens with the following restrictions:
a. Each residentially or agriculturally zoned property shall be permitted to
keep up to a maximum of eight (8). Only hens are allowed, not roosters.
b. Chickens must be confined in a well-ventilated coop, fowl house, or mobile
coop known as a chicken tractor. If moved from the coop, the chickens
must be caged in a pen designed to prevent their escape. Both shall be
designed and constructed so as to be reasonably expected to prevent entry
by dogs, cats, or other animals and shall be completely enclosed.
c. The owner shall be responsible for sufficiently confining chickens to their
property and prevent chickens from entering upon adjacent properties.
d. Any coop, house, or fenced pen area shall be kept clean, sanitary, and free
from accumulation of chicken excrement and objectionable odors. Food
shall be stored in rodent-proof containers.
6. Vietnamese pot-bellied and other miniature breeds of pig.
a. Each residentially or agriculturally zoned property shall be permitted to
keep up to one (1) Vietnamese pot-bellied or other miniature breed of pig.
Other breeds or types of pig are not allowed.
b. Pigs must be housed within a residence. Any outdoor area, whether fenced
or unfenced shall be kept clean, sanitary, and free from accumulation of
excrement and objectionable odors. Food shall be stored in rodent-proof
containers.
c. Pigs shall be registered with the City Clerk in the same manner and for the
same fees as dogs and cats as provided in Chapter 55.06 of this code.
Vaccinations deemed as standard in the care of such breeds shall be
required for registration.
Revised 5/14/18
7. Other farm animals may be granted exemptions by a majority vote of the
Council. Their decision shall be final. To request an exemption hearing in
front of the Council, the requestor shall provide the following items to the
City Clerk:
a. Written request including property location, type and number of animals
requested, duration of exemption requested, and detailed reason for request
b. Written consent of property owner (if different from requestor)
c. Written consent from adjacent residents and property owners (if different
from resident) showing support for the exemption
56.08 VIOLATIONS. Violations of this code section are a municipal infraction as
provided in this Code of Ordinances.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 288 -
CHAPTER 57
INSECT SPRAYING SERVICES
57.01 Purpose 57.03 Lien for Nonpayment
57.02 Payment of Bills 57.04 Annual Fee Determination
57.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a method to
control the growth of insects for the enhancement of the health and safety of the
residents in the City and for the billing and collection of fees for insect spraying
services provided by the City.
57.02 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All insect spraying service charges are due
and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of a
combined service account as contained in Section 92.03 of this Code of
Ordinances. Utility services may be discontinued in accordance with the
provisions contained in Section 92.04 if the combined service account becomes
delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.07 relating to lien notices
shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account.
57.03 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and
the occupant thereof and the user of the insect spraying service provided by the
City shall be jointly and severally liable for the fees for the insect spraying
services provided to the premises being served. Fees and penalties remaining
unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall
be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
57.04 ANNUAL FEE DETERMINATION. The Council shall annually
determine the fee to be charged for insect spraying in order to reasonably reflect
the anticipated cost, as approved by motion or resolution of the Council.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 301 -
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
60.01 Title 60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions 60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be
known and cited as the “Marengo Traffic Code.”
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code
are defined by State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code
and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further
definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the
following meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1. “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage
thereon for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for business.
2. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
3. “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or
regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4. “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school
district, where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a
highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied
by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
5. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from
a school house.
6. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
7. “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of
movement.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 302 -
8. “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a
vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal.
9. “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included
in the business, school or residence districts.
10. “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for
the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
11. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway,
street, or alley.
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this
Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are
enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer, and, in the absence
of a peace officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic
laws. In the event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle
involved in an accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and
when required by the Iowa Department of Transportation. A copy of this report
shall be filed with the City for the confidential use of peace officers and shall be
subject to the provisions of Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273 & 321.274)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. A peace officer is authorized to
stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve
a summons or memorandum of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the
vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book,
bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or
to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order,
or permit of such vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a
vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card
issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 303 -
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer
invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 305 -
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
61.01 Installation 61.04 Standards
61.02 Crosswalks 61.05 Compliance
61.03 Traffic Lanes
61.01 INSTALLATION. The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and
maintained traffic control devices when and as required under this Traffic Code
or under State law or emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the
duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may
require to regulate, guide or warn traffic. The Police Chief shall keep a record
of all such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.02 CROSSWALKS. The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to
approval of the Council by resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by
appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.03 TRAFFIC LANES. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark
lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require,
consistent with the traffic code of the City. Where such traffic lanes have been
marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to
keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully
passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.04 STANDARDS. Traffic control devices shall comply with standards
established by The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05 COMPLIANCE. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions
of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CHAPTER 61 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 306 -
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 307 -
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.06 Tampering with Vehicle
62.02 Play Streets Designated 62.07 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks 62.08 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle 62.09 Reckless Driving
62.05 Quiet Zones 62.10 Careless Driving
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS. Any person who willfully fails
or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a
fire department officer during a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable
provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and
the statutory law of the road is in violation of this section. These sections of the
Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are as follows:
1. Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2. Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited.
3. Section 321.34 – Plates or validation sticker furnished – retained
by owner – special plates.
4. Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
5. Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations
prohibited.
6. Section 321.41 – Change of address or name or fuel type.
7. Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
8. Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.
9. Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
10. Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
11. Section 321.104(c) – Failure to surrender title, registration or
plates.
12. Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.
13. Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired
license.
14. Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.
15. Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged
fourteen through seventeen.
16. Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 308 -
17. Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.
18. Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card.
19. Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
20. Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco
products.
21. Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
22. Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
23. Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
24. Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
25. Section 321.223 – License inspected.
26. Section 321.224 – Record kept.
27. Section 321.232 – Radar jamming devices; penalty.
28. Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.
29. Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
30. Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
31. Section 321.256 – Obedience to official traffic control devices.
32. Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
33. Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
34. Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or signals;
unlawful possession.
35. Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.
36. Section 321.263 – Information and aid.
37. Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
38. Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
39. Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized
bicycles.
40. Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
41. Section 321.284A – Open containers in motor vehicles –
passengers.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 309 -
42. Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
43. Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
44. Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways;
exceptions.
45. Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
46. Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
47. Section 321.302 – Overtaking and otherwise.
48. Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
49. Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
50. Section 321.305 – One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
51. Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
52. Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
53. Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance
requirements.
54. Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.
55. Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
56. Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
57. Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
58. Section 321.314 – When signal required.
59. Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
60. Section 321.316 – Stopping.
61. Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
62. Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
63. Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
64. Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
65. Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
66. Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
67. Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
68. Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
69. Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 310 -
70. Section 321.329 – Duty of driver – pedestrians crossing or
working on highways.
71. Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
72. Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
73. Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
74. Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
75. Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal of train.
76. Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting
warning.
77. Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
78. Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
79. Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
80. Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
81. Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
82. Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
83. Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
84. Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous
material.
85. Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
86. Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
87. Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
88. Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
89. Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
90. Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
91. Section 321.372 – School buses.
92. Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped
vehicles.
93. Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
94. Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
95. Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
96. Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 311 -
97. Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
98. Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized
bicycles.
99. Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
100. Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
101. Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
102. Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
103. Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
104. Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
105. Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
106. Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
107. Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
108. Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
109. Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
110. Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
111. Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
112. Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
113. Section 321.406 – Cowl lamps.
114. Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
115. Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
116. Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
117. Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
118. Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
119. Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
120. Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
121. Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
122. Section 321.422 – Red light in front.
123. Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
124. Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch and control requirements.
125. Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
126. Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 312 -
127. Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles and bells prohibited.
128. Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
129. Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
130. Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
131. Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
132. Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
133. Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
134. Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
135. Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
136. Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
137. Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
138. Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
139. Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.
140. Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.
141. Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
142. Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
143. Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.
144. Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
145. Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
146. Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
147. Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
148. Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
149. Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.
150. Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
151. Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02 PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED. The Police Chief shall have
authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and cause to be placed
appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the
same. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or
portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 313 -
are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest
care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not
drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway.
62.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLE. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on
the streets of the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle
in the place intended for their accommodation. No person riding upon any
bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the
same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05 QUIET ZONES. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a
quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall
sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06 TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE. It is unlawful for any person,
either individually or in association with one or more other persons, to willfully
injure or tamper with any vehicle or break or remove any part or parts of or
from a vehicle without the consent of the owner.
62.07 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
1. Drivers. A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or
highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an
open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an
alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284)
2. Passengers. A passenger in a motor vehicle upon a public street
or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle
an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an
alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284A)
As used in this section “passenger area” means the area of a motor vehicle
designed to seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in
operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger
while in their seating positions, including the glove compartment. An open or
unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported in the
trunk of the motor vehicle. An unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic
beverage may be transported behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if
the motor vehicle does not have a trunk.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 314 -
62.08 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS. It is unlawful to
allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to obstruct the view of an
intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of traffic
approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction is
deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in the
manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.09 RECKLESS DRIVING. No person shall drive any vehicle in such
manner as to indicate a willful or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277)
62.10 CARELESS DRIVING. No person shall intentionally operate a motor
vehicle on a street or highway in any one of the following ways:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277A)
1. Creating or causing unnecessary tire squealing, skidding or sliding
upon acceleration or stopping.
2. Simulating a temporary race.
3. Causing any wheel or wheels to unnecessarily lose contact with
the ground.
4. Causing the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 321 -
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
63.01 General 63.04 Special Speed Restrictions
63.02 State Code Speed Limits 63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots
63.01 GENERAL. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the
same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable
and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop within
the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume,
however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02 STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS. The following speed limits are
established in Section 321.285 of the Code of Iowa and any speed in excess
thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter as a
special speed zone.
1. Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour.
2. Residence or School District – twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
3. Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour.
63.03 PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS. A speed in excess
of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park, cemetery or parking lot, unless
specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04 SPECIAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS. In accordance with
requirements of the Iowa State Department of Transportation, or whenever the
Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater or less than is
reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or
other place or upon any part of the City street system, the Council shall
determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems
reasonable and safe at such location. The following special speed zones have
been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
CHAPTER 63 SPEED REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 322 -
1. Special 15 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifteen (15)
miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.
A. Franklyn Avenue from Main Street to May Street, east side
of swimming pool;
B. Lafayette Avenue from Main Street to May Street, west
side of swimming pool;
C. May Street from Lafayette Avenue to Franklyn Avenue,
north side of swimming pool.
2. Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty-five
(35) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets
or parts thereof.
A. Highway 212 (South Street) from Lincoln Avenue to west
City limits;
B. Highway 411 (Eastern Avenue) commencing at a point 620
feet south of the north City limits and continuing south on Eastern
Avenue for a distance of 310 feet.
3. Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of forty-five
(45) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets
or parts thereof.
A. Highway 411 (Eastern Avenue) commencing at a point 310
feet south of the north City limits and continuing south on Eastern
Avenue for a distance of 310 feet.
4. Special 50 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifty (50)
miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.
A. Highway 6 commencing at a point 700 feet east of
Highway 411 (Eastern Avenue) and continuing west of Highway
6 to a point 400 feet west of L Avenue.
63.05 MINIMUM SPEED. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a
slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in
compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 325 -
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
64.01 Authority to Mark 64.02 U-turns
64.01 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS. The driver of a vehicle intending
to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the
intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
3. Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way
street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway
nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such
centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way
street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the
centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions
require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by vehicles
turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no
driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed
and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
64.02 U-TURNS. It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an
intersection, however, U-turns are prohibited within the business district, at the
following designated intersections and at intersections where there are
automatic traffic signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
1. At the intersection of Main Street and Court Avenue;
2. At the intersection of Main Street and Marengo Avenue;
3. At the intersection of Marengo Avenue and Washington Street;
4. At the intersection of Washington Street and Court Avenue;
5. At the intersection of Court Avenue and Hilton Street;
CHAPTER 64 TURNING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 326 -
6. At the intersection of Hilton Street and Marengo Avenue.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 327 -
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
65.01 Through Streets - Stop 65.05 School Stops
65.02 Stop Required 65.06 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.03 Four-Way Stop Intersections 65.07 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.04 Yield Required 65.08 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.01 THROUGH STREETS - STOP. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop,
unless a yield is permitted by this chapter, before entering an intersection with
the following designated through streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. Highway 212;
2. Eastern Avenue;
3. Highway U.S. 6;
4. Court Avenue from Miller Street to North Street;
5. Miller Street from Eastern Avenue to Western Avenue;
6. East Hilton Street from Eastern Avenue east to sale barn property;
7. Western Avenue from Miller Street to Garfield Street;
8. South Street.
65.02 STOP REQUIRED. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance
with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. Lafayette Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Lafayette Avenue shall
stop at Main Street;
2. Franklyn Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Franklyn Avenue shall
stop at Main Street;
3. Hilton Street. Vehicles traveling on Hilton Street shall stop at
Marengo Avenue;
4. Franklyn Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Franklyn Avenue shall
stop at North Street;
5. Lafayette Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Lafayette Avenue shall
stop at North Street;
6. North Street. Vehicles traveling on North Street shall yield at
Western Avenue;
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 328 -
7. Roberts Avenue. Vehicles traveling north on Roberts Avenue
shall stop at Pine Street;
8. Cherry Street. Vehicles traveling on Cherry Street shall stop at
Pine Street;
9. Clinton Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Clinton Avenue shall stop
at Main Street;
10. Short Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Short Avenue shall stop at
Main Street;
11. Marengo Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Marengo Avenue shall
stop at South Street;
12. May Street. Vehicles traveling west on May Street shall stop at
Western Avenue;
13. Iowa Valley High School Alley/Parking Lot Access. Vehicles
traveling out of the one-way alley parking lot access shall stop at East
Washington Street;
14. Dillin Street. Vehicles traveling west on Dillin Street shall stop at
Western Avenue;
15. Court Avenue. Vehicles traveling south on Court Avenue shall
stop at State Highway 6.
16. South Street. Vehicles travelling north and south on any
intersecting avenue to South Street shall be required to stop, with the
exception of Western and Eastern Avenue.
65.03 FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS. Every driver of a vehicle
shall stop before entering the following designated four-way stop intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. Intersection of Washington Street and Court Avenue;
2. Intersection of Washington Street and Marengo Avenue;
3. Intersection of Hilton Street and Court Avenue;
4. Intersection of Main Street and Marengo Avenue;
5. Intersection of Court Avenue and South Street;
6. Intersection of Court Avenue and Main Street;
7. Intersection of Court Avenue and North Street.
65.04 YIELD REQUIRED. Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in
accordance with the following:
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 329 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. Lafayette Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Lafayette Avenue shall
yield at South Street;
2. Lafayette Avenue. Vehicles traveling south on Lafayette Avenue
shall yield at Miller Street;
3. Franklyn Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Franklyn Avenue shall
yield at South Street;
4. Franklyn Avenue. Vehicles traveling south on Franklyn Avenue
shall yield at Miller Street;
5. Court Avenue. Vehicles traveling north on Court Avenue shall
yield at North Street;
6. Clinton Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Clinton Avenue shall
yield at South Street;
7. Short Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Short Avenue shall yield at
South Street;
8. Short Avenue. Vehicles traveling south on Short Avenue shall
yield at Miller Street;
9. Short Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Short Avenue shall yield at
Marion Street;
10. Jefferson Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Jefferson Avenue shall
yield at Marion Street;
11. Wallace Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Wallace Avenue shall
yield at Marion Street;
12. Washington Street. Vehicles traveling west on Washington Street
shall yield at Western Avenue;
13. Hilton Street. Vehicles traveling east on Hilton Street shall yield
at Western Avenue;
14. Marion Street. Vehicles traveling on Marion Street shall yield at
Court Avenue;
15. Marion Street. Vehicles traveling on Marion Street shall yield at
Western Avenue;
16. Randolph Street. Vehicles traveling on Randolph Street shall
yield at Court Avenue;
17. Adams Street. Vehicles traveling on Adams Street shall yield at
Court Avenue;
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 330 -
18. Randolph Street. Vehicles traveling on Randolph Street shall
yield at Marengo Avenue;
19. Adams Street. Vehicles traveling on Adams Street shall yield at
Marengo Avenue;
20. Pine Street. Vehicles traveling on Pine Street shall yield at
Marengo Avenue;
21. Marion Street. Vehicles traveling on Marion Street shall yield at
Marengo Avenue.
65.05 SCHOOL STOPS. At the following school crossing zones every
driver of a vehicle approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at
a point ten (10) feet from the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an
authorized school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent
manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
1. Intersection of Clinton Avenue and Hilton Street;
2. Intersection of Short Avenue and Hilton Street;
3. Intersection of Washington Street and Clinton Avenue;
4. Intersection of Washington Street and Short Avenue;
5. Intersection of Court Avenue and Lucas Street.
65.06 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle
emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall
proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do so without danger to
pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the
street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.07 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. Notwithstanding any
traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection
or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle.
65.08 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS. Where traffic
control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 331 -
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 341 -
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
66.01 Temporary Embargo 66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Route
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO. If the Council declares an embargo
when it appears by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic
conditions that certain streets will be seriously damaged or destroyed by
vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the signs, no such
vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Police Chief
may, upon application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special
permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum
specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named in the
permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is
responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS. When signs are
erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross
weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of
the following streets or parts of streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
— NONE —
66.04 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES. Where it has been determined that
any City bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets
of the City, or on the street serving the bridge, the Police Chief may cause to be
posted and maintained signs on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of
the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and no
person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in
excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
CHAPTER 66 LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 342 -
66.05 TRUCK ROUTE. Truck route regulations are established as follows:
1. Truck Routes Designated. Every motor vehicle weighing seven
(7) tons or more, when loaded or empty, having no fixed terminal within
the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the City for the
purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon the following
streets within the City and none other:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
A. Court Avenue from the north City limits to Main Street;
B. Main Street from Western Avenue to Eastern Avenue;
C. Marengo Avenue from Main Street to May Street;
D. Miller Street from Jefferson Avenue to Western Avenue;
E. All streets south of Miller Street;
F. South Street from the west City limits to the east City
limits;
G. Western Avenue from Highway 6 north to Main Street;
H. North Street from Court Avenue to Eastern Avenue;
I. Highway 6 from Western Avenue to the east City limits;
J. Eastern Avenue from north City limits to south City limits;
K. Jefferson Avenue from Miller Street to Pine Street;
L. Pine Street from Eastern Avenue to Jefferson Avenue;
M. May Street from Court Avenue to Marengo Avenue.
2. Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any motor vehicle weighing seven
(7) tons or more, when loaded or empty, having a fixed terminal, making
a scheduled or definite stop within the City for the purpose of loading or
unloading shall proceed over or upon the designated routes set out in this
section to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall
proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to its
point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3. Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person,
employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not
require or knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street
in any manner contrary to this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CHAPTER 66 LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 343 -
4. Non-rubber Tread Vehicles. It is illegal for any vehicle which
does not have rubberized tread tires to be driven on any City street or
alley.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 345 -
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
67.01 Pedestrian Defined 67.04 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Walking in Street 67.05 Use Sidewalks
67.03 Hitchhiking
67.01 PEDESTRIAN DEFINED. “Pedestrian” as it is used in this chapter
means a person who is walking on foot, or a person who travels by way of roller
blades, skateboards or in-line skates.
67.02 WALKING IN STREET. Pedestrians shall at all times when walking
on or along a street, walk on the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.03 HITCHHIKING. No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a
street for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.04 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at
any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.05 USE SIDEWALKS. Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for
any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent street. Those pedestrians on
roller blades, skateboards and in-line skates are exempted from this provision if
they can show by a preponderance of the evidence that the condition of the
sidewalk poses an unreasonable risk of injury to or threatens the safety of other
pedestrians or themselves.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 347 -
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED. Upon the following streets and
alleys vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the
indicated direction when appropriate signs are in place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [4])
1. May Street, from Lafayette Avenue to Franklyn Avenue, shall be
eastbound only from May 21 through September 14 of each year.
2. The alley located in the 200 block of East Main Street shall be
northbound only.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 349 -
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb 69.08 No Parking Zones
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb - One-way Street 69.09 All Night Parking Prohibited
69.03 Angle Parking 69.10 Truck Parking Limited
69.04 Angle Parking – Manner 69.11 Limited Parking
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal 69.12 Snow Removal
69.06 Parking Prohibited 69.13 Snow Routes
69.07 Persons With Disabilities Parking
69.01 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a
vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in
the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as
hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the
left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB - ONE-WAY STREET. No person
shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18)
inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the
case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 ANGLE PARKING. Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in
the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1. Court Avenue on both sides from Marion Street to Main Street;
2. Marengo Avenue on both sides from Hilton Street to Main Street;
3. Main Street on the south side from Court Avenue to ninety (90)
feet east of Marengo Avenue;
4. Washington Street on the south side from Clinton Avenue to onehalf
(½) block west of Court Avenue;
5. Washington Street on the north side from Marengo Avenue to
Franklyn Avenue.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 350 -
69.04 ANGLE PARKING - MANNER. Upon those streets or portions of
streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall
park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway
or in the center of the roadway as indicated by such signs and markings. No
part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking
district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet
when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person
shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than seventy-two (72) hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of the
following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
2. Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing
of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency;
3. Advertising. Displaying advertising;
4. Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle
except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or
licensed under this Code of Ordinances.
69.06 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following
places:
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5])
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any
divided street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Mailboxes. Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox
which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail
from vehicles on the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
4. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1])
5. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 351 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2])
6. Intersection. Within an intersection or within ten (10) feet of an
intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [3])
7. Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4])
8. Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to
any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at
the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6])
9. Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not
exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8])
10. Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to
any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any
fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly
sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9])
11. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10])
12. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11])
13. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or
when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving
traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause
curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing
signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13])
14. Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of fifty
(50) feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any
theatre, auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping
rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other
building where large assemblages of people are being held, within which
space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left
standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 352 -
passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15. Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10)
feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in
such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle
parked in any alley which is eighteen (18) feet wide or less; provided
said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
16. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public
or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or
ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17. Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public
way not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb
line, where curbing has been installed.
18. In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that
any part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes
beyond the markings designating such space.
69.07 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING. The following
regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities
parking spaces:
1. Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code
of Iowa and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person
shall establish any on-street persons with disabilities parking space
without first obtaining Council approval.
2. Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities
parking space, located on either public or private property, constitute
improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a
violation of this Code of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
A. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons
with disabilities parking permit;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 353 -
B. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a
permit or being transported in accordance with Section
321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
C. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under
Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
3. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with
a wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
A. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit
must comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A(1) of the
Code of Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
B. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone
which is properly placed under the provisions of Section
321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa.
69.08 NO PARKING ZONES. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in
any of the following specifically designated no parking zones except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction
of a peace officer or traffic control signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. U.S. Highway No. 6 on the north side from Station 736+00 to
Station 747+21.5;
2. Miller Street on both sides from Western Avenue to Court
Avenue;
3. Miller Street on both sides from Marengo Avenue to Eastern
Avenue;
4. Western Avenue on both sides from South Street to Marion
Street;
5. Western Avenue on both sides from Hilton Street to May Street;
6. Lafayette Avenue on the west side from May Street to Lucas
Street;
7. May Street on both sides from Court Avenue to 150 feet east;
8. May Street on both sides from Court Avenue to Franklyn Avenue;
9. Main Street on the south side from Clinton Avenue to Eastern
Avenue;
10. Hilton Street on the north side from Marengo Avenue to Short
Avenue;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 354 -
11. Eastern Avenue, on both sides from North Street to south City
limits;
12. U. S. Highway No. 212, from U.S. Highway No. 6 to west City
limits;
13. Franklyn Avenue on the east side from Washington Street to 90
feet south;
14. Main Street on the south side from Western Avenue to Franklyn
Avenue;
15. Marengo Avenue on the west side from Main Street to May
Street;
16. Marion Street on the north side from Franklyn Avenue to
Marengo Avenue;
17. Marion Street on the south side from Marengo Avenue to Clinton
Avenue;
18. South Street on the south side from Western Avenue to Court
Avenue;
19. South Street on the north side from Court Avenue to Wallace
Avenue;
20. Hilton Street on the south side from Clinton Avenue to Short
Avenue between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and four o’clock
(4:00) p.m.;
21. East Washington Street on the north side from Short Avenue to
Eastern Avenue, and for a distance of 85 feet west from Eastern Avenue
on the south side of East Washington Street;
22. East South Street on the south side beginning at the intersection of
East South Street and Wallace Avenue and continuing east to the City
limits;
23. West Washington Street on the south side, beginning 82 feet east
from the center of the intersection of West Washington Street and
Lafayette Avenue and thence continuing east for a distance of 50 feet;
24. Western Avenue on both the east and west sides, commencing
from the center of the intersection with Miller Street and continuing
south for a distance of 265 feet;
25. Clinton Avenue on both the east and west sides, from the
alleyway located between Hilton and Marion Streets, north to Hilton
Street;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 355 -
26. South Street on the south side from Eastern Avenue westward 80
feet;
27. Lincoln Avenue on the east side from Randolph Street north to
South Street;
28. Randolph Street on the south side from Lincoln Avenue west to
William Avenue;
29. West May Street on the south side of the 200 block, 120 feet west
of the centerline of Lafayette Avenue;
30. Dillin Street on both the north and south sides from Western
Avenue to Eastern Avenue;
31. Main Street on the north side from Western Avenue to Franklin
Avenue.
69.09 ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED. No person, except
physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a vehicle on any of
the following named streets between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and
six o’clock (6:00) a.m. of any day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Main Street from Marengo Avenue to Court Avenue;
2. Washington Street from Marengo Avenue to Court Avenue;
3. Court Avenue from Main Street to Hilton Street;
4. Marengo Avenue from Main Street to Washington Street.
69.10 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED. No person shall park a motor truck,
semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle with trailer attached in violation of the
following regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to pickup,
light delivery or panel delivery trucks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Business District. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually
engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo within the
prohibited area, no person shall park or leave unattended such vehicle, on
any of the following designated streets. When actually receiving or
delivering merchandise or cargo such vehicle shall be stopped or parked
in a manner which will not interfere with other traffic.
A. Court Avenue;
B. Washington Street on both sides from Franklyn Avenue to
Marengo Avenue;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 356 -
C. Marengo Avenue on both sides from Hilton Street to Main
Street;
D. Main Street on both sides from Court Avenue to Marengo
Avenue.
2. Noise. No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any
street, alley, public or private parking lot, or drive of any service station
between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m.
with the engine, auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating
equipment or other device in operation giving off audible sounds
excepting only the drive of a service station when actually being
serviced, and then in no event for more than thirty (30) minutes.
3. Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked
on any street, alley or highway for a period of time of more than thirty
(30) minutes.
4. Heavy Weight Vehicles. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this Code of Ordinances, no person shall park any truck, trailer, semitrailer,
truck-tractor or other vehicle exceeding seven (7) tons in weight
when loaded or unloaded on any street, alley or City-owned off-street
parking, except while in the actual process of being loaded or unloaded
at its freight terminus.
69.11 LIMITED PARKING. It is unlawful to park any vehicle upon the
following designated streets for a continuous period exceeding the following
designated time limits:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. A continuous period of fifteen (15) minutes between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, on Washington Street
on the north side from 90 feet east of Franklyn Avenue to Franklyn
Avenue.
2. A continuous period of one (1) hour between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, in the four parking spaces
comprising a total of 47 feet on Court Avenue, determined as beginning
140 feet from the north edge of sidewalk along the south side of Hilton
Street and ending 150 feet from the south edge of sidewalk along the
north side of Marion Street.
3. A continuous period of two (2) hours on the following streets:
A. Marengo Avenue on the east side from 90 feet north of
Hilton Street to Hilton Street;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 357 -
B. Hilton Street on the south side between Marengo Avenue
and Clinton Avenue;
C. East Main Street on the south side of the 200 block
beginning at the alleyway (mid-block) and continuing west for a
distance of 60 feet; this restriction applies only between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
D. Washington Street on the south side from Marengo Avenue
to the alley west of Clinton Avenue and the north side of
Washington Street from the west property line of 249 East
Washington to the alley west of Clinton Avenue; this restriction
applies only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
69.12 SNOW REMOVAL. No person shall park, abandon or leave
unattended any vehicle on any public street, alley, or City-owned off-street
parking area during snow removal operations unless the snow has been removed
or plowed from said street, alley or parking area and the snow has ceased to fall.
(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])
69.13 SNOW ROUTES.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])
1. Designated. The following streets and avenues are hereby
designated as snow routes:
A. Miller Street from Western Avenue to Eastern Avenue.
B. South Street from Western Avenue to Easter Avenue.
C. Main Street from Western Avenue to Eastern Avenue.
D. North Street from Western Avenue to Eastern Avenue.
E. Garfield Street from Lafayette Avenue to Franklyn
Avenue.
F. Lucas Street from Western Avenue to Court Avenue.
G. May Street from Western Avenue to Lafayette Avenue.
H. May Street from Court Avenue to Marengo Avenue.
I. Washington Street from Franklyn Avenue to Short Avenue.
J. Hilton Street from Court Avenue to Short Avenue.
K. Western Avenue from South Street to North Street.
L. Lafayette Avenue from May Street to Lucas Street.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 358 -
M. Lafayette Avenue from North Street to Garfield Street.
N. Franklyn Avenue from North Street to Garfield Street.
O. Court Avenue from Miller Street to North Street.
P. Marengo Avenue from Hilton Street to May Street.
Q. Short Avenue from Hilton Street to Washington Street.
R. Eastern Avenue from Miller Street to Main Street.
2. Signs Required. All streets and avenues designated as snow
routes shall be identified by signs as being snow routes, and no ordinance
shall be enforced as to parking restrictions on such routes unless such
signs are in place. Said signs shall be no less than one sign for every two
(2) City blocks on both sides of each designated street or avenue.
3. Parking Restrictions. Whenever there has been a snowfall of two
(2) inches or more, or an accumulation of that amount from more than
one snowfall, there shall be no parking on either side of a street or
avenue designated as a snow route from a period commencing ten (10)
hours after such snowfall or such accumulation begins to exist until snow
removal or clearance of snow has been completed on that street or
avenue.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 375 -
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01 Arrest or Citation 70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations 70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable
cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code,
such officer may:
1. Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such
person before a local magistrate, or
2. Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in
quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the
Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and
complaint utilizing a State-approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code
which are designated by Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled
violations, the scheduled fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in
Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Admitted violations of
parking restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances may be charged upon a
simple notice of a fine payable at the office of the City Clerk. The simple
notice of a fine shall be in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for all violations
except snow route parking violations and improper use of a persons with
disabilities parking permit. If such fine is not paid within thirty (30) days, it
shall be increased by five dollars ($5.00). The simple notice of a fine for snow
route parking violations is twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and the simple notice of
a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Failure to pay the simple notice of a fine shall be
grounds for the filing of a complaint in District Court.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1a] & 321L.4[2])
EDITOR’S NOTE: A snow route parking violation occurs when
the driver of a vehicle impedes or blocks traffic on a designated
snow route. (See Section 69.13.)
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 376 -
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a
vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the
driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be
attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In
any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed
such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
1. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the
information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and
2. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was
the registered owner at the time in question.
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to
remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public
parking lot or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a
garage designated or maintained by the City, under the circumstances
hereinafter enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute
an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the
vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as
to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and
is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to
the normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a
ban on parking during snow removal operations.
4. Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left
parked for a continuous period in violation of any limited parking time.
If the owner can be located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to
remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 377 -
5. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or
driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of
towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 395 -
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01 Purpose 75.05 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
75.02 Definitions 75.06 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations 75.07 Accident Reports
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of
all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are
defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized flotation-tire
vehicle with not less than three (3) low pressure tires, but not more than
six (6) low pressure tires, or a two-wheeled, off-road motorcycle, that is
limited in engine displacement to less than eight hundred (800) cubic
centimeters and in total dry weight to less than eight hundred fifty (850)
pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the
operator and handlebars for steering control. Two-wheeled, off-road
motorcycles shall be considered all-terrain vehicles only for the purpose
of titling and registration. An operator of a two-wheeled, off-road
motorcycle is exempt from the safety instruction and certification
program requirements of Section 321I.24 and 321I.25 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1[1])
2. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle weighing less than one
thousand (1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless
belt-type tread with a width of forty-eight (48) inches or less, or any
combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow
or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle which has
been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1[18])
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV
within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their
registration, numbering, equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 396 -
75.04 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES. The operators of snowmobiles
shall comply with the following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be
operated within the City:
1. Unplowed Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon
streets which have not been plowed during the snow season.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
2. Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on any streets within
the City for the sole and exclusive purpose of using the most direct
roadway for the ingress to and egress from the City. No snowmobile
shall be driven on any roadway solely for entertainment or pleasure.
Other exceptions include the following circumstances:
A. Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street
in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations
where snow upon the roadway renders travel by conventional
motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B. Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing
of a prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately
ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a
place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe
crossing;
(2) The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop
before crossing the street;
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming
traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
(4) In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made
only at an intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3. Railroad Right-of-way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly
across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and
notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the
improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all
oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
4. Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle
trails except where so designated.
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 397 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4g])
5. Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in
any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the
express permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on
any City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
6. Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the
public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line
and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking”
except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which
operation is authorized by this chapter.
75.05 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. The operators of
ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs may be
operated within the City:
1. Streets. ATVs may be operated on streets only in accordance
with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council for the sport of driving ATVs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])
2. Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except
where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
3. Railroad Right-of-way. ATVs shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV may be driven directly across
a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and
notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the
improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all
oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
4. Parks and Other City Land. ATVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the
express permission of the City.
5. Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and
the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
75.06 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile
are liable for any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the
ATV or snowmobile. The owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for
any such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or
snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 398 -
owner’s consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or
damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)
75.07 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is
involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property
damage amounting to one thousand dollars ($1000.00) or more, either the
operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 399 -
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
76.01 Scope of Regulations 76.08 Carrying Articles
76.02 Traffic Code Applies 76.09 Riding on Sidewalks
76.03 Double Riding Restricted 76.10 Towing
76.04 Two Abreast Limit 76.11 Improper Riding
76.05 Bicycle Paths 76.12 Parking
76.06 Speed 76.13 Equipment Requirements
76.07 Emerging from Alley or Driveway 76.14 Special Penalty
76.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. These regulations shall apply
whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES. Every person riding a bicycle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of
the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic code of the City applicable to the
driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have
no application. Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle the person
shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03 DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED. A person propelling a bicycle
shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for
which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234 [3 and 4])
76.04 TWO ABREAST LIMIT. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway
shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall
be kept to the right and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand
edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.05 BICYCLE PATHS. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been
provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not
use the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 400 -
76.06 SPEED. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.07 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a
bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a
sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-ofway
to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on
said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.08 CARRYING ARTICLES. No person operating a bicycle shall carry
any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least
one hand upon the handle bars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS. The following shall apply to riding
bicycles on sidewalks:
1. Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk
within the Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this Code
of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
2. Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or
roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no
person shall disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
3. Yield Right-of-way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle
upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.10 TOWING. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or
to tow any other vehicle upon the streets of the City.
76.11 IMPROPER RIDING. No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular
or reckless manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to
disregard the safety of the operator or others.
76.12 PARKING. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than
upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 401 -
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.13 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Every person riding a bicycle
shall be responsible for providing and using equipment as provided herein:
1. Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible
from a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a
lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of three
hundred (300) feet to the rear except that a red reflector on the rear, of a
type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three
hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2. Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake
which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry,
level, clean pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.14 SPECIAL PENALTY. Any person violating the provisions of this
chapter may, in lieu of the scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty
provided for violations of the Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to
be impounded by the City for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten
(10) days for a second offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CHAPTER 77
OPERATION OF OFF ROAD VEHICLES AND GOLF CARTS
77.01 Definitions 77.06 Location Restrictions
77.02 ORV Equipment Requirements 77.07 Registration, Licensing, Fees, and Inspection
77.03 Driver’s License Required 77.08 Penalties
77.04 Proof of Insurance 77.09 Golf Cart Requirements
77.05 Operation Restrictions of Vehicles 77.10 Golf Cart Hours
77.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. "Off road utility vehicle" means a motorized vehicle with four (4) or more
non-highway tires that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand
five hundred (1,500) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to not more than
two thousand (2,000) pounds and that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design
not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers
for control. Vehicles designed for the primary purpose of recreation, such as dune
buggies and recreational side by sides, shall not fit this definition and are not
allowed under this section. The chief of police shall have the final say on whether
a vehicle meets this definition. These vehicles shall be referred to as ORV or
ORVs in this code.
2. Golf Carts shall be referred to as GC or GCs in this code
77.02 ORV EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any ORV registered with the City of
Marengo, shall be equipped as required by Section 321I.10, 321I.12, and 321I.13 of the
Code of Iowa, including but not limited to: muffler, headlight, tail light, and brakes.
77.03 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall operate an ORV or GC on
any public highway, street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless
such person has a valid driver's license.
Persons between age sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) who have passed an All-Terrain
Vehicle (ATV) or Off Road Vehicle (ORV) educational course approved by the State of
Iowa may operate an ORV within the corporate limits of the city. Proof of course
completion should be kept with the operator while the vehicle is in use.
77.04 PROOF OF INSURANCE. The owner of every ORV or GC being operated
upon city streets and alleys shall have in effect liability insurance covering the ORV or
GC in the same limits as required of automobiles by the financial responsibility
provisions of chapter 321A of the Code of Iowa. Certification of Insurance will need to
be provided and the City of Marengo, Iowa shall be named certificate holder.
77.05 OPERATION RESTRICTIONS OF VEHICLES. The following restrictions
shall apply to the operation of all vehicles covered under this chapter.
1. ORV or GCs may be operated upon the public highways, streets, roads and
alleys within the corporate limits of the city. ORV or GCs operation shall be
permitted on trails subject to the location restrictions in section 77.07 of this code.
ORV, GCs shall not be operated upon sidewalks unless the operator is engaged in
snow removal or sidewalk maintenance activities.
2. All laws regarding the use of seatbelts and child restraints shall be obeyed.
3. No person may ride on an ORV or GC on any portion not designed to carry
passengers. No person may stand on or ride in the cargo area of an off road utility
vehicle.
4. Unattended Vehicles and Parking. No person shall leave a ORV or GC
unattended on public property while the motor is running or the keys are in the
ignition switch.
77.06 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS. The following location restrictions shall apply
to the operation of all vehicles covered under this chapter.
1. City Streets. Registered ORV or GCs may be operated upon Streets under
the jurisdiction and within the corporate limits of the City of Marengo pursuant to
the restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter.
2. Trails. ORV or GCs shall not be operated on any recreational, bike or
walking trail unless the trail is specifically designated to allow use of off road
utility vehicles.
3. City Parks and other land owned by the City of Marengo. ORV or GCs
shall not be operated in City parks or upon other city owned land unless for a
special public event authorized by the Chief of Police. Approval for operation in
city parks must be sought prior to the event and will be granted on an individual
basis by the Chief of Police. ORV or GCs covered in this chapter may enter the
Lions Field Facility.
77.07 REGISTRATION, LICENSING, FEES, AND INSPECTION.
1. Before operating ORV or GCs on any public highway, street, road or alley
within the corporate limits of the city and each calendar year thereafter, the vehicle
shall be registered with the city and a license shall be obtained and placed on the
vehicle. The license fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per calendar year,
payable in advance to the Marengo Police Department. The full amount of the
license fee shall be required regardless of the time of year that the application is
made.
2. Application for registration of aforementioned vehicles shall be made by
the owner, or owner's agent, with the Marengo Police Department. The application
shall be made upon forms provided by the city and each application shall contain
the name of the owner, the owner's residential address, or bona fide place of
business, and a brief description of the vehicle to be registered (including make,
model and serial or VIN number). Proof of insurance, as required in subsection
77.05 of this section, shall be furnished at the time of application for registration.
3. Prior to the issuance of the registration and license, each applicant for an
ORV or GC license shall first present such vehicle for an official inspection. If,
upon inspection and completion of the registration application, such vehicle is
found to be in safe mechanical condition, and upon establishing proof of insurance
and payment of the fees herein provided, a registration sticker shall be issued to
the owner who shall attach it to the rear of the vehicle. The license number on the
application will be recorded and then filed with the police department.
77.08 PENALTIES. Any person who is found to have violated subsection 77.02 or
77.07(3) of this section shall be subject to a municipal fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) plus surcharge and costs. A court appearance shall not be required if the fine is
paid in full prior to the date set for the person's court appearance.
77.09 GOLF CART REQUIREMENTS. GCs shall be equipped with a slow moving
vehicle sign and a bicycle safety flag. The carts shall be equipped with adequate brakes.
77.10 GOLF CART HOURS. Golf carts shall be allowed on the streets only between
sunrise and sunset.
[The next page is 415]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 415 -
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
80.01 Definitions 80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles 80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail 80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Notification in Newspaper 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
80.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are
defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])
1. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property
for more than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current
registration plates or two (2) or more wheels or other parts which
renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for
more than twenty-four (24) hours.
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in
control of the property for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a
police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten
(10) days. However, a police authority may declare the vehicle
abandoned within the ten-day period by commencing the
notification process.
E. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police
authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section
321J.4B of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose
owner has not paid the impoundment fees after notification by the
person or agency responsible for carrying out the impoundment
order.
2. “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the
Code of Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed
scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
3. “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law
enforcement agency of a county or city.
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 416 -
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED
VEHICLES. A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon
the request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or
traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may
take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police
authority may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire a
private entity, equipment and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving,
storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. If a police authority employs a
private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall
provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered
owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle
or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL. The police authority or private entity that takes
into custody an abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by
certified mail, the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of
record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property
found in the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record,
that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed
given when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and
vehicle identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property
found in the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is
being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim
the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after the effective date of
the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders
or claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders
and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle or personal
property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed
consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to
a demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction.
The notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle
or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or
property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees
and charges provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before
the police authority to contest those matters. If the persons receiving the notice
do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal
property within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or
claimants shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 417 -
vehicle or the personal property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not
recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or
claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.04 NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER. If it is impossible to determine
with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of the last registered owner
and all lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to
meet all requirements of notice under Section 80.03. The published notice may
contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall
be published within the same time requirements and contain the same
information as prescribed for mailed notice in Section 80.03.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
80.05 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT. The owner, lienholder or claimant
shall pay five dollars ($5.00) for each day within the reclaiming period plus
towing charges if stored by the City, or towing and storage fees, if stored in a
public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The amount of towing
charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned garages, shall be
established by such facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. If an abandoned
vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or
private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the motor vehicle
should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of the motor
vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES. The City
or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle
whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor
vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification
procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two (2) or more wheels or
other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police
authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant shall
then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall surrender
the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 418 -
80.08 PROCEEDS FROM SALES. Proceeds from the sale of any
abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing,
preserving, storing and notification required, in accordance with State law. Any
balance shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder
for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax
Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to
meet costs the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the
Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER. Any demolisher who purchases or
otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap,
wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall
not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has
obtained the junking certificate issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 419 -
CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
81.01 Definitions 81.03 Obstructing Streets
81.02 Warning Signals 81.04 Crossing Maintenance
81.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are
defined:
1. “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation or
other association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad
train.
2. “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1 [29])
81.02 WARNING SIGNALS. Operators shall sound a horn at least one
thousand (1,000) feet before a street crossing is reached and after sounding the
horn, shall ring the bell continuously until the crossing is passed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.13)
81.03 OBSTRUCTING STREETS. Operators shall not operate any train in
such a manner as to prevent vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a
period of time in excess of ten (10) minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
1. Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals
affecting the safety of the movement of trains.
2. Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or
person on the track.
3. Disabled. When the train is disabled.
4. Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with
governmental safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed
ordinances and speed regulations.
5. In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in
switching operations.
6. No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the
crossing.
CHAPTER 81 RAILROAD REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 420 -
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s action
was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a railroad
corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad corporation.
81.04 CROSSING MAINTENANCE. Operators shall construct and
maintain good, sufficient and safe crossings over any street traversed by their
rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 435 -
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions 90.13 Failure to Maintain
90.02 Public Works Director’s Duties 90.14 Curb Valve
90.03 Mandatory Connections 90.15 Interior Valve
90.04 Abandoned Connections 90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.05 Permit 90.17 Completion by the City
90.06 Fee for Permit 90.18 Shutting off Water Supply
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.08 Plumber Required 90.20 Boilers and Pressure Vessels
90.09 Excavations 90.21 Line Extensions
90.10 Tapping Mains 90.22 Easements
90.11 Construction Standards 90.23 Emergency Repairs by City
90.12 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in the
chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
1. “Combined service account” means a customer service account
for the provision of two or more utility services.
2. “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water
service from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between
such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations
hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
3. “Public Works Director” means the Public Works Director of the
City or any duly authorized assistant, agent or representative.
4. “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or
community use.
5. “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the
building served.
6. “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for
securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating and distributing water.
90.02 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR’S DUTIES. The Public Works
Director shall supervise the installation of water service pipes and their
connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining to water
services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall apply to
all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to new ones. The
Public Works Director shall make such rules, not in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the water system,
subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an emergency the Public
Works Director may make temporary rules for the protection of the system until
due consideration by the Council may be had.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 436 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03 MANDATORY CONNECTIONS. As of July 24, 2006, all
residences and business establishments within the City limits intended or used
for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be connected to the public water
system, with the following exceptions:
1. Existing wells that furnish a pure and wholesome water supply to
residences and business establishments. In the event of failure of said
existing well, system connection to the public water system shall be
required. However, routine mechanical repairs on wells shall be
allowed.
2. If City water is not available within one hundred (100) feet of
property line, connection shall not be mandatory.
Any nonpublic water-supplying well that is installed within the City limits shall
conform to all required standards set forth by the State of Iowa.
90.04 ABANDONED CONNECTIONS. When an existing water service is
abandoned or a service is renewed with a new tap in the main, all abandoned
connections with the mains shall be turned off at the corporation cock and made
absolutely watertight.
90.05 PERMIT. Before any person makes a connection with the public water
system, a written permit must be obtained from the City. The application for
the permit shall include a legal description of the property, the name of the
property owner, the name and address of the person who will do the work, and
the general uses of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements
of this chapter and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the
permit shall be issued. Work under any permit must be completed within sixty
(60) days after the permit is issued, except that when such time period is
inequitable or unfair due to conditions beyond the control of person making the
application, an extension of time within which to complete the work may be
granted. The permit may be revoked at any time for any violation of these
chapters.
90.06 FEE FOR PERMIT. Before any permit is issued the person who
makes the application shall pay twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the Clerk to
cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting
the work.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07 COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE. The installation of any
water service pipe and any connection with the water system shall comply with
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 437 -
all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether regulatory, procedural or
enforcement provisions of the State Plumbing Code.
90.08 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of water service pipes and
connections to the water system shall be made by a plumber approved by the
City.
90.09 EXCAVATIONS. All trench work, excavation and backfilling
required in making a connection shall be performed in accordance with
applicable excavation provisions as provided for installation of building sewers
and/or the provisions of Chapter 135.
90.10 TAPPING MAINS. All taps into water mains shall be made by or
under the direct supervision of the Public Works Director and in accord with the
following:
1. Independent Services. No more than one house, building or
premises shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission
is obtained from the Public Works Director and unless provision is made
so that each house, building or premises may be shut off independently
of the other.
2. Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six (6) inches or less in
diameter shall receive no larger than a three-fourths (3/4) inch tap. All
mains of over six (6) inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one
inch tap. Where a larger connection than a one inch tap is desired, two
(2) or more small taps or saddles shall be used, as the Public Works
Director shall order. All taps in the mains shall be made at or near the
top of the pipe, at least eighteen (18) inches apart. No main shall be
tapped nearer than two (2) feet of the joint in the main.
3. Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and
weight approved by the Public Works Director, shall be inserted in every
tap in the main. The corporation stop in the main shall in no case be
smaller than one size smaller than the service pipe.
4. Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing
the exact location of the tap shall be filed with the Public Works Director
in such form as the Public Works Director shall require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.11 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. Service lines and appurtenances
shall be constructed in accordance with this chapter and/or the State Plumbing
Code.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 438 -
90.12 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE. The City shall
install and maintain at its expense that portion of the service line from the main
to and including the corporation valve; and the customer shall install and
maintain the corporation valve to the customer’s premises, including a stop and
waste cock at the end of the house side of the service. The minimum earth
cover of the customer’s service shall be five (5) feet. The City shall determine
the size and kind of service to be installed. All service lines shall have a copper
locator wire attached or shall otherwise be constructed to enable surface
detection and location.
90.13 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. When any portion of the water service
pipe which is the responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or
creates a nuisance and the owner fails to correct such nuisance the City may do
so and assess the costs thereof to the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.14 CURB VALVE. There shall be installed within the public right-ofway
a main shut-off valve on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the
Public Works Director. The shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible
and even with the pavement or ground.
90.15 INTERIOR VALVE. There shall be installed a shut-off valve on
every service pipe inside the building as close to the entrance of the pipe within
the building as possible and so located that the water can be shut off
conveniently. Where one service pipe supplies more than one customer within
the building, there shall be separate valves for each such customer so that
service may be shut off for one without interfering with service to the others.
90.16 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. All water service pipes and their
connections to the water system must be inspected and approved in writing by
the Public Works Director before they are covered, and the Public Works
Director shall keep a record of such approvals. If the Public Works Director
refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must proceed
immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to use the
municipal water system shall permit the Public Works Director to enter the
premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable
hours and on proof of authority.
90.17 COMPLETION BY THE CITY. Should any excavation be left open
or only partly refilled for twenty-four (24) hours after the water service pipe is
installed and connected with the water system, or should the work be
improperly done, the Public Works Director shall have the right to finish or
correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner or
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 439 -
the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs before
receiving another permit If the property owner is assessed, such assessment
may be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.18 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY. The Public Works Director
may shut off the supply of water to any customer because of any violation of the
regulations contained in these Water Service System chapters that is not being
contested in good faith. The supply shall not be turned on again until all
violations have been corrected and the Public Works Director has ordered the
water to be turned on.
90.19 OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS. It is unlawful
for any person except the Public Works Director to turn water on at the curb
valve, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall open or
attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
90.20 BOILERS AND PRESSURE VESSELS. Customers having boilers
and/or pressure vessels receiving a supply of water from the City must have a
check valve on the water supply line and a vacuum valve on the steam line to
prevent collapse in case the water supply from the City is discontinued or
interrupted for any reason, with or without notice.
90.21 LINE EXTENSIONS. The City will construct extensions to its water
lines to points within its service area, but the City is not required to make such
installations unless the customer pays to the City the entire cost of the
installation. All line extensions shall be evidenced by a contract signed by the
City and the person advancing funds for said extension. If refund of the
advance is to be made, the following method shall apply: twenty percent (20%)
of the total gross revenue of water sales per year for each service connected to
the new extension described in the agreement, for a period not to exceed five (5)
years, provided that the aggregate payments do not exceed the total amount
deposited. No refund shall be made from any revenue received from any lines
leading up to or beyond the particular line extension covered by contract. All
decisions in connection with the manner of installation of any extension and
maintenance thereof shall remain in the exclusive control of the City and such
extension shall be the property of the City and no other person shall have any
right, title or interest therein.
90.22 EASEMENTS. Each customer shall grant or convey or shall cause to
be granted or conveyed to the City a permanent easement and right-of-way
across any property owned or controlled by the customer wherever said
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 440 -
easement or right-of-way is necessary for the municipal water facilities and
lines, so as to be able to furnish service to the customer.
90.23 EMERGENCY REPAIRS BY CITY. In the event that any service
pipe, stop cock or any other equipment between the water main and the water
meter is broken or out of repair, and the condition is such that the opinion of the
City there is an immediate likelihood of damage to the water system as a whole,
or damage to the lines and equipment of other water customers, of substantial
water leakage or waste, or that water service to other customers will have to be
interrupted until repairs are completed, the City may make such repairs as are
necessary without notice to the customer on whose line or equipment such
repairs are made, unless the situation can be remedied by shutting off service to
the affected line or premises without disrupting service to other customers. If
such repairs are made to the service line or equipment for which the customer is
responsible for maintenance, the City shall present a bill to the customer for the
reasonable cost of repair, including labor and material, and if such bill is not
paid within ten (10) days after presentation, the Clerk may order the water shut
off from the property supplied by the service that was repaired or replaced.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 445 -
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
91.01 Purpose 91.07 Meter Repairs
91.02 Water Use Metered 91.08 Right of Entry
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems- Exception 91.09 Meter Installation Fee
91.04 Location of Meters 91.10 Meter Tests
91.05 Meter Setting 91.11 Estimated Readings
91.06 Meter Costs
91.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the
conservation of water and facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for
water service among customers.
91.02 WATER USE METERED. All water furnished customers shall be
measured through meters furnished by the City and installed by the City.
91.03 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS - EXCEPTION. Fire sprinkler
systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection without meters
under the direct supervision of the Public Works Director. No open connection
can be incorporated in the system, and there shall be no valves except a main
control valve at the entrance to the building which must be sealed open.
91.04 LOCATION OF METERS. All meters shall be so located that they
are easily accessible to meter readers and repairmen and protected from
freezing. All water meters shall be installed with an outside reading device.
91.05 METER SETTING. The property owner shall provide all necessary
piping and fittings for proper setting of the meter including a valve on the
discharge side of the meter. Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the
Public Works Director and shall be of a design and construction approved by
the Public Works Director.
91.06 METER COSTS. The full cost of any meter larger than that required
for a single-family residence shall be paid to the City by the property owner or
customer prior to the installation of any such meter by the City, or, at the sole
option of the City, the property owner or customer may be required to purchase
and install such meter in accordance with requirements established by the City.
91.07 METER REPAIRS. Whenever a water meter owned by the City is
found to be out of order the Public Works Director shall have it repaired. If it is
found that damage to the meter has occurred due to the carelessness or
negligence of the customer or property owner, or the meter is not owned by the
City, then the property owner shall be liable for the cost of repairs.
CHAPTER 91 WATER METERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 446 -
91.08 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Public Works Director shall be permitted to
enter the premises of any customer at any reasonable time to read, remove, or
change a meter.
91.09 METER INSTALLATION FEE. There shall be a fee charged to the
property owner for each new installation of a water meter in accordance with
the schedule of such fees approved by resolution of the Council.
91.10 METER TESTS. Upon the written request of any customer, the meter
serving said customer shall be tested by the City. Such test will be made
without charge to the customer if the meter was outside the two percent (2%)
meter efficiency; a charge will be made then only if the test indicates meter
accuracy with the limits of two percent (2%).
91.11 ESTIMATED READINGS. Where a meter has ceased to register, or
meter reading could not be obtained, the quantity of water consumed for billing
purposes will be based upon an average of the prior six (6) months’
consumption, and the conditions of normal water usage expected during the
period in which the meter failed to register.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
Revised 2/27/19
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
92.01 Service Charges 92.06 Lien Exemption
92.02 Rates For Service 92.07 Lien Notice
92.03 Billing for Water Service 92.08 Customer Deposits
92.04 Service Discontinued 92.09 Requested Discontinuance of Service
92.05 Lien for Nonpayment
92.01 SERVICE CHARGES. Each customer shall pay for water service
provided by the City based upon use of water as determined by meters provided
for in Chapter 91. Each location, building, premises or connection shall be
considered a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the
same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02 RATES FOR SERVICE. Water service shall be furnished at the
following monthly rates within the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
Gallons Used Per Month Rate
First 1,000 $22.51 (minimum bill)
Next 99,000 $4.96 per 1,000 gallons
Next 100,000 $4.76 per 1,000 gallons
All over 200,000 $4.50 per 1,000 gallons
Revised 2/27/19
Commencing July 1, 2013 and thereafter, each contributor shall pay an increase
as determined by the annual CPI-U for the Midwest Region as published by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics or a minimum 3% increase, whichever is greater.
The % increase shall apply to the base rate and per 1,000 gallon rate.
In addition to water usage fees as stated above, an assessment in the amount of
$12.50 per month will be added to utility bills for water users. This assessment
will remain in effect until June 30, 2022.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
92.03 BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE. Water service shall be billed as
part of a combined service account, payable in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined
service accounts on or before the first day of each month.
2. Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due
and payable at the office of the Clerk by the fifteenth (15th) day of the
same month.
3. Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be
considered delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty of fifteen
percent (15%) of the amount due shall be added to each delinquent bill.
92.04 SERVICE DISCONTINUED. Water service to delinquent customers
shall be discontinued in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that
service will be discontinued if payment of the combined service account,
including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified in
the notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail
and shall inform the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford
the customer the opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance.
The delinquent account shall be billed a ten dollar ($10.00)
administrative fee for the shut-off notice.
2. Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner
or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord.
3. Hearing. If a hearing is requested in writing within ten (10) days
after notice of the proposed disconnection, the Mayor and Utilities
Committee shall conduct an informal hearing and shall make a
determination as to whether the disconnection is justified. The customer
has the right to appeal the Mayor and Utilities Committee’s decision to
the Council, and if the Council finds that disconnection is justified, then
such disconnection shall be made, unless payment has been received.
4. Fees. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged
before service is restored to a delinquent customer. A charge of fifty
dollars ($50.00) shall be made for reconnection of water service made
during any time other than between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary trips
in the regular changes in occupancies of property.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
92.05 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and
any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for water
service charges to the premises. Water service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.06 LIEN EXEMPTION. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to a
residential rental property where water service is separately metered and the
rates or charges for the water service are paid directly to the City by the tenant,
if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is residential
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The City
may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of ninety (90) days of water
service be paid to the City. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name
of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the rental property and the
date of occupancy. A change in tenant shall require a new written notice to be
given to the City within thirty (30) business days of the change in tenant. When
the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if
the water service charges are paid in full. A change in the ownership of the
residential rental property shall require written notice of such change to be
given to the City within ten business days of the completion of the change of
ownership. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
to a water service.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.07 LIEN NOTICE. A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not
be certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to
certify a lien is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the
owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the
notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to
the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to
certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.08 CUSTOMER DEPOSITS. There shall be required from every owneroccupied
residence a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) deposit. Every rental
property tenant shall provide a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of ninety
days of water service, in which calculations will be based on previous or similar
usage, but in no instance shall the required deposit be less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) from a tenant. The deposit is intended to guarantee the
payment of bills for service. Upon disconnection of the water service, any
balance of such deposit shall be returned to the customer without interest.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09 REQUESTED DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE. Any customer
desiring to discontinue the water service to said customer’s premises for any
reason must give notice of discontinuance in writing at the business office of
the waterworks system; otherwise, the customer shall remain liable for all water
used and service rendered by the City until said notice is received by the City.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
[The next page is 465]

[Type text]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 465 -
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01 Purpose 95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions 95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Public Works Director 95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts 95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required
95.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances
pertaining to Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the
treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
95.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters, unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined:
1. “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty
(20) degrees C., expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million.
2. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping
of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face
of the building wall.
(IAC, 567-69.3[1])
3. “Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain to
the public sewer or other place of disposal.
(IAC, 567-69.3[1])
4. “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off
and sewage.
5. “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of
domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly
discharged into the public sewer system.
6. “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
7. “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 466 -
8. “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to
inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their
connections to the public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as
may be discharged therefrom.
9. “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
10. “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all
equipment and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection,
storage, treatment, and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer
dwelling units or other facilities serving the equivalent of fifteen persons
(1500 gpd) or less.
11. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
12. “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
13. “Public Works Director” means the Public Works Director of the
City or any authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
14. “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories or institutions, and free from storm, surface
water, and industrial waste.
15. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
16. “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
17. “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
18. “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for
collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
19. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
20. “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees
levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the
servicing of said customers by said sewer system.
21. “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 467 -
than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or
flows during normal operation.
22. “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer which carries
storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
23. “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface
of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
24. “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.
95.03 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director shall
exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City
sewage system.
2. Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to
assure compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
3. Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers,
sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and
grades thereof.
95.04 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person shall do, or allow, any of the
following:
1. Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2. Surface Run-off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout,
sump pump, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of
surface run-off or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.
3. Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system,
except by authority of the Public Works Director.
4. Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner
on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 468 -
5. Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage except as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
6. Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the
City, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial
wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of these
chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED. The owners of any houses,
buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a
public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required to install, at such
owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building sewer
connecting such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, and to maintain
the same all in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters,
such compliance to be completed within sixty (60) days after date of official
notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer is located within
one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line of such owner and is
of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be
conveyed to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official
notice to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3f])
(IAC, 567-69.3[3])
95.06 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY. The owners of property outside
the corporate limits of the City so situated that it may be served by the City
sewer system may apply to the Council for permission to connect to the public
sewer upon the terms and conditions stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
95.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Public Works Director and other duly
authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters. The Public Works Director or
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 469 -
that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
95.08 USE OF EASEMENTS. The Public Works Director and other duly
authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09 SPECIAL PENALTIES. The following special penalty provisions
shall apply to violations of these Sanitary Sewer chapters:
1. Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any
provision of these chapters except subsections 1, 3 and 4 of Section
95.04, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
2. Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall
be in violation of this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
3. Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of
these chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 471 -
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
96.01 Permit 96.06 Interceptors Required
96.02 Permit Fee 96.07 Sewer Tap
96.03 Plumber Required 96.08 Inspection Required
96.04 Excavations 96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.10 Abatement of Violations
96.01 PERMIT. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City. The
application for the permit shall set forth the location and description of the
property to be connected with the sewer system and the purpose for which the
sewer is to be used, and shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or
other information considered pertinent. The permit shall require the owner to
complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer
within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a
property owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the
owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or unfair,
an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions herein may be
granted. Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a
violation of these chapters.
96.02 PERMIT FEE. The person who makes the application shall pay a fee
in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the Clerk to cover the cost of
issuing the permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work.
96.03 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of building sewers and
connections to the public sewer shall be made by a plumber approved by the
City.
96.04 EXCAVATIONS. All excavations required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
City. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with A.S.T.M.
Specification C-12, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has
been inspected. The excavations shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 135 where applicable.
96.05 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS. Any connection with a public
sanitary sewer must be made under the direct supervision of the Public Works
Director and in accordance with the following:
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 472 -
1. Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test conducted by the owner and observed by the Public
Works Director, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
2. Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. In such cases the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
3. Installation. The installation and connection of the building sewer
to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State
Plumbing Code, applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the
procedures set forth in A.S.T.M. Specification C-12. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Public
Works Director before installation.
4. Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at
least ten (10) feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal
separation may be less, provided the water service line is located at one
side and at least twelve (12) inches above the top of the building sewer.
5. Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage
flow from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four (4)
inches.
6. Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a
straight line and at a uniform grade of not less than the following:
A. Four (4) inch lines: one-fourth (¼) inch per foot.
B. Six (6) inch lines: one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot.
C. Minimum velocity: 2.50 feet per second with the sewer
half full.
D. Deviations: any deviation in alignment or grade shall be
made only with the written approval of the Public Works Director
and shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings.
7. Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of
cover above the sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 473 -
8. Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too
low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried
by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged
to the building sewer.
9. Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws,
splits, or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing
Code except that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the
public sewer, shall comply with the current edition of one of the
following:
A. Clay sewer pipe – A.S.T.M. C-700 (extra strength).
B. Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe – A.S.T.M. A-74.
C. Ductile iron water pipe – A.W.W.A. C-151.
D. P.V.C. – SDR26 – A.S.T.M. D-3034.
10. Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to, or
within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be
weakened.
11. Jointing. Fittings, type of joint, and jointing material shall be
commensurate with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the
Public Works Director.
12. Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is
exposed when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse
must of necessity be crossed or where there is any danger of
undermining or settlement, cast iron soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe
thoroughly encased in concrete shall be required for such crossings.
Such encasement shall extend at least six (6) inches on all sides of the
pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on firm, solid
material at either end.
13. Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any
residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be
made unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building
with a slab or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the
area adjacent to the foundation of such building cleared of debris and
backfilled. The backfill shall be well compacted and graded so that the
drainage is away from the foundation. Prior to the time the basement
floor is poured, or the first floor is installed in buildings without
basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the plug shall be sealed by the
Public Works Director. Any accumulation of water in any excavation or
basement during construction and prior to connection to the sanitary
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 474 -
sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary
sewer.
96.06 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED. Grease, oil, sludge and sand
interceptors shall be provided by gas and service stations, convenience stores,
car washes, garages, and other facilities when, in the opinion of the Public
Works Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of such wastes that
contain grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other
harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. When required, such interceptors shall be installed
in accordance with the following:
1. Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity as provided by the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the
Public Works Director, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
2. Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes
in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and
watertight.
3. Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the
owner at the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient
operations at all times.
96.07 SEWER TAP. Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall be made at the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable
location. If no properly located “Y” branch is available, a “Y” saddle shall be
installed at the location specified by the Public Works Director. The public
sewer shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the
type of public sewer shall be glued and attached with stainless steel clamps to
the sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a
manhole unless special written permission is received from the Public Works
Director and in accordance with the Public Works Director’s direction if such
connection is approved.
96.08 INSPECTION REQUIRED. All connections with the sanitary sewer
system before being covered shall be inspected and approved, in writing, by the
Public Works Director. As soon as all pipe work from the public sewer to
inside the building has been completed, and before any backfilling is done, the
Public Works Director shall be notified and the Public Works Director shall
inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material; no sewer pipe laid
under ground shall be covered or trenches filled until after the sewer has been
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 475 -
so inspected and approved. If the Public Works Director refuses to approve the
work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work.
96.09 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY. All costs and
expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
City from any loss or damage that may directly be occasioned by the installation
of the building sewer. The City shall have sole discretion on type of materials
used.
96.10 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS. Construction or maintenance of
building sewer lines whether located upon the private property of any owner or
in the public right-of-way, which construction or maintenance is in violation of
any of the requirements of this chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s
expense, within thirty (30) days after date of official notice from the Council of
such violation. If not made within such time the Council shall, in addition to
the other penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work
and assess the cost thereof to the property owner. Such assessment shall be
collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 477 -
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
97.01 Storm Water 97.05 Restricted Discharges - Powers
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges 97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges 97.08 Testing of Wastes
97.01 STORM WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as
combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Public
Works Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the Public Works Director, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02 SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION. Special permits for discharging
surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon
recommendation of the Public Works Director where such discharge is deemed
necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any permit so issued shall
be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to the best interests of the
sewer system.
97.03 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
1. Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene,
naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing
toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in
excess of two (2) milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged
to the public sewer.
3. Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than
5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 478 -
4. Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in
quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage
works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
5. Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow. Any waters or wastes having
(a) a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred
(300) parts per million by weight, or (b) containing more than three
hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or
(c) having an average daily flow greater than two (2) percent of the
average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the
Public Works Director. Where necessary in the opinion of the Public
Works Director, the owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (a) reduce the biochemical
oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per million by weight, or (b)
reduce the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million
by weight, or (c) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such
waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for the approval of the Public Works Director and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals
are obtained in writing.
97.04 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or
wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Public Works Director that such
wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment,
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Public Works Director will give consideration
to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the
sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
The substances restricted are:
1. High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature
higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (65 degrees C).
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 479 -
2. Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease,
or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100)
milligrams per liter or six hundred (600) milligrams per liter of dispersed
or other soluble matter.
3. Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirtytwo
(32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C).
4. Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that
is, to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than one-half (½) inch in any dimension.
5. Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
6. Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing
iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such
degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the
sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Public
Works Director for such materials.
7. Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other
taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding
limits which may be established by the Public Works Director as
necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the
requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies or jurisdiction for
such discharge to the receiving waters.
8. Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Public
Works Director in compliance with applicable State or Federal
regulations.
9. Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of
9.5.
10. Unusual Wastes. Materials which exert or cause:
A. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues)
or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate).
B. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 480 -
C. Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load
on the sewage treatment works.
D. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined herein.
11. Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas
or other substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes
is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing
entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
12. Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials or
substances which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to
release noxious gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form
suspended solids in objectionable concentration or create any other
condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
13. Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances
which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage
treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such
degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
97.05 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES - POWERS. If any waters or wastes
are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which
waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
Section 97.04 and which in the judgment of the Public Works Director may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Public Works Director may:
1. Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the
public sewage system;
2. Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
3. Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates
of discharge; and/or
4. Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of Chapter 99.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 481 -
97.06 SPECIAL FACILITIES. If the Public Works Director permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the
plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Public
Works Director and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities
are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
97.07 CONTROL MANHOLES. When required by the Public Works
Director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Public Works Director. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s expense, and shall be maintained
by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
97.08 TESTING OF WASTES. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods
of the Examination of Water and Wastewater,” published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and
property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twentyfour
(24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a
grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites
of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples).
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 483 -
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
98.01 When Prohibited 98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.02 When Required 98.06 Maintenance of System
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.04 Permit Required 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.01 WHEN PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
it is unlawful to construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02 WHEN REQUIRED. When a public sanitary sewer is not available
under the provisions of Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside,
congregate or are employed shall be provided with an approved on-site
wastewater treatment and disposal system complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. The type, capacity,
location and layout of a private on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall comply with the specifications and requirements set forth by the
Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and with such additional
requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the County Board of
Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install or alter an on-site
wastewater treatment and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from
the County Board of Health.
98.05 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS. It is unlawful to discharge any
wastewater from an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except
under an NPDES permit) to any ditch, stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial
waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.06 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM. The owner of an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a
sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the City.
CHAPTER 98 ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 484 -
98.07 SYSTEMS ABANDONED. At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property served by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system, as provided in Section 95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the
public sewer in compliance with these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site
wastewater treatment and disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with
suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE. No person shall dispose of septage from
an on-site treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 485 -
CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
99.01 Purpose 99.08 Additional Charges
99.02 Sewer District Created 99.09 Special Rates
99.03 Definitions 99.10 Private Water Systems
99.04 Sewer Service Charges Required 99.11 Sewer Maintenance and Improvement Fee
99.05 Rate Setting and Accounts 99.12 Payment of Bills
99.06 Rate and Manner of Payment 99.13 Lien for Nonpayment
99.07 Surcharges 99.14 Biennial Review
99.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to collect from all users of
the City sewer system the cost in whole or in part of constructing and
maintaining the main sewers and sewage treatment plant in proportion to the
service provided to each user.
99.02 SEWER DISTRICT CREATED. One sewer district is hereby created
which includes all of the City.
99.03 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, unless the context specifically
indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined:
1. “Normal domestic wastewater” means wastewater that has a BOD
concentration of not more than 200 mg/l and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than 250 mg/l.
2. “Operation and maintenance” means all expenditures during the
useful life of the wastewater treatment works for materials, labor,
utilities and other items which are necessary for the management and
maintenance of said treatment works to achieve the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
3. “Replacement” means expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the wastewater treatment works to maintain the capacity
and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.
4. “Residential customer” means any customer whose lot, parcel of
real estate or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes only.
5. “SS” (denoting suspended solids) means solids that either float on
the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and
which are removable by laboratory filtering.
6. “Treatment works” means any devices and systems for the
storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage,
CHAPTER 99 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 486 -
domestic sewage or liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting
sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, individual systems,
pumping, power, and other equipment and appurtenances, extensions,
improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; and any
works, including site acquisition of the land, that will be an integral part
of the treatment process or used for ultimate disposal of residues
resulting from such treatment; or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treatment, separating or disposing
of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in sanitary sewer
systems.
7. Useful life” means the estimated period during which a treatment
works will be operated.
8. “User charge” means that portion of the total wastewater service
charge which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost
of operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment
works.
9. “Water meter” means a water volume measuring and recording
device, furnished and/or installed by the City or furnished and/or
installed by a user and approved by the City.
99.04 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED. Every person whose
premises now or hereafter is directly or indirectly served by a connection to the
City sewer system shall pay to the City sewer service fees as hereinafter
provided. Each separate dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling unit,
apartment building, condominium or other like structure or premises and each
separate business occupying separable premises within a single building or
structure, if connected directly or indirectly to the City sewer system, shall be
deemed a user for the purposes of this chapter and shall be charged as a separate
user as provided in Section 99.05.
99.05 RATE SETTING AND ACCOUNTS. The minimum service charge,
rate or rental for all users of the City sewer system shall be established in
accordance with the following provisions:
1. General Rates. The user charge system shall generate adequate
annual revenues to pay costs of annual operation and maintenance
including replacement and costs associated with debt retirement of
bonded capital associated with financing the treatment works by which
the City may by ordinance designate to be paid by the user charge
system. That portion of the total user charge which is designated for
operation and maintenance including replacement of the treatment works
shall be established by this chapter.
CHAPTER 99 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 487 -
2. That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated
for operation and maintenance including replacement purposes as
established in Section 99.06 shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing
fund known as the Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund and
will be kept in two primary accounts, as follows:
A. Operation and Maintenance Account: an account
designated for the specific purpose of defraying operation and
maintenance costs, excluding replacement, of the wastewater
treatment works.
B. Replacement Account: an account designated for the
specific purpose of ensuring replacement needs over the useful
life of the treatment works. Deposits in the Replacement Account
shall be made annually from the operation, maintenance and
replacement revenue in the amount of $3,000 annually.
3. Fiscal year-end balances in the Operation and Maintenance
Account and the Replacement Account shall be carried over to the same
accounts in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other
purposes than those designated for these accounts. Moneys which have
been transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the
Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund shall be returned to their
respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates
for operation, maintenance and replacement. The user charge rates shall
be adjusted such that the transferred moneys will be returned to their
respective accounts within the fiscal year following the fiscal year in
which the moneys were borrowed.
99.06 RATE AND MANNER OF PAYMENT. The minimum service
charge or rate for all users of the City sewer system shall be in accordance with
the following rate schedule. For each user, user charges shall be based on water
used during the current month. If a commercial or industrial customer has a
consumptive use of water, or in some other manner uses water which is not
returned to the wastewater collection system, the user charge for that customer
may be based on a wastewater meter or separate water meter installed and
maintained at the customer’s expense and in a manner acceptable to the City.
The basic charge per month shall be $8.50 for each user who receives services
for residences or businesses within the corporate limits of the City. In addition,
each resident user shall pay $3.25 for each 1,000 gallons used.
99.07 SURCHARGES. For those customers who contribute wastewater the
strength of which is greater than normal domestic sewage, a surcharge will be
CHAPTER 99 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 488 -
collected in addition to the sewer user charge. The surcharge for operation and
maintenance including replacement is $0.12 per pound of BOD.
99.08 ADDITIONAL CHARGES. Any user which discharges any toxic
pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the
sludge from the wastewater treatment works, or any user which discharges any
substance which singly or by interaction with other substances causes
identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or replacement of
the wastewater treatment works, shall pay for such increased costs. The charge
to each such user shall be as determined by the responsible plant operating
personnel and approved by the Council.
99.09 SPECIAL RATES. Where, in the judgment of the Public Works
Director, special conditions surround the use of City or private water to the
extent that the application of the sewer charges provided in herein would be
inequitable or unfair to either the City or the customer, a special rate may be
established by the City. Such rates shall be subject to the approval by resolution
of the Council. Such rates may include, among others, the following cases:
1. Where the nature of the use of the City or private water is such in
the opinion of the Public Works Director that the resulting sewage or
industrial waste has characteristics making it more or less difficult to
treat or purify than ordinary domestic wastes.
2. Where a major proportion of the water consumed is not polluted
and/or is not discharged into or does not reach the sanitary sewer system.
99.10 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS. Users whose premises have private
water systems shall pay a monthly charge based upon the number of occupants
or employees of the premises, as follows:
1. Residences:
One person ................................................... $ 11.75
Two persons ................................................ $ 15.00
Three persons .............................................. $ 18.25
Four persons ................................................ $ 21.50
Five persons ................................................. $ 24.75
Six persons .................................................. $ 28.00
2. Businesses:
One person non-public businesses .............. $ 10.50
Businesses with less than 5 employees ....... $ 15.50
Businesses with 5 to 15 employees ............. $ 25.00
Commercial and industrial businesses with
more than 15 employees ......................... $ 50.50
CHAPTER 99 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 489 -
Water-intensive businesses ......................... $.003/1000 gal. usage
These rates apply to each separate unit or business located in a single building
or structure as provided in Section 99.04. Each user shall cooperate with and
promptly respond to inquiries of the City for determination of the number of
premises occupants or number of employees.
As used in this section, “water intensive businesses” are those businesses which
on average use a significantly higher amount of water than normal, irregardless
of the number of employees in those businesses. Businesses which qualify
under this category shall be determined by the City Administrator or Council.
Those businesses which are determined to be water-intensive businesses shall
be notified in writing of such designation, and shall have the opportunity for a
review hearing with the full Council within fifteen (15) days of said designation
and written notice, if said written request for hearing is received by the City
within the fifteen days.
99.11 SEWER MAINTENANCE AND IMPROVEMENT FEE. Effective
August 1, 2015, in addition to the sewer user charges established in this chapter,
a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged to each utilities customer each
billing cycle. Said fee shall be used for sewer maintenance and sewer
improvements.
99.12 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All sewer service charges are due and
payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of a
combined service account as contained in Section 92.03 of this Code of
Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued in accordance with the
provisions contained in Section 92.04 if the combined service account becomes
delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.07 relating to lien notices
shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account.
99.13 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and
any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer
service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.14 ANNUAL REVIEW. The City shall review the user charge system
annually and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system
generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance
including replacement and that the system continues to provide for the
CHAPTER 99 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 490 -
proportional distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement
costs among users and user classes. The City will notify each user at least
annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being charged for
operation and maintenance including replacement of the treatment works.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 501 -
CHAPTER 100
STORM WATER UTILITY
100.01 Purpose 100.04 Rates
100.02 Definitions 100.05 Payment of Bills
100.03 Storm Water Drainage System District Established 100.06 Lien for Nonpayment
100.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Storm Water
Utility and provide a means of funding the construction, operation and
maintenance of storm water management facilities including, but not limited to,
detention and retention basins, storm water sewers, inlets, ditches and drains,
and cleaning of streets. The Council finds that the construction, operation and
maintenance of the City’s storm and surface water drainage system should be
funded through charging users of property which may connect or discharge
directly, or indirectly, into the storm and surface water drainage system.
100.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined:
1. “Connection” means the physical act or process of tapping a
public storm water sewer or drainage line, or joining onto an existing
side sewer, for the purpose of connecting private impervious surface or
other storm and surface water sources or systems to the public storm and
surface water system. It also includes creation or maintenance of
impervious surface that causes or is likely to cause an increase in the
quantity or decrease in quality or both from the natural state of storm
water runoff, and which drains, directly or indirectly, to the storm and
surface water system.
2. “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving storm
water service from the City, the owner of the property served, and as
between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and
obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
3. “Storm and surface water drainage system” means any
combination of publicly owned storm and surface water quantity and
quality facilities, pumping, or lift facilities, storm and secondary drain
pipes and culverts, open channels, creeks and ditches, force mains,
laterals, manholes, catch basins and inlets, including the grates and
covers thereof, detention and retention facilities, laboratory facilities and
equipment, and any other publicly owned facilities for the collection,
conveyance, treatment and disposal of storm and surface water system
CHAPTER 100 STORM WATER UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 502 -
within the City, to which sanitary sewage flows are not intentionally
admitted.
4. “User” means any person who uses property that maintains
connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the City
for storm water management. The occupant of occupied property is
deemed the user. If the property is not occupied, the person who has the
right to occupy it shall be deemed the user.
100.03 STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM DISTRICT
ESTABLISHED. Pursuant to the authority of Section 384.84(5) of the Code of
Iowa, the entire City is hereby declared a Storm Water Drainage System District
for the purpose of establishing, imposing, adjusting and providing for the
collection of rates for the operation and maintenance of storm water
management facilities. The entire City, as increased from time to time by
annexation, shall constitute a single Storm Water Drainage System District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[5])
100.04 RATES. Each customer shall pay for storm and surface water
drainage system service provided by the City. The rates for the operation and
maintenance of the storm water management facilities shall be collected by
imposing a monthly rate on each residential, commercial and industrial
customer within the City. The Council may adopt rules, charges, rates, and fees
for the use of the City’s storm and surface water system, and for services
provided by the City relating to that system. Such rules may include
delinquency and interest charges and penalties. Such charges and fees shall be
just and equitable based upon the actual costs of operation, maintenance,
acquisition, extension and replacement of the City’s system, the costs of bond
repayment, regulation, administration, and services of the City. A fee of one
dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) shall be charged to each utilities customer each
billing cycle.
100.05 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All Storm Water Drainage System District
charges shall be due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided
for payment of a combined service account as contained in Section 92.03 of this
Code of Ordinances. All City services may be discontinued in accordance with
the provisions contained in Section 92.04 if the combined service account
becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Sections 92.06 and 92.07
relating to lien exemptions and lien notices shall also apply in the event of a
delinquent account.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[2b] and [2d])
CHAPTER 100 STORM WATER UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 503 -
100.06 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and
any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for charges for
the operation and maintenance of the storm water management facilities. Any
such charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the
premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[3a])
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 504 -
CHAPTER 104
MUNICIPAL COMPOST SITE AND YARD WASTE
104.01 Purpose 104.06 Violation and Penalty
104.02 Compost Site 104.07 Compost Site Fee
104.03 Hours of Operations 104.08 User Fee Determination
104.04 Prohibited Materials and Practices 104.09 Lien for Nonpayment
104.05 Yard Waste from Outside City Prohibited
104.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a location and
manner for residents of the City of Marengo to dispose of yard waste.
As used in this chapter, “yard waste”, means any debris such as grass
clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and trees. Yard waste does not
include tree stumps.
104.02 COMPOST SITE. The location of the site where City of Marengo
residents are allowed to dispose of their yard waste, is the city-owned
lot located in the 800 block of East Main Street.
104.03 HOURS OF OPERATION. The compost site will be available for
disposal of yard waste or brush commencing at sun-up and ending at
sundown each day.
104.04 PROHIBITED MATERIALS AND PRACTICES. It is unlawful
for any person to engage in the dumping of materials other than yard
waste at the compost site. In addition, it is unlawful for any person to
set fire to, or cause the ignition of the materials at the site.
104.05 YARD WASTE FROM OUTSIDE CITY PROHIBITED. It is
unlawful for any person to dispose of yard waste or brush at the
Compost Site, which did not originate or was not produced within the
City limits.
104.06 VIOLATION AND PENALTY. Anyone violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30)
days, and/or a fine not to exceed $100.00. The person shall be required
to remove any unapproved materials deposited into the Compost Site.
In addition, the violator may be subject to civil penalties, which shall
include the costs of removing the material in violation of this section
and the proper disposal thereof. The minimum civil penalty for a
violation shall be $500.00 for the first offense and $1000.00 for each
subsequent offense.
CHAPTER 104 MUNICIPAL COMPOST SITE AND YARD WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 505 -
104.07 COMPOST SITE FEE. A compost site fee, established by
resolution of the Council, shall be charged as a user fee on customers’
water/sewer bills every month. All compost fees are due and payable
under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of a
combined service account as contained in Section 92.03 of this Code
of Ordinances. Utility services may be discontinued in accordance
with the provisions contained in Section 92.04 if the combined service
account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section
92.07 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a
delinquent account.
104.08 USER FEE DETERMINATION. The Council shall annually
determine the fee to be charged for the compost site in order to
reasonably reflect the anticipated cost, as approved by motion or
resolution of the Council.
104.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and
the occupant thereof and the user of the compost site provided by the
City shall be jointly and severally liable for the fees for the compost
services provided to the premises being served. Fees and penalties
remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the
premises served and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 521 -
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Purpose 105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions 105.08 Open Dumping Prohibited
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.09 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard 105.10 Waste Storage Containers
105.05 Open Burning Restricted 105.11 Prohibited Practices
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required 105.12 Sanitary Disposal Project Designated
105.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances
pertaining to Solid Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary
storage, collection and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the
citizens of the City from such hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may
result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters the following terms are
defined:
1. “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste
from public and private places.
2. “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or
drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
3. “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located
within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities
which are used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking
and eating.
4. “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and
vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food,
and all offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all
such substances from all public and private establishments and from all
residences.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
5. “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except
garbage. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps,
brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 522 -
6. “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials
or debris.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
7. “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person
residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business
in any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
8. “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including
but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street
cleanings, market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste
in dry or semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
9. “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any
multiple-family dwelling.
10. “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises
as a result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste
grown on the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but
excludes garbage, tires, trade wastes and any locally recyclable goods or
plastics.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
11. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of
combustible and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard,
tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any
kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
12. “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that
it does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a
nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
13. “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
including all real and personal property connected with such facilities,
which are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped,
improved, extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final
disposition of solid waste without creating a significant hazard to the
public health or safety, and which are approved by the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
14. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar
discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 523 -
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and
domestic activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by
subsection one of Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
105.03 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED. It is the duty of each owner
to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner’s
premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on
any premises for a period of more than thirty (30) days shall be deemed a
nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD. It is unlawful for any person to
permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public
place, such quantities of solid waste that constitute a health, sanitation or fire
hazard.
105.05 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED. No person shall allow, cause or
permit open burning of combustible materials where the products of combustion
are emitted into the open air without passing through a chimney or stack, except
that open burning is permitted in the following circumstances:
(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2)
1. Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including
landscape waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in
cases where an officially declared emergency condition exists, provided
that the burning of any structures or demolished structures is conducted
in accordance with 40 CFR Section 61.145.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3a])
2. Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree
trimmings at a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is
conducted in compliance with the rules established by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3b])
3. Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases,
provided such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with
applicable rules of the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3c])
4. Landscape Waste. Open burning of landscape waste which
originates on the premises is allowed any day during the months of April,
May, September, October and November, provided that all such burning
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 524 -
shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. During all
other calendar months, open burning of landscape wastes which
originates on the premises is allowed each Wednesday and Saturday,
provided that all such burning shall occur only between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. All fires shall be extinguished by and not allowed to
smolder beyond 8:00 p.m. The burning of landscape waste produced in
clearing, grubbing and construction operations shall be limited to areas
located at least one-fourth (¼) mile from any building inhabited by other
than the landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. Rubber tires
shall not be used to ignite landscape waste.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3d])
5. Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation
and ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of
visible air contaminants established by the State Department of Natural
Resources. Rubber tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])
(IAC, 567-23.2[3f] and 567-20.2[455B])
6. Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona fide
training of public or industrial employees in fire fighting methods,
provided that the training fires are conducted in compliance with rules
established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])
7. Pesticide Containers and Seed Corn Bags. The disposal by open
burning of paper or plastic pesticide containers (except those formerly
containing organic forms of beryllium, selenium, mercury, lead,
cadmium or arsenic) and seed corn bags resulting from farming activities
occurring on the premises if burned in accordance with rules established
by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3h])
8. Agricultural Structures. The open burning of agricultural
structures if in accordance with rules and limitations established by the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3i])
9. Controlled Burning of a Demolished Building. The controlled
burning of a demolished building by the City, subject to approval of the
Council, provided that the controlled burning is conducted in accordance
with rules and limitations established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3j])
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 525 -
10. Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of
materials not permitted herein may make application for a variance to the
Director of the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[2])
105.06 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED. All yard waste
shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste
accumulated on the premises and shall be composted or burned on the premises
in accordance with Section 105.05(4). As used in this section, “yard waste”
means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and trees.
Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.07 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto
or in any water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to
affect the authorized collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or
receptacles provided for such purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor
vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any
case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually
discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08 OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED. No person shall dump or deposit
or permit the dumping or depositing of any solid waste on the surface of the
ground or into a body or stream of water at any place other than a sanitary
disposal project approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste on land owned
or leased by such person has been obtained from the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources. However, this section does not prohibit the
use of dirt, stone, brick or similar inorganic material for fill, landscaping,
excavation, or grading at places other than a sanitary disposal project.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2)
105.09 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE. No person shall deposit in a
solid waste container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous
waste. Such materials shall be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the
Director of the State Department of Natural Resources. As used in this section,
“toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including but not limited
to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste,
flammable or explosive materials and similar harmful waste which requires
special handling and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve
the environment and protect the public health and safety.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 526 -
105.10 WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS. Every person owning,
managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises, dwelling unit or any place
where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all times maintain in good order
and repair portable containers for refuse in accordance with the following:
1. Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply
with the following specifications:
A. Residential. Residential waste containers, whether they be
reusable, portable containers or heavy-duty disposable garbage
bags, shall be of sufficient capacity, and leakproof and
waterproof. Disposable containers shall be securely fastened, and
reusable containers shall be fitted with a fly-tight lid which shall
be kept in place except when depositing or removing the contents
of the container. Reusable containers shall also be lightweight
and of sturdy construction and have suitable lifting devices.
B. Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating,
leasing or renting any commercial premises where an excessive
amount of refuse accumulates and where its storage in portable
containers as required above is impractical, shall maintain metal
bulk storage containers approved by the City.
2. Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be
stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers
shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted
written permission from the City to use public property for such
purposes. The storage site shall be well drained; fully accessible to
collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection
personnel. All owners of residential and commercial premises shall be
responsible for proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent
materials from being blown or scattered around neighboring yards and
streets.
3. Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage
of solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed outdoors at some easily
accessible place by the owner or occupant of the premises served.
4. Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers
which are not in compliance with the provisions of this section will not
be collected.
105.11 PROHIBITED PRACTICES. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the
owner of such containers.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 527 -
2. Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid
waste collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful
performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or
collectors be those of the City, or those of any other authorized waste
collection service.
3. Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators
designed for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid
or gaseous combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from
which the solid residues contain little or no combustible material, as
acceptable to the Environmental Protection Commission.
4. Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste which has been
placed out for collection on any premises, unless such person is an
authorized solid waste collector.
105.12 SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED. The sanitary
landfill facilities operated by the Regional Environmental Improvement
Commission are hereby designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal
Project” for the disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the City.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 529 -
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
106.01 Collection Service 106.05 Bulky Rubbish
106.02 Collection Vehicles 106.06 Right of Entry
106.03 Loading 106.07 Landfill Fee
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.08 Lien for Nonpayment
106.01 COLLECTION SERVICE. The collection of solid waste within the
City shall be by private contract with collectors.
106.02 COLLECTION VEHICLES. Vehicles or containers used for the
collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid
waste containing such materials shall be leakproof, durable and of easily
cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or
insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03 LOADING. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and
transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner
that the contents will not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to
prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material
shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to
the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. All solid waste shall be
collected from residential premises at least once each week and from
commercial, industrial and institutional premises as frequently as may be
necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05 BULKY RUBBISH. Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be
collected in the normal manner of other solid waste may be collected by the
collector upon request in accordance with procedures therefor established by the
Council.
106.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to
enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom
as required by this chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter
dwelling units or other residential buildings.
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 530 -
106.07 LANDFILL FEE. A landfill fee in the amount of $3.25 per month
shall be charged to every business and residential premises in the City. Such
fees are due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for
payment of a combined service account as contained in Section 92.03 of this
Code of Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be discontinued in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.04 if the combined
service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section
92.07 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
106.08 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and
any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid
waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to
the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 545 -
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted 110.05 Mains Extended
110.02 Service Provided 110.06 Hold Harmless
110.03 Installation and Maintenance 110.07 Rates
110.04 Restoration of Public Ways 110.08 Successors
110.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. The City hereby grants unto Iowa
Electric Light and Power Company, an Iowa corporation, its successors and
assigns, hereinafter called the Grantee, a nonexclusive franchise and right for a
period of twenty-five (25) years from and after the date the ordinance codified
by this chapter became effective, to erect, construct, reconstruct, maintain and
operate within the corporate limits of the City, as the same are now or hereafter
may be located or extended, a natural gas plant, or plants, and/or a plant, or
plants, for the manufacturing and processing of any and all kinds of gas, and to
erect, construct, reconstruct, maintain and operate within said corporate limits
distributing systems for the distribution of natural gas, or any and all other types
and kinds of gas, whether said plant, or plants, and distribution systems have
been heretofore or hereafter may be constructed, together with the franchise and
right to enter upon and to use and occupy the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges
and other public places of the City as the same now are or hereafter may be
located or extended, for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, maintaining
and operating therein, thereon and thereunder systems for the distribution of
natural gas and/or any and all other kinds of gas, consisting of mains, pipes,
pipe lines, distributing lines, conduits and other equipment, appurtenances and
construction necessary or incident to said distribution systems, and together
with the franchise and right to supply, distribute and sell natural gas and/or any
and all other kinds of gas to the City and to the inhabitants thereof and others
within and without the corporate limits of the City for any and all purposes, and
upon such terms and conditions and under such restrictions and regulations as
are hereinafter contained, and such other reasonable rules and regulations as
hereafter may be provided by ordinance.
110.02 SERVICE PROVIDED. The Grantee shall maintain within the City
a modern gas service, with sufficient capacity to meet the reasonable
requirements of its patrons, and shall supply same in such a manner as to render
efficient service unless prevented by an act of God, a public enemy, a
governmental authority, or by a cause not under the control of the Grantee, and
in any such event, the Grantee may adopt reasonable rules and regulations
governing the volume of gas which it shall be required to furnish its patrons, or
any class of patrons.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 546 -
110.03 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE. The systems for the
distribution of gas shall be constructed, maintained and operated by the Grantee
in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property, and so as not to
interfere unnecessarily with any improvements the City may deem proper to
make, or to hinder unnecessarily or obstruct the free use of the streets, avenues,
alleys, bridges, highways or public or private property, and so as not to interfere
with the sewers, drainage or water systems of the City.
110.04 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS. Whenever the Grantee, in
erecting, constructing or maintaining said distribution systems, shall take up or
disturb any pavement or sidewalks, or make any excavations in the streets,
avenues, alleys, bridges or public places of the City, said excavations shall at
once be refilled and the pavement, sidewalk, or other improvement replaced to
the satisfaction of the City officials, and in case of failure to do so as promptly
as is practical, the City may do so at the expense of the Grantee.
110.05 MAINS EXTENDED. The Grantee shall extend its mains as
provided by its most current gas tariff and applicable rules promulgated by the
governing regulatory body for customers in all cases where bona fide customers
apply in writing to be supplied with gas and if said applicants shall sign
reasonable contracts for the use of gas.
110.06 HOLD HARMLESS. The Grantee shall hold the City harmless from
any and all causes of action, litigation or damages which may arise through or
by reason of the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of the
systems for the distribution of gas and other construction hereby authorized.
110.07 RATES. The Grantee shall have the right to supply, distribute and
sell gas for any and all purposes to the City and to the inhabitants thereof, and to
charge therefor such just and reasonable rates as hereafter may be fixed and
determined by the rate-making body established under the laws of the State and
given jurisdiction thereof.
110.08 SUCCESSORS. All of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to
the successors or assigns of the Grantee with the same force and effect as they
do to the Grantee.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 547 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 251 adopting a gas franchise for the City was
passed and adopted by the Council on March 14, 1988.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 549 -
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
111.01 Franchise Granted 111.05 Rates
111.02 Construction Standards 111.06 Successors and Assigns
111.03 Restoration of Public Ways 111.07 Hold Harmless
111.04 Lines Extended
111.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. The City hereby grants unto the Iowa
Electric Light and Power Company, an Iowa Corporation, its successors and
assigns, hereinafter called the Grantee, a nonexclusive franchise and right, for a
period of twenty-five (25) years from and after the date the ordinance codified
by this chapter became effective, to erect, construct, reconstruct, maintain and
operate within the corporate limits of the City, as the same now are or may
hereafter be located or extended, a power plant or plants for the generation of
electricity and/or a system or systems for the transmission and distribution of
electricity, whether said power plant or plants and transmission and distribution
systems have been heretofore or hereafter may be constructed, together with the
franchise and right to enter upon and to use and occupy the streets, avenues,
alleys, bridges and other public places of the City as the same are now or may
hereafter be located or extended, for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing,
maintaining and operating thereon, therein, thereunder and thereover said
systems for the transmission and distribution of electricity, consisting of poles,
posts, wires, cables, conduits and other equipment, appurtenances and
construction necessary or incident to said systems, including a high potential
electric transmission line or lines, to and through the City, and together with the
franchise and right to supply, distribute and sell electric energy to the City and
to the inhabitants thereof and others within and without the corporate limits of
the City for any and all purposes and upon such terms and conditions and under
such restrictions and regulations as are hereinafter contained, and such other
reasonable rules and regulations as may hereafter be provided by the rulemaking
body having jurisdiction thereof.
111.02 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. The construction of said
transmission and distribution systems shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the National Electrical Safety Code issued by the United States
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Standards, as approved by the rulemaking
body having jurisdiction thereof. All poles, posts, wires, cables,
conduits and other equipment, appurtenances and construction connected
therewith shall be located, erected, adjusted and maintained so as not to
interfere unreasonably with any improvements the City may deem proper to
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 550 -
make, or to hinder unnecessarily or obstruct the free use of the streets, avenues,
alleys, bridges or other public places.
111.03 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS. Whenever the Grantee, in
erecting, constructing, or maintaining said transmission and distribution
systems, shall take up or disturb any pavement or sidewalk or make any
excavation in the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges or public places of the City,
such excavations shall be at once refilled and the pavement, sidewalk or other
improvement, replaced to the satisfaction of the City officials.
111.04 LINES EXTENDED. The Grantee shall extend its overhead
transmission and distribution lines for each applicant for light, power or electric
current as provided by the most current extension rules promulgated by the
governing regulatory body.
111.05 RATES. The Grantee shall have the right to supply, distribute and
sell electricity for any and all purposes to the City and to the inhabitants thereof,
and to charge therefor such just and reasonable rates as may hereafter be fixed
and determined by the rate-making body established under the laws of the State
and given jurisdiction thereof.
111.06 SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS. All of the provisions of this
chapter shall apply to the successors or assigns of the Grantee, with the same
force and effect as they do the Grantee.
111.07 HOLD HARMLESS. The Grantee shall hold the City harmless from
any and all causes of action, litigation or damages which may arise through or
by reason of the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of said
distribution and transmission systems and other construction hereby authorized.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 260 adopting an electric franchise for the City was
passed and adopted by the Council on May 14, 1990. Voters
approved the franchise at an election held on June 26, 1990.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 551 -
CHAPTER 112
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
112.01 Definitions 112.07 Proof of Insurance
112.02 Franchise Granted 112.08 Hold Harmless From Damages
112.03 Restrictions 112.09 Successors and Assigns
112.04 Moving Structures 112.10 Indemnification
112.05 Streets to Be Restored to Good Condition 112.11 Compliance with Franchise Terms
112.06 Tree Trimming 112.12 Damage or Defacing Facilities
112.01 DEFINITIONS. Whenever used in this chapter, the following words
and terms have the definitions and meanings provided in this section:
1. “Facilities” means all Grantee duct spaces, manholes, poles,
conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment,
structures and appurtenances and all associated transmission media.
2. “Grantee” means GTE Midwest Incorporated.
3. “Rights-of-way” means all present and future streets, avenues,
highways, alleys, bridges, viaducts and public grounds within the City
limits of the City.
4. “Transmission media” means all Grantee cables, fibers, wires or
other physical devices used to transmit and/or receive communication
signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristics and whether
for voice or data or other purposes.
112.02 FRANCHISE GRANTED. GTE Midwest Incorporated, its
successors and assigns (hereinafter referred to as “Grantee”) are hereby granted
a franchise for a period of five (5) years from the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter to acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, extend and
operate such telephone plant or system and such facilities thereof, including
lines, poles, wires, stubs, anchors, cables, vaults, laterals, conduits and other
fixtures and equipment in, upon, through, over, under, along and across the
public streets, alleys, highways and other passageways or public grounds of or
in the corporate limits of the City as now or hereafter established, as may be
necessary and/or convenient for supplying to the citizens of the City, to adjacent
rural areas and to the public at large telephone service, local and long distance,
and communication by telephone or other electric signals and for the conduct of
a general telephone business therein.
112.03 RESTRICTIONS. Grantee’s rights and privileges in the public ways
and grounds of the City shall be exercised as follows:
CHAPTER 112 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 552 -
1. Location of Facilities. Location of its existing system is hereby
approved; changes of location, additions or extensions thereto affecting
public grounds or ways shall be subject to the reasonable and proper
regulation, control and direction of the City or of any municipal officer
to whom such duties have been or may be delegated.
2. Quality and Installation. All poles to be placed shall be of sound
material and reasonably straight, and shall be so set that they will not
interfere with the flow of water to any gutter or drain, and so that the
same will interfere as little as practicable with the ordinary travel on the
street and sidewalk.
3. Excavations. Grantee may make excavations in public grounds or
ways and may take up such portions of pavement or sidewalk as it deems
necessary for the installation, maintenance, replacement or removal of its
facilities. Excavations so made shall be refilled and surfacing thus
disturbed shall be restored to as reasonably good condition as before.
4. Joint Pole Use. Grantee shall permit the City to attach to its poles
its fire and/or police wires and apparatus incident thereto — such
attachments to be made under the direction and supervision of the
Grantee and so made and maintained as not to interfere with the
Grantee’s use of said poles.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to add to or detract from any authority
granted by the Legislature of the State to the City.
112.04 MOVING STRUCTURES. Grantee shall accommodate public or
private necessity to move along or across public ways or grounds of the City
vehicles or structures, other than parade components, of such height or size as to
interfere with its poles and/or wires erected hereunder and shall temporarily
remove, raise or lower the same to permit such passage, provided:
1. Written notice thereof shall be served upon Grantee’s agent or
manager in the City not less than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the
time set for the proposed passage.
2. Grantee is paid in advance the actual cost of such accommodation.
3. The clearance of wires above ground shall conform to the basic
standards of the National Electrical Safety Code, National Bureau of
Standards, United States Department of Commerce, as promulgated at
the time of erection thereof.
CHAPTER 112 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 553 -
112.05 STREETS TO BE RESTORED TO GOOD CONDITION. The
surface of any street, avenue, alley, highway, viaduct or public ground within
the City disturbed by the Grantee in building, constructing, renewing or
maintaining its telecommunications system shall be restored within a reasonable
time after completion of the work to as good a condition as before the
commencement of the work and maintained to the satisfaction of the City or of
any City official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated, for one
year from the date the surface of said street, avenue, alley, highway, viaduct or
public ground is broken for such construction or maintenance work, after which
time responsibility for such maintenance shall revert to the City. No such street,
avenue, alley, highway, viaduct or public ground shall be encumbered for a
longer period of time than shall be necessary to execute the work. The Grantee
shall be responsible for any expense incurred by the City by reason of neglect of
the Grantee to do such work.
112.06 TREE TRIMMING. In the pursuit of maintaining its
telecommunications system, the Grantee, its contractors, agents, successors and
assigns shall have the right to trim trees upon and overhanging the streets,
avenues, alleys, bridges, viaducts and public grounds of the City, so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contract with the wires,
cables or other facilities of the Grantee, and when so ordered by the City, said
trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the City or any
City official to whom said duties have been or may be delegated.
112.07 PROOF OF INSURANCE. Grantee shall be required to show proof
of insurance by the Grantee, including worker’s compensation insurance,
comprehensive general liability insurance, and business auto insurance, within
60 days after the effective date of the franchise ordinance.
112.08 HOLD HARMLESS FROM DAMAGES. The Grantee shall hold
the City free and harmless from all damages or claims for damage of any kind
whatsoever caused by the negligent construction or maintenance of its lines and
shall be liable for injuries to public or private property of every kind.
112.09 SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS. The rights, powers, limitations,
duties and restrictions herein provided for shall inure to and be binding upon the
parties hereto and upon their respective successors and assigns.
112.10 INDEMNIFICATION. Grantee shall indemnify the City against loss
from claims or causes of action arising out of its construction, reconstruction,
maintenance or operation of the installations herein authorized.
CHAPTER 112 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 554 -
112.11 COMPLIANCE WITH FRANCHISE TERMS. The Grantee shall
at all times during the term of the franchise comply with, submit to and carry
out any and all valid ordinances relating to any person, firm or corporation now
in force or that hereafter may be lawfully enacted and not inconsistent herewith.
In the event of a breach of the terms of this chapter by the Grantee, the City
may seek relief, including voidance of franchise, injunctive relief and damages
and any other remedies it has under the law.
112.12 DAMAGE OR DEFACING FACILITIES. It is unlawful for any
person to injure, destroy or deface any property of Grantee lawfully installed
and maintained hereunder or to post bills or signs thereon. A violation of this
section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 306 granting a telephone franchise for the City was
passed and adopted on June 12, 1995.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 551 -
CHAPTER 113
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
113.01 Grant of Franchise 113.02 Assignment
113.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. A nonexclusive right is hereby granted to
Coon Creek Telecommunications Corp., its successors and assigns (hereinafter
referred to as the “Grantee”) to establish, construct, operate, maintain, repair,
replace, renew, reconstruct and remove a cable television system across public
property in the City limits for a term of twenty-five (25) years, in accordance
with the laws and regulations of the United States of America and the State of
Iowa and the ordinances and regulations of the City, including the nonexclusive
right, privilege and authority:
1. To sell and supply audio and video communication service to
persons within the City;
2. To use public property within the City;
3. To engage in such further activities within the City as may now or
hereafter be consistent with the generally accepted principles applicable
to the operation of a cable television system.
113.02 ASSIGNMENT. The Grantee shall not assign or transfer any right
granted under the franchise to any other person, company or corporation
without prior consent of the Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably
withheld, provided that the Grantee shall have the right to assign the franchise
to a corporation wholly owned by the Grantee or to a limited partnership of
which the Grantee is a general partner without prior consent of the City.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 399 adopting a cable television franchise for the
City was passed and adopted on March 28, 2005.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 557 -
CHAPTER 113
CHAPTER 114
CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
114.01 Definitions 114.23 Channel Capacity and Performance
114.02 Use of Property 114.24 Installation and Maintenance of Subscriber
114.03 Taxes Terminals in Municipal Buildings, Public Schools,
114.04 Insurance Fire Station, Public Library and Hospitals
114.05 Repairs 114.25 Telecast of Educational Activities
114.06 Hold Harmless 114.26 Program Alteration
114.07 Liability 114.27 Subscriber Rates and Charges
114.08 Assignment 114.28 Local Office and Complaint Procedures
114.09 Insolvency of Grantee 114.29 Change of Subscriber Rates and Charges
114.10 Default of Grantee 114.30 Service Rules and Regulations
114.11 Termination 114.31 Service Agreements
114.12 Compliance with Applicable Laws 114.32 Payments to City
114.13 Installation and Maintenance of Property of Grantee 114.33 Injury to Property of Grantee
114.14 Installation of Cables 114.34 Intercepting Signals of Grantee
114.15 Restoration of Ground Surface 114.35 Filing of Reports
114.16 Alteration of Grade 114.36 Filing of Maps and Plats
114.17 Temporary Removal of Cables 114.37 Filing of Communications with Regulatory Agencies
114.18 Tree Trimming 114.38 Access
114.19 Line Extensions 114.39 Discrimination Prohibited
114.20 Service Requirements 114.40 Arbitration
114.21 Construction Schedule 114.41 Reservations
114.22 Performance Standards
114.01 DEFINITIONS. The following words and phrases, when used herein,
shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
1. “Channel” means the segment of the electromagnetic spectrum to
which a source of television transmission is assigned.
2. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.
3. “Franchise” means the rights, privileges, and authority granted by
the City to the Grantee hereunder and includes all of the terms and
conditions of this chapter.
4. “Grantee” means Coon Creek Telecommunications Corp., a
corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Iowa,
its successors and assigns. When the context so requires, the term
“Grantee” means and includes the Grantee, its officers, agents,
employees, servants and independent contractors.
5. “Property of the Grantee” means all property, real, personal or
mixed, owned or used by the Grantee however arising from or related to
or connected with the franchise.
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 558 -
6. “Public property” means all property, real or personal or mixed,
owned or used by the City, including property owned or used by a public
utility owned or operated by the City.
7. “Switched digital video system” means any telecommunications
infrastructure that receives and redistributes signals transmitting
programs broadcast by one or more television or networks and
distributes such signals, utilizing existing telecommunication
infrastructure, to subscribing members of the public who pay for such
services.
114.02 USE OF PROPERTY. The Grantee may use public property for a
term of twenty-five (25) years within the City with the written consent of the
City Administrator and/or Public Works Director, and, with the consent of the
owner thereof, private property within the City, in furtherance of such activities
within the City as may now or hereafter be consistent with generally accepted
principles applicable to the operation of a switched digital video system subject,
however, to the following restrictions:
1. Laws and Regulations. The Grantee shall comply with all
governmental laws, ordinances, rules or regulations as may now or
hereafter be applicable thereto.
2. Restrictions. The Grantee shall not use or occupy or permit
public property or private property to be used or occupied or do or permit
anything to be done on or about public property or private property
which will, in any manner:
A. Impair the owner’s interest in or title thereto;
B. Impair any mortgage or lease as may now or hereinafter be
applicable thereto;
C. Adversely affect the then value or character thereof;
D. Cause or be likely to cause structural damage thereto, or
any part thereof;
E. Cause or be likely to cause any damage or injury to any
utility service available thereto;
F. Create a public or private nuisance, cause any offensive or
obnoxious vibrations, noise, odor or undesirable effect or interfere
with the safety, comfort or convenience of the owner thereof, and
persons lawfully on or about the same;
G. Violate the rules, regulations and requirements of any
person furnishing utilities or services thereto; or
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 559 -
H. Make void or voidable any insurance then in force
affecting the same or cause an increase in the rates applicable
thereto.
114.03 TAXES. The Grantee shall pay all real estate taxes, special
assessments, personal property taxes, license fees, permit fees and other charges
of a like nature which may be taxed, charged, assessed, levied, or imposed upon
the property of the Grantee and upon any services rendered by the Grantee.
114.04 INSURANCE. The Grantee shall, at all times during the term of the
franchise, carry and require their contractors to carry:
1. General Business Insurance. Insurance in such forms and in such
companies as shall be approved by the City to protect the City and
Grantee from and against any and all claims, injury or damage to persons
or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction, erection,
operation and maintenance of any structure, equipment or appliance in
connection with the system. The amount of such insurance shall be not
less than $100,000 as to any one person, $300,000 as to any one
occurrence for injury or death to persons, and $100,000 for damages to
property, with, as to Grantee, so-called umbrella coverage of at least
$2,000,000, and shall name the City as additional insured.
2. Worker’s Compensation. Worker’s Compensation Insurance as
provided by the laws of the State of Iowa, as amended.
3. Auto Insurance. Automobile Insurance with limits of not less
than $100,000/$300,000 of public liability coverage and automobile
property damage insurance with a limit of not less than $100,000
covering all automotive equipment, with, as to Grantee, so-called
umbrella coverage of at least $2,000,000, and shall name the City as
additional insured for claims in conjunction with the construction,
erection, operation and maintenance of the system.
4. Change Notice. All of said insurance coverage shall provide a ten
(10) day notice to the City in the event of material alteration or
cancellation of any coverage afforded in said policies prior to the date
said material alteration or cancellation shall become effective.
5. Copies Filed. Copies of all insurance policies required hereunder
shall be furnished to and filed with the City prior to the commencement
of operations or the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be.
6. Defense Costs. The Grantee shall pay all reasonable expenses
incurred by the City in defending itself with regard to all damages,
penalties or other claims resulting from the acts of the Grantee, its
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 560 -
assigns, employees, agents or invitees. Said expenses shall include all
out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney legal fees, and shall include the
value of any services rendered by the City Attorney or any other officers
or employees of the City.
114.05 REPAIRS. During the term of the franchise, the Grantee shall, at its
own expense, make all necessary repairs and replacements to the property of the
Grantee. Such repairs and replacements, interior and exterior, ordinary as well
as extraordinary, and structural as well as nonstructural, shall be made
promptly, as and when needed.
114.06 HOLD HARMLESS. During the term of the franchise, the Grantee
absolutely assumes and agrees to pay the City for, and the Grantee indemnifies
the City against, and agrees to hold and save the City harmless from, any and all
damage, injury, costs, expenses, liability, claims, settlements, judgments,
decrees and awards of every kind and nature whatsoever, including attorney’s
fees, costs and disbursements, that may be claimed against the City by any
person whatsoever occasioned by reason of any conduct undertaken pursuant to
this chapter, or on account of any actual or alleged loss, damage or injury to any
property or person whatsoever, however arising from or related to or connected
with, directly or indirectly, (a) injury to or death of any person, or loss, damage
or injury to any property of the Grantee, and/or (b) the nonobservance by the
Grantee of the provisions of any laws, statutes, ordinances, resolutions,
regulations or rules duly promulgated by any governmental entity which may be
applicable directly or indirectly, to rights, privileges, and authority, and the
obligations and liabilities, assumed by the Grantee under the franchise, (c) the
nonobservance by the Grantee of any of the terms and conditions of the
franchise, and/or (d) the granting of the franchise.
114.07 LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable for any damages occurring
to the property of the Grantee caused by employees of the City in the
performance of their duties except for damages to Grantee’s facilities caused by
the negligence of these employees while they are conducting City business.
The City shall not be liable for the interruption of service by action of City
employees in the performance of their duties, nor shall the City be held liable
for the failure of the Grantee to be able to perform normal services due to acts
of God or other factors beyond the control of the City.
114.08 ASSIGNMENT. The Grantee shall not assign or transfer any right
granted under this chapter to any other person without prior consent of the
Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, provided that the
Grantee shall have the right to assign the provisions of this chapter to a
corporation wholly owned by the Grantee or to a limited partnership of which
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 561 -
the Grantee or other wholly owned subsidiary or affiliate of Coon Creek
Telecommunications Corp., is a general partner or affiliate without the prior
consent of the City.
114.09 INSOLVENCY OF GRANTEE. In the event that the Grantee shall
become insolvent, or be declared a bankrupt, or the property of the Grantee
shall come into the possession of any receiver, assignee or other officer acting
under an order of court, and any such receiver, assignee or other such officer
shall not be discharged within sixty (60) days after taking possession of such
property, the City may, at its option, terminate the franchise by giving written
notice thereof to the Grantee.
114.10 DEFAULT OF GRANTEE. In the event the Grantee shall fail to
comply with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise within thirty (30)
days after receipt of notice in writing from the City specifying the failure or
default, the City may, at its option, terminate the franchise by giving written
notice thereof to the Grantee. This section shall not apply to failures or defaults
beyond the reasonable control of the Grantee.
114.11 TERMINATION. Upon termination of the franchise for any cause,
the Grantee shall remove the property of the Grantee from all public property
and private property within the City and shall return such public property and
private property to the owner thereof in the same condition as when the property
of the Grantee was placed thereon, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
114.12 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS. During the term of
the franchise, the Grantee shall comply with all governmental laws, ordinances,
rules or regulations as may be applicable to the construction, operation,
maintenance, repair, replacement, renewal, reconstruction, and removal of a
switched digital video system, the sale and supply of audio and video
communications services, the use of public property and private property and
the engagement in such further activities as may now or hereafter be consistent
with generally accepted principles applicable to the operation of a switched
digital video system.
114.13 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY OF
THE GRANTEE. During the term of the franchise, the property of the
Grantee shall be constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, replaced, renewed,
reconstructed, and removed in accordance with generally accepted engineering
principles so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or to
interfere with improvements which the City may deem proper to make or to
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic or use of public
property or private property.
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 562 -
114.14 INSTALLATION OF CABLES. The Grantee shall have the right,
privilege, and authority to lease, rent or in any other manner obtain the use of
wooden poles with overhead lines, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, cables, and
other equipment and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and
franchises within the City, and to use such poles, conduits, trenches, ducts,
lines, and cables in the course of its business. When installation of cable on
poles is insufficient, or when holders of other public licenses or franchises have
installed underground cable, then in that event, the cable used by the Grantee
shall be installed underground.
114.15 RESTORATION OF GROUND SURFACE. In case of any
disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the Grantee
shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City, replace
and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, or surface of any street or alley
disturbed, in as good a condition as before said work was commenced.
114.16 ALTERATION OF GRADE. In the event that during the term of the
franchise, the City shall elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley, or
public way, the Grantee, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove,
relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and
other fixtures at its own expense.
114.17 TEMPORARY REMOVAL OF CABLES. The Grantee shall, on
the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City,
temporarily raise or lower its cables to permit the moving of buildings. The
expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering of cables shall be paid
by the person requesting the same and the Grantee shall have the authority to
require such payment in advance. The Grantee shall be given not less than five
(5) days’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary cable changes.
114.18 TREE TRIMMING. The Grantee shall have the authority to trim
trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the
City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
cables of the Grantee. All trimming shall be done at the expense of the Grantee.
114.19 LINE EXTENSIONS. It shall be the obligation of the Grantee to
serve all residents of the City except to the extent that density of homes, adverse
terrain or other factors render providing service impracticable, technically
infeasible or economically non-compensatory. For purposes of determining
compliance with the provisions of this section, and to provide for a reasonable
and nondiscriminatory policy governing extensions of cable service within the
City, Grantee shall extend service to new subscribers at the normal installation
charge and monthly rate for customers of that classification where there is an
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 563 -
average of fifty (50) homes per each linear mile of new cable construction. In
the event the requirements of this section are not met, extensions of service
shall be required only on a basis which is reasonable and compensatory.
114.20 SERVICE REQUIREMENTS. During the term of the franchise, the
Grantee shall furnish reasonable, adequate and efficient cable television service
to subscriber terminals. This requirement may be temporarily suspended due to
circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the Grantee.
114.21 CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE. The Grantee shall reasonably
make service available to all residents of the City, subject to the line or
extension provisions of Section 114.20 within 18 months after the granting of
its franchise by the City. In the event that the City shall annex further territories
as authorized by law, the Grantee shall extend energized trunk cable to the
remaining portions of the City so annexed within a reasonable time acceptable
to the Council. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the
requirements of Sections 114.20 and 114.22 of this chapter from being in force.
114.22 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. The Grantee shall produce a
picture in color that is of high quality accompanied by proper sound on typical
standard television sets in good repair. The Grantee shall also transmit signals
of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound at all subscriber
terminals throughout the City without causing cross modulation in the cables or
interfering with other electrical or electronic systems.
114.23 CHANNEL CAPACITY AND PERFORMANCE. During the term
of the franchise, the switched digital video system of the Grantee shall conform
to the channel capacity and performance requirements contained in the then
current regulations of the FCC.
114.24 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SUBSCRIBER
TERMINALS IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS, PUBLIC SCHOOLS, FIRE
STATION, PUBLIC LIBRARY AND HOSPITALS. During the franchise,
the Grantee shall at its sole cost, install and maintain a subscriber terminal along
with free monthly service in such buildings owned or used by the City, and in
such buildings owned or used by recognized educational authorities within the
City, both public and private, as may be designated by the governing body
having jurisdiction thereof. Such subscriber terminals shall be placed in such
location within such buildings as may be designated by the governing body
having jurisdiction thereof. This provision is meant to apply only to those
buildings accessible to Grantee’s system. The Grantee shall also comply with
FCC regulations governing the availability and maintenance of access channels
for public, educational, governmental and leased access usage, including
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 564 -
regulations governing provision by the Grantee of equipment and facilities for
access use. The Grantee shall provide technical and production assistance to
access users as needed. This section requires the subscribe to also be a
subscriber of all Coon Creek Telecommunications Corp. land-line
telecommunication services.
114.25 TELECAST OF EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES. The Grantee
shall not cablecast, tape, reproduce or otherwise convey to its subscribers the
activities of any recognized educational authority, public or private, without the
written consent of the governing body of such authority.
114.26 PROGRAM ALTERATION. Any signal received by the Grantee
from a television broadcast station shall be cablecast by the Grantee in its
entirety, as received, without alteration.
114.27 SUBSCRIBER RATES AND CHARGES. Except as otherwise
provided in the franchise, the Grantee shall have the right, privilege and
authority to change the rates and charges fixed in this section to its subscribers
for its services and notify the City of said rate changes. At turn-on, single-user
rates and charges may be as follows:
DESCRIPTION CHARGE
Standard Installation Cost Not to exceed $90.00 per Standard Installation
Basic Monthly Service Charge (initial outlet) Not to exceed $49.95
Basic Monthly Service Charge (each additional outlet) Not to exceed $10.00
Multi-user rates and charges may be negotiated between the Grantee and the
subscriber, but in no event shall the multi-user rates and charges for any
subscriber exceed the aggregate of rates and charges.
114.28 LOCAL OFFICE AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURES. During
the term of the franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Grantee shall maintain a
an area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving and resolving all
complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters. The provisions of this section shall be complied with if the Grantee
maintains a local, toll-free telephone number and provides the Mayor’s office
with the name, address and telephone number of the person who will act as the
Grantee’s agent to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment
malfunctions and similar matters. The area office shall be open to receive
inquiries or complaints from subscribers during the hours of 8:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., five days per week. Any complaints from subscribers shall be
investigated and acted upon as soon as possible, but at least within three (3)
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 565 -
business days of their receipt. The Grantee shall keep a maintenance service
log which will indicate the nature of each service complaint, the date and time it
was received, the disposition of said complaint and the time and date thereof.
This log shall be made available for periodic inspection by the City.
114.29 CHANGE OF SUBSCRIBER RATES AND CHARGES.
1. Grantee’s rates and charges presently in effect for installation,
moving of equipment and for basic monthly service are hereby approved
by the City. A current schedule of rates will be kept on file with the City
Clerk.
2. For the purposes of this section, “basic service” is the provision of
television broadcast signals and distribution of local access and original
channels, if any, and does not include advertising services, rental of
studios or equipment, provision of program production service, perchannel
or per-program charges to subscriber, rental of channels, sale of
channel time, provision of commercial service such as security systems,
or any other services of the system, the rates and charges for which shall
not require approval of the City.
3. Grantee shall have the right to change the rates for basic monthly
service, provided any increase does not exceed the increase in the
Consumer Price Index for the previous twelve months as determined by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Should Grantee wish to increase rates
beyond the Consumer Price Index increase, approval shall rest with the
City Council. Such approval will result in improved switched digital
video service to the community or permit Grantee a fair rate of return on
its investment.
4. Before approving an increase in excess of that permitted by
subsection 3, the City shall hold a public hearing thereon, and shall cause
to be published for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City a public notice setting forth the proposed rates and
charges and the date, time, and place of the public hearing. At such
public hearing, any interested party shall have the right to give testimony
and present evidence on the rates and charges proposed.
5. Before instituting an increase equal to or less than the Consumer
Price Index increase, Grantee will furnish to the Council a copy of the
new rates and charges, as well as information regarding Bureau of Labor
Statistics figures on the Consumer Price Index. Such notification shall
precede any increase by not less than 30 days and not more than 60 days.
The Grantee shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection
with said application and said hearing.
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 566 -
114.30 SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Grantee shall have
the right to prescribe reasonable service rules and regulations and operating
rules for the conduct of its business. Such rules and regulations shall be
consistent with the terms and conditions of the franchise. The Grantee shall file
such rules and regulations, and all amendments thereto, with the City.
114.31 SERVICE AGREEMENTS. The Grantee shall have the right to
prescribe a reasonable form of service agreement for use between the Grantee
and its subscribers. Such service agreement shall be consistent with the terms
and conditions of the franchise.
114.32 PAYMENTS TO CITY. The Grantee shall, during the first year of
operation under the franchise, pay to the City three percent (3%) of its annual
“basic monthly service” revenue for the service rendered to customers located
within the City. Thereafter the fee shall become one percent (1%) as calculated
above. All payments as required by the Grantee to the City shall be made
annually and shall be due forty-five (45) days after the close of the year.
114.33 INJURY TO PROPERTY OF THE GRANTEE. No person shall
wrongfully or unlawfully injure the property of the Grantee.
114.34 INTERCEPTING SIGNALS OF THE GRANTEE. No person
shall wrongfully or unlawfully intercept the signals of the Grantee.
114.35 FILING OF REPORTS. On or before April 1 of each year, the
Grantee shall file with the City copies of any required FCC filings for the
preceding calendar year.
114.36 FILING OF MAPS AND PLATS. On or before April 1 of each
year, the Grantee shall file with the City maps and plats showing the location
and nature of all new property of the Grantee within the City as of the end of the
preceding calendar year, provided however, said maps and plats shall not be
public record and shall be kept confidential by the City.
114.37 FILING OF COMMUNICATIONS WITH REGULATORY
AGENCIES. The Grantee shall file with the City, copies of all relevant
petitions, applications and communications submitted by the Grantee to any
regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the Grantee.
114.38 ACCESS. The Grantee shall and does hereby grant to the City the
right to enter upon the property of the Grantee, upon reasonable notice, at any
and all reasonable times to inspect the same for purposes pertaining to the rights
of the City.
CHAPTER 114 CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 567 -
114.39 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED. The Grantee shall not grant
any undue preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to
prejudice or disadvantage with respect to rates, charges, services, service
facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect.
114.40 ARBITRATION. Any controversy between the City and the Grantee
regarding the rights, duties and liabilities of either party under the franchise
shall be settled by arbitration. This section shall not apply to termination
proceedings under Section 114.11. Such arbitration shall be before three (3)
disinterested arbitrators, one (1) named by the City, one (1) named by the
Grantee, and one (1) named by the two (2) thus chosen. The decision of the
arbitrators shall be conclusive and shall be enforced in accordance with the laws
of the State.
114.41 RESERVATIONS. The right is reserved to the Council to adopt, in
addition to the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable
ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise
of the police power.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 575 -
CHAPTER 115
UTILITY FRANCHISES
115.01 Utility Defined 115.11 Relocation of Facilities
115.02 Franchise Required 115.12 Facility Maintenance
115.03 Election 115.13 Service to Public Building
115.04 Duration 115.14 Non-Transferability
115.05 Purpose and Amendment 115.15 Hold Harmless From Damages
115.06 Compensation 115.16 Provisions Severable
115.07 Franchise Not Exclusive 115.17 Indemnification
115.08 Compliance with Franchise Terms 115.18 Insurance
115.09 Privileged Use of Utility Facilities 115.19 Other Terms and Conditions
115.10 Location of Facilities 115.20 Operating Without a Franchise
115.01 UTILITY DEFINED. “Utility,” as used in this chapter, refers to
every utility which shall erect, maintain and operate plants and systems for
electric light and power, heating, telephone, telegraph, cable television, district
telegraph and alarm, motor bus, trolley bus, street railway or other public transit
or gasworks, within the City.
115.02 FRANCHISE REQUIRED. An ordinance granting unto said utility,
its successors and assigns, the right, franchise and privilege to erect, operate and
maintain in the City the necessary facilities for the production, distribution,
transmission and sale of said utilities services for public and private use, and to
use and occupy the public streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and public
places, is required of each Utility using City property.
115.03 ELECTION. The franchise ordinance shall be adopted pursuant to
the provisions of Section 364.4 of the Code of Iowa, including the requirement
of an election, and the requirement that the costs incurred in holding the
election, including the costs of the notice, shall be paid by the person asking for
the granting, amending, extension or renewal of a franchise.
115.04 DURATION. Each franchise granted shall be for a term of not more
than five years or shall include a section explaining the reason a longer term is
being granted. In accordance with Section 364.2(4) of the Code of Iowa, no
franchise shall be granted for a term of more than twenty-five (25) years.
115.05 PURPOSE AND AMENDMENT. The franchise ordinance shall
specify that all facilities which are not necessary for the purposes stated in the
franchise are not authorized by the franchise and will require amendment as a
significant alteration. Significant alterations requiring amendment include, but
are not limited to:
CHAPTER 115 UTILITY FRANCHISES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 576 -
1. Installation in, and use of, facilities for communications unless
exclusively for Utility maintenance and safety functions or for City
purposes.
2. Utility use of facilities for the transmission of energy not owned
by the Utility shall require an amendment only to the extent the
compensation provisions to the City impair the measure of consideration
originally agreed to be paid by the Utility for the valuable use of the
public ways.
115.06 COMPENSATION. In consideration of the right to erect and
maintain such facilities and equipment along, upon, across and under the streets,
highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and public places of the City, the franchise
ordinance shall impose on the Utility and, by its acceptance of the franchise,
during the terms of the franchise it shall be the Utility’s obligation to pay to the
City a franchise fee from funds collected from its customers, in an amount equal
to an agreed upon percentage of the gross receipts derived by the Utility from
the sale of services to customers within the corporate City limits of the City,
excluding the sale of services to the City. Any franchise ordinance which
provides for compensation other than payment of a franchise fee, such as use of
Utility facilities, shall state the reasons for not requiring a franchise fee. The
franchise ordinance should also address any other fees, charges and rents which
may be charged to the Utility in addition to the franchise fee.
115.07 FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE. The franchise ordinance shall
specify that pursuant to Section 364.2(4) of the Code of Iowa, the franchise
shall not be exclusive and shall not restrict in any manner the right of the City in
the exercise of any regulatory power which it may now have, or hereafter be
authorized or permitted, by the laws of the State of Iowa.
115.08 COMPLIANCE WITH FRANCHISE TERMS. The franchise
ordinance shall require the Utility to at all times during the term of the franchise
to comply with, submit to and carry out any and all valid ordinances relating to
any person now in force or that hereafter may be lawfully enacted and not
inconsistent herewith. In the event of a breach of franchise terms by the Utility,
the City may seek relief, including voidance of the franchise, injunctive relief
and damages. Any Utility operating or seeking to operate on City property
without a valid franchise shall be subject to individual permits and fees for all
activities on City property.
115.09 PRIVILEGED USE OF UTILITY FACILITIES. In order to avoid
unnecessary duplication of facilities as well as to efficiently use the space
provided in the public ways, the franchise ordinance shall require the Utility to
cooperate with the City in the installation of City cable or equipment necessary
CHAPTER 115 UTILITY FRANCHISES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 577 -
to the efficient performance of City operations. The City shall bear the
reasonable cost of installation which shall be customarily performed by City
personnel (or City agents) upon due notice to the Utility.
115.10 LOCATION OF FACILITIES. The franchise ordinance shall
specify the standards for erecting or otherwise installing poles, cable and other
facilities, including restoration of City property, and payment by the Utility of
any expense incurred by the City by reason of neglect of the Utility to do such
work.
115.11 RELOCATION OF FACILITIES. The franchise ordinance shall
specify the requirements for relocation of existing facilities, including the
circumstances requiring placement of existing above-ground systems in
underground locations.
115.12 FACILITY MAINTENANCE. The franchise ordinance shall
specify the authority of the Utility to trim trees and otherwise prevent contact of
objects with the wires and cables of the Utility, in a manner approved by and
acceptable to the City.
115.13 SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDING. The franchise ordinance shall
specify any special conditions and requirements for providing service to City
facilities.
115.14 NONTRANSFERABILITY. The franchise ordinance shall specify
the conditions, if any, allowing the Utility to transfer the franchise to another
utility or a merged utility. Consideration should be given to the need for a new
election and any changes in terms and conditions of the franchise. The
franchise ordinance may prohibit the transfer of the franchise.
115.15 HOLD HARMLESS FROM DAMAGES. The franchise ordinance
shall specify that the Utility shall hold the City free and harmless from all
damages or claims for damage of any kind whatsoever caused by the negligent
construction or maintenance of its lines and shall be liable for injuries to public
or private property of every kind.
115.16 PROVISIONS SEVERABLE. The franchise ordinance shall provide
for severability of the provisions if some provisions are declared void.
115.17 INDEMNIFICATION. The franchise ordinance shall provide that
the Utility shall indemnify, defend and hold the City, its officers, agents and
employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, judgments, costs or
expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees caused by any conduct
CHAPTER 115 UTILITY FRANCHISES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 578 -
undertaken by the Utility, its officers, agents or employees, pursuant to or by
reason of the franchise.
115.18 INSURANCE. The franchise ordinance shall require proof of
insurance by the Utility, including worker’s compensation insurance,
comprehensive general liability insurance, and business auto insurance, within a
specified period after the effective date of the franchise, and prior to any
operations under the franchise.
115.19 OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS. The franchise ordinance
may include other terms and conditions agreed to by the City and the Utility
which are not specified in this chapter.
115.20 OPERATING WITHOUT A FRANCHISE. A Utility operating
within the City without a valid franchise agreement with the City shall be
subject to other fees, charges and rents for its activities within the City, as
established by the Council.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 595 -
CHAPTER 118
CEMETERY
118.01 Definition 118.07 Perpetual Care
118.02 Trusteeship 118.08 1994 Perpetual Care Fund
118.03 Cemetery Superintendent Appointed 118.09 Cemetery Lots Without Perpetual Care
118.04 Duties of Cemetery Superintendent 118.10 Annual Care
118.05 Records 118.11 Rules and Regulations
118.06 Sale of Interment Rights
118.01 DEFINITION. The term “cemetery” means the Marengo Cemetery,
which is a municipal cemetery under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code
of Iowa and which shall be operated under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the
Code of Iowa and this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.501)
118.02 TRUSTEESHIP. Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa,
the City Council hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee
for the perpetual maintenance of the cemetery property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.502)
118.03 CEMETERY SUPERINTENDENT APPOINTED. The Council
shall appoint a committee of four (4) people who reside within the City limits
and one (1) person who resides within a two-mile radius. The Cemetery
Superintendent will be selected from the committee. The committee shall
operate the cemetery in accordance with the rules and regulations therefor and
under the direction of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
118.04 DUTIES OF CEMETERY SUPERINTENDENT. The duties of the
Cemetery Superintendent are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Supervise Openings. Supervise the opening of all graves and be
present at every interment in the cemetery;
2. Maintenance. Be responsible for the maintenance of the cemetery
buildings, grounds and equipment and make a monthly report of the
cemetery operation to the Council.
118.05 RECORDS. It is the duty of the Clerk to make and keep complete
records identifying the owners of all interment rights sold by the cemetery and
CHAPTER 118 CEMETERY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 596 -
historical information regarding any transfers of ownership. The records shall
include all of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.311)
1. Sales or Transfers of Interment Rights.
A. The name and last known address of each owner or
previous owner of interment rights.
B. The date of each purchase or transfer of interment rights.
C. A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies
the location of each interment space sold by the cemetery.
2. Interments.
A. The date the remains are interred.
B. The name, date of birth and date of death of the decedent
interred, if those facts can be conveniently obtained.
C. A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies
the location of each interment space where the remains are
interred.
118.06 SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS. The sale or transfer of
interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced by a certificate of interment
rights or other instrument evidencing the conveyance of exclusive rights of
interment upon payment in full of the purchase price. The agreement for
interment rights shall disclose all information required by Chapter 523I of the
Code of Iowa. The payment of all fees and charges shall be made at the office
of the Clerk where receipts will be issued for all amounts paid. Said fees and
charges shall be based upon the charges as established by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.310)
118.07 PERPETUAL CARE. The Council, by resolution, shall accept,
receive and expend all moneys and property donated or left to them by bequest
for perpetual care, and that portion of interment space sales or permanent
charges made against interment spaces which has been set aside in a perpetual
care fund. The assets of the perpetual care fund shall be invested in accordance
with State law. The Council, by resolution, shall provide for the payment of
interest annually to the appropriate fund, or to the cemetery, or to the person in
charge of the cemetery to be used in caring for or maintaining the individual
property of the donor in the cemetery, or interment spaces which have been sold
with provisions for perpetual care, all in accordance with the terms of the
donation or bequest, or the terms of the sale or purchase of an interment space
and Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 118 CEMETERY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 597 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.503, 523I.507 & 523I.508)
118.08 1994 PERPETUAL CARE FUND. The amount of $50.00 received
from the sale of each space sold at the Marengo Cemetery after July 1, 1994,
shall be set aside in a separate interest bearing account. The account shall be
compounded for a period of twenty-five (25) years. No assessment of interest
for use in the care, maintenance and protection of the cemetery shall be allowed
until after July 1, 2019. After that date, the funds shall be made at the discretion
and under the direction of the Council. The income shall be used in the
perpetual care of avenues, alleys, fences, buildings and grounds in general.
This fund shall be separate from and in addition to the perpetual care
endowment which was previously established for the care of the cemetery. This
section does not apply to the perpetual care endowment previously established.
This perpetual care fund shall be irrevocable, but the Council shall not be bound
to make any separate investment of any other sum of money set aside as
perpetual care in the future, but the same may be added to this perpetual care
fund or the other perpetual care fund currently existing and the proceeds
therefrom used by the City in the manner heretofore provided.
118.09 CEMETERY LOTS WITHOUT PERPETUAL CARE. Owners of
lots or other interested persons may secure perpetual care on lots or parts of lots
in the older portions of the cemetery not having perpetual care by the payment
to the City of the perpetual care charges at the rates specified in the rules and
regulations.
118.10 ANNUAL CARE. An annual care charge as specified in the rules and
regulations shall be made by the City on those lots in the older portions of the
cemetery which are not at present under perpetual or endowed care. The City
reserves the right to refuse to furnish maintenance service, or to permit the
erection of any monumental work on those lots not under perpetual or endowed
care or when the annual care on such lot has not been paid in advance.
118.11 RULES AND REGULATIONS. Rules and regulations for the
cemetery may be adopted, and may be amended from time to time, by
resolution of the Council and may cover such things as the use, care, control,
management, restrictions and protection of the cemetery as necessary for the
proper conduct of the business of the cemetery. The rules shall specify the
cemetery’s obligations in the event that interment spaces, memorials or
memorializations are damaged or defaced by acts of vandalism.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.304)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 615 -
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition 120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation 120.06 Amusement Devices
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall manufacture
for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer
without first securing a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale,
sell, offer or keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer
except upon the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or
revoked or a civil penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03 INVESTIGATION. Upon receipt of an application for a liquor
license, wine or beer permit, the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who
shall then conduct an investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of
the facts averred in the application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the
premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the City. The
Council shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises
which does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04 ACTION BY COUNCIL. The Council shall either approve or
disapprove the issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer
permit and shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and
thereafter the application, necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be
forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of
Commerce for such further action as is provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32 [2])
120.05 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS. A person or club holding a
liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or
employees shall not do any of the following:
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 616 -
1. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [1])
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the
premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption
thereon between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and six o’clock
(6:00) a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of two o’clock (2:00)
a.m. on Sunday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on the following Monday;
however, a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling
alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic
liquor, beer or wine between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on
Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. of the following Monday, and
further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control license or the
holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor,
wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on Monday
when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the
premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and
two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is
the day before New Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2b and 2k] & 123.150)
3. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine or beer to any person on credit,
except with a bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to
sales by a club to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide
registered guests or to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention
center, civic center or events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2c])
4. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or
serving of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the
premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2f])
5. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the
mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or
any other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2i])
6. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa
law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or
immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or
permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2a])
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 617 -
7. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the
premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2j])
8. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any
alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased
from the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of
Commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises
for immediate consumption.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2d])
9. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or
knowingly possess any original package which has been reused or
adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2e])
10. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees
of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any
alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the
transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2g])
11. Sell, give, possess or otherwise supply a machine which is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a
vaporized form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2l])
120.06 AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.10C)
1. As used in this section an “electronic or mechanical amusement
device” means a device that awards a prize redeemable for merchandise
on the premises where the device is located and which is required to be
registered with the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals.
2. It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to
participate in the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement
device.
3. It is unlawful for any person, or an employee of a person, owning
or leasing an electrical or mechanical amusement device to knowingly
allow a person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of an
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 618 -
4. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the
operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person
under the age of 21.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 619 -
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
121.01 Definitions 121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required 121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application 121.08 Self-service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees 121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are
defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1. “Carton” means a box or container of any kind in which ten or
more packages or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for
sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.
2. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and
irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a
wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material. However, this
definition is not to be construed to include cigars.
3. “Package” or “pack” means a container of any kind in which
cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise
distributed to consumers.
4. “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes or tobacco
products are sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption
by a retailer.
5. “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for
sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for
consumption, cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the
number of sales or who engages in the business of selling tobacco
products to ultimate consumers.
6. “Self-service display” means any manner of product display,
placement or storage from which a person purchasing the product may
take possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from
the retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a
restricted access location.
7. “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars;
cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 620 -
and other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco;
fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco
prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a
pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean
cigarettes.
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall
distribute, sell or solicit the sale of any cigarettes within the City without
a valid permit for each place of business. The permit shall be displayed
publicly in the place of business so that it can be seen easily by the
public. No permit shall be issued to a minor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2. Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco products at any place of business
without first having received a permit as a tobacco products retailer for
each place of business owned or operated by the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a tobacco
permit. However, if a retailer only holds a cigarette permit and that permit is
suspended, revoked or expired, the retailer shall not sell any cigarettes or
tobacco products during such time.
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms provided by the
State Department of Revenue and accompanied by the required fee shall be
filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days
prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application
is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the
application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 621 -
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING: FEE:
July, August or September $ 75.00
October, November or December $ 56.25
January, February or March $ 37.50
April, May or June $ 18.75
121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and
payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall
describe clearly the place of business for which it is issued and shall be
nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of each year. The Clerk shall
submit a duplicate of any application for a permit, and any permit issued, to the
Iowa Department of Public Health within thirty (30) days of issuance.
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive
a refund from the City, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the
schedule of refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give or
otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes to any person
under eighteen (18) years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a minor from purchasing cigarettes or tobacco products from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions
of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in
addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:
1. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in
the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil
penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic
suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two (2) years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or the retailer’s permit shall be suspended
for a period of thirty (30) days. The retailer may select its preference in
the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3. For a third violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 622 -
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended
for a period of thirty (30) days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of three (3) years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer’s permit shall be
suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
5. For a fifth violation with a period of four (4) years, the retailer’s
permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a
copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED. Beginning January 1,
1999, except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or
offer for sale cigarettes or tobacco products, in a quantity of less than a carton,
through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09 PERMIT REVOCATION. Following a written notice and an
opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may
also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I
of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder. If a
permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to the permit holder for any
place of business, or to any other person for the place of business at which the
violation occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation,
unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council. The Clerk shall
report the revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the Iowa Department of
Public Health within thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 623 -
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose 122.11 Revocation of License
122.02 Definitions 122.12 Notice
122.03 License Required 122.13 Hearing
122.04 Application for License 122.14 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees 122.15 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required 122.16 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued 122.17 Rebates
122.08 Display of License 122.18 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.19 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.10 Time Restriction
122.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the
City against fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their
homes by licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants.
122.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are
defined:
1. “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who
sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise
from house to house or upon the public street.
2. “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit
from house to house or upon the public street any contribution or
donation or any order for goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise
to be delivered at a future date.
3. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a
temporary or itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such
business hires, leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever,
or who operates out of a vehicle which is parked anywhere within the
City limits. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader
or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in connection with,
as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or
auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered a transient
merchant.
122.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting
or in the business of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a
license as herein provided is in violation of this chapter.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 624 -
122.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application in writing shall be
filed with the Clerk for a license under this chapter. Such application shall set
forth the applicant’s name, permanent and local address and business address if
any. The application shall also set forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and
the employer’s address, the nature of the applicant’s business, the last three
places of such business and the length of time sought to be covered by the
license. An application fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be paid at the time of
filing such application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05 LICENSE FEES. The following license fees shall be paid to the
Clerk prior to the issuance of any license.
1. Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person
actually soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of ten
dollars ($10.00) per year.
2. Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
A. For one day ...................................... $ 5.00
B. For one week ................................... $ 10.00
C. For up to six (6) months .................. $ 20.00
D. For one year or major part thereof .. $ 25.00
122.06 BOND REQUIRED. Before a license under this chapter is issued to
a transient merchant, an applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the
applicant has filed a bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with
Chapter 9C of the Code of Iowa.
122.07 LICENSE ISSUED. If the Clerk finds the application is completed in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are
found to be correct and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued
immediately.
122.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such
license in possession at all times while doing business in the City and shall,
upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of
compliance with all requirements of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall
display publicly such merchant’s license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the
provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be
applicable only to the person filing the application.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 625 -
122.10 TIME RESTRICTION. All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall
provide that said licenses are in force and effect only between the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) p.m.
122.11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. After notice and hearing, the Clerk
may revoke any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent
statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the
business.
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has
conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order or morals.
122.12 NOTICE. The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the
licensee’s local address, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a
hearing on the possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain
particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or
State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the
matter.
122.13 HEARING. The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the
licensee and any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the
facts alleged in the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized
representative, fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a
determination of the complaint.
122.14 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The Clerk shall make and
record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only
when upon review of the entire record the Clerk finds clear and convincing
evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or State law.
122.15 APPEAL. If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk
shall make a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee, or the
applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular
meeting. The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Clerk
by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall carry out
the decision of the Council.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 626 -
122.16 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar
the licensee from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of
one year from the date of the revocation.
122.17 REBATES. Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license,
shall be entitled to a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered
before it expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the
total license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and
then multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases,
at least five dollars ($5.00) of the original fee shall be retained by the City to
cover administrative costs.
122.18 LICENSE EXEMPTIONS. The following are excluded from the
application of this chapter.
1. Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for or selling
subscriptions to newspapers.
2. Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy
Scout, Girl Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar
organizations.
3. Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who
offer for sale their own products.
4. Students. Students representing the Iowa Valley Community
School District conducting projects sponsored by organizations
recognized by the school.
5. Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
6. Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on
businesses or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale
or institutional use.
7. Religious and/or political advocacy.
122.19 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating
under the provisions of Chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit
money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of Sections
122.04 and 122.05. All such organizations are required to submit in writing to
the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are
sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization,
the period during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any
commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 627 -
thereof. If the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or
nonprofit organization the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing
the above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the
exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section 122.15 of this chapter.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 629 -
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Permit Issued
123.02 Permit Required 123.08 Public Safety
123.03 Application 123.09 Time Limit
123.04 Bond Required 123.10 Removal by City
123.05 Insurance Required 123.11 Protect Pavement
123.06 Permit Fee 123.12 Overhead Wires
123.01 HOUSE MOVER DEFINED. A “house mover” means any person
who undertakes to move a building or similar structure upon, over or across
public streets or property when the building or structure is of such size that it
requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies or any other specialized moving
equipment.
123.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
activity of house mover as herein defined without a valid permit from the City
for each house, building or similar structure to be moved.
123.03 APPLICATION. Application for a house mover’s permit shall be
made in writing to the Clerk. The application shall include:
1. Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and if
a corporation the names and addresses of its principal officers.
2. Building Location. An accurate description of the present
location and future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
3. Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street
superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be
the shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and
safety.
123.04 BOND REQUIRED. The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal
bond in the minimum sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) issued by a
surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall
guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or to public
property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of moving
the building or structure.
123.05 INSURANCE REQUIRED. Each applicant shall also file a
certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability
insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all
agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
CHAPTER 123 HOUSE MOVERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 630 -
1. Bodily Injury - $50,000 per person; $100,000 per accident.
2. Property Damage - $50,000 per accident.
123.06 PERMIT FEE. A permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be payable
at the time of filing the application with the Clerk. A separate permit shall be
required for each house, building or similar structure to be moved.
123.07 PERMIT ISSUED. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond
and insurance certificate, and payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue
a permit.
123.08 PUBLIC SAFETY. At all times when a building or similar structure
is in motion upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee
shall maintain flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of
traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times
when the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at
the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the
building or structure.
123.09 TIME LIMIT. No house mover shall permit or allow a building or
similar structure to remain upon any street or other public way for a period of
more than twelve (12) hours without having first secured the written approval of
the City.
123.10 REMOVAL BY CITY. In the event any building or similar structure
is found to be in violation of Section 123.09 the City is authorized to remove
such building or structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder
and the surety on the permit holder’s bond.
123.11 PROTECT PAVEMENT. It is unlawful to move any house or
building of any kind over any pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon
which the house or building is moved are at least one (1) inch in width for each
one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of such building. If there is any
question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of the City as to
such weight shall be final.
123.12 OVERHEAD WIRES. The holder of any permit to move a building
shall see that all telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are
removed when necessary and replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the
costs of the same.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 655 -
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.07 Washing Vehicles
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.03 Placing Debris On 135.09 Excavations
135.04 Playing In 135.10 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley 135.11 Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace
135.06 Use for Business Purposes 135.12 Driveway Culverts
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person
to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley
any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or
other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing
unsafe or dangerous places in said street or alley without the consent of the
person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to
obstruct, deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. No person shall throw, place, rake, mow or
deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown, placed, raked, mowed or deposited,
any glass, nails or other sharp objects, ashes or cinders, paper, sweepings,
mowings or rakings, wood, brush, dirt, refuse or rubbish of any kind upon any
sidewalk, street, alley, gutter, drain or public ground. Any person in violation
of the foregoing provision shall be charged the entire cost of any cleanup or
removal done by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play
games on streets or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such
purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is
unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley
temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the
authority or permission of any City official, police officer or member of the fire
department.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 656 -
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store or
place, temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods,
wares, and merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of
storage, exhibition, sale or offering same for sale, without permission of the
Council.
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any
public sidewalk, street or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any
automobile, truck equipment, or any vehicle of any kind when such work is
done for hire or as a business. This does not prevent any person from washing
or cleaning his or her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in
the street or alley.
135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves,
rubbish or other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or
surfaced street or alley.
135.09 EXCAVATIONS. No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner
disturb any street, parking or alley except in accordance with the following:
1. Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without
first obtaining a permit therefor. A written application for such permit
shall be filed with the City and shall contain the following:
A. An exact description of the property, by lot and street
number, in front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
B. A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the
excavation is to be made;
C. The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation
and restoration of the street or alley surface; and
D. Date of commencement of the work and estimated
completion date.
2. Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the
manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit
the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
3. Barricades, Fencing and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing
and warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so
placed as to protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the
City in providing or maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning
lights shall be paid to the City by the permit holder/property owner.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 657 -
4. Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal
bond in the minimum sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) issued by
a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State. The bond
shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City
or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the
course of administration of this section. In lieu of a surety bond, a cash
deposit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be filed with the City.
5. Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability
insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant
and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
A. Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per
accident.
B. Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
6. Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored to the condition of the property prior to the commencement of
the work, or in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the
permit holder/property owner.
7. Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
Backfill shall not be deemed completed, nor resurfacing of any improved
street or alley surface begun, until such backfill is inspected and
approved by the City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide
the City with notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time
when inspection of backfill is desired.
8. Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or
alley be discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of twentyfour
(24) hours after the approved completion date, or in the event the
work is improperly done, the City has the right to finish or correct the
excavation work and charge any expenses therefor to the permit
holder/property owner.
9. Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner.
The permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
10. Notification. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the
commencement of the excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays, the person performing the excavation shall contact the
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 658 -
Statewide Notification Center and provide the center with the
information required under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa.
11. Permit Fee. A permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be payable
at the time of filing the application with the City. A separate permit shall
be required for each excavation.
12. Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond
and insurance certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit
shall be issued.
13. Permit Exemption. Utility companies are exempt from the permit
application requirement of this section. They shall, however, comply
with all other pertinent provisions and shall post with the City a yearly
bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to guarantee
such compliance.
135.10 MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE. It shall be the
responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the
lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the public streets, except
that the abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees
or dead wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance
includes timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs and picking up litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
135.11 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE. If the
abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the above
section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required action and
assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same manner
as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS. The property owner shall, at the owner’s
expense, install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other
access to the owner’s property, and before installing a culvert, permission must
first be obtained from the City. In the event repairs are needed at any time with
respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make
such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the
right to make the repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for
the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and
specially assessed against the property as by law provided.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 665 -
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose 136.11 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
136.02 Definitions 136.12 Awnings
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations 136.13 Encroaching Steps
136.04 Responsibility for Maintenance 136.14 Openings and Enclosures
136.05 City May Order Repairs 136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered 136.16 Defacing
136.07 Permit Required 136.17 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards 136.18 Merchandise Display
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights 136.19 Sales Stands
136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade
136.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by
citizens on sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are
defined:
1. “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping
the sidewalk when it is hardening.
2. “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for
the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
3. “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the
concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
4. “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property
abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes
of notification required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes
the lessee, if any.
5. “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous
cement.
6. “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business,
residential or suburban areas.
7. “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction,
repair, replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the
excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way in
connection therewith.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 666 -
8. “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by
smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS. It is the
responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow, ice and
accumulations promptly from sidewalks. If a property owner does not remove
snow, ice or accumulations within a reasonable time, the City may do so and
assess the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner as
a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
136.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. It is the responsibility
of the abutting property owners to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition
any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or
traveled portion of the public street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2c])
136.05 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS. If the abutting property owner
does not maintain sidewalks as required, the Council may serve notice on such
owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner to repair, replace or reconstruct
sidewalks within a reasonable time and if such action is not completed within
the time stated in the notice, the Council may require the work to be done and
assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner
as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])
136.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED. The Council may
order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court in the
City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to abutting property
owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall remove, reconstruct or
install a sidewalk unless such person has obtained a permit from the City and
has agreed in writing that said removal, reconstruction or installation will
comply with all ordinances and requirements of the City for such work.
136.08 SIDEWALK STANDARDS. Sidewalks repaired, replaced or
constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall be of the following
construction and meet the following standards:
1. Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the
construction and repair of sidewalks.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 667 -
2. Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
3. Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and
well-drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three (3) inch subbase
of compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. The
adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by the City.
4. Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the
constructed sidewalk will be at established grade.
5. Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements
are as follows:
A. Residential sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide
and four (4) inches thick, and each section shall be no more than
six (6) feet in length.
B. Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property
line to the curb. Each section shall be four (4) inches thick and no
more than six (6) feet in length.
C. Driveway areas shall be not less than six (6) inches in
thickness.
6. Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner
edge (edge nearest the abutting private property) on the property line,
unless the Council establishes a different distance due to special
circumstances.
7. Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street
which shall be the established grade.
8. Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation
even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half (½) inch above
the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
9. Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch per foot
toward the curb.
10. Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a “broom” or “wood
float” finish.
11. Ramps for Persons with Disabilities. There shall be not less than
two (2) curb cuts or ramps per lineal block which shall be located on or
near the crosswalks at intersections. Each curb cut or ramp shall be at
least thirty (30) inches wide, shall be sloped at not greater than one inch
of rise per twelve (12) inches lineal distance, except that a slope no
greater than one inch of rise per eight (8) inches lineal distance may be
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 668 -
used where necessary, shall have a nonskid surface, and shall otherwise
be so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for
persons with disabilities using the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Whenever any
material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or
alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a
dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons having an interest
therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or lessee of the property in
front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such dangerous
condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and
at each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of
approved warning lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire
night and to erect sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure
the same. The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified
in this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or property
arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties, or their
agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by this
chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.
136.10 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty of the
owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent,
to notify the City immediately in the event of failure or inability to make
necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or erect necessary barricades as
required by this chapter.
136.11 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No
person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any
sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12 AWNINGS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any
awning over any sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least
eight (8) feet above the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made
of duck, canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets
securely fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will
obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 669 -
136.13 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or
maintain any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk
without permission by resolution of the Council.
136.14 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway
to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to
enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by
resolution of the Council.
2. Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any
vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to
protect the public.
3. Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all
openings on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
136.15 FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to
make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain
upon any sidewalk.
136.16 DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste,
paint or writing on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.17 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or
deposit on any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash,
garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to
injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
136.18 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. It is unlawful for a person to place
upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in
such a manner as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of
pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall more than three (3) feet of the
sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes. All merchandise
on display shall be placed inside the building of the business when it is not open
for business.
136.19 SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any
vending machine or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or
commodities on any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the
Council.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 670 -
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 671 -
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
137.01 Power to Vacate 137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing 137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
137.01 POWER TO VACATE. When, in the judgment of the Council, it
would be in the best interest of the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof
or any public grounds, the Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2a])
137.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. Any proposal to
vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds shall be referred by
the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its study and
recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. The
Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed vacation is referred
to the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03 NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING. The Council shall cause to
be published a notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to
vacate shall be considered.
137.04 FINDINGS REQUIRED. No street, alley, portion thereof or any
public grounds shall be vacated unless the Council finds that:
1. Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and
therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
2. Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners
of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their
property.
137.05 DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS. When in the
judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of
a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground, the Council may do
so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 672 -
137.06 DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED. The City may not dispose of real
property by gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public grounds
and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
93 November 28, 1941
100 April 10, 1946
101 June 24, 1946
114 July 29, 1955
123 May 2, 1958
125 October 2, 1959
158 October 5, 1970
159 November 4, 1970
178 October 4, 1972
179 November 6, 1972
181 June 4, 1973
189 February 3, 1975
193 December 18, 1975
221 April 11, 1983
228 August 29, 1983
256 September 11, 1989
356 November 23, 1998
358 December 14, 1998
366 April 10, 2000
387 January 26, 2004
393 May 24, 2004
397 November 22, 2004
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 673 -
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
138.01 Established Grades 138.02 Record Maintained
138.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES. The grades of all streets, alleys and
sidewalks, which have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby
confirmed, ratified and established as official grades.
138.02 RECORD MAINTAINED. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all
established grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon
request.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
Revised Ordinance
No. 50
October 24, 1930
CHAPTER 138 STREET GRADES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 674 -
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 675 -
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
139.01 Naming New Streets 139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
139.01 NAMING NEW STREETS. New streets shall be assigned names in
accordance with the following:
1. Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are
natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.
2. Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3. Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall
be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation.
139.02 CHANGING NAME OF STREET. The Council may, by
resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03 RECORDING STREET NAMES. Following official action naming
or changing the name of a street, the Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the
County Recorder, County Auditor and County Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04 OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP. Streets within the City are
named as shown on the Official Street Name Map which is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Official Street Name
Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of
the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official
Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of
Marengo, Iowa.”
139.05 REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP. If in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, changes are made in street names, such changes shall
be entered on the Official Street Name Map promptly after the change has been
approved by the Council with an entry on the Official Street Name Map as
follows: “On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following
CHAPTER 139 NAMING OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 676 -
changes were made in the Official Street Name Map: (brief description),”
which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 677 -
CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
140.01 Exercise of Police Power 140.04 Access Controls Imposed
140.02 Definition 140.05 Designated Access Points
140.03 Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility
140.01 EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER. This chapter shall be deemed
an exercise of the police power of the City under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa,
for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and for the promotion of
the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
140.02 DEFINITION. The term “controlled access facility” means a
highway or street especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to
which owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or
easement or only a controlled right or easement of access, light, air or view by
reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility
or for any other reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
140.03 UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY. It
is unlawful for any person to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366)
1. Cross Dividing Line. Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any
curb, central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such
controlled access facilities.
2. Turns. Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except
through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb
section, separation or line.
3. Use of Lanes. Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane
provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of
the central dividing curb, separation, section or line.
4. Enter Facility. Drive any vehicle into the controlled access
facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for
that purpose in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line
which separates such service road from the controlled access facility
property.
CHAPTER 140 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 678 -
140.04 ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED. There are hereby fixed and
established controlled access facilities within the City, described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
1. Project No. FN-6-6(1) 21-48. On the Primary Road System
extension improvement, Project No. FN-6-6(1) 21-48, Primary Road No.
U.S. No. 6 and State No. 411 within the City. Access to and from
abutting properties along said highways shall be limited in accordance
with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. FN-6-6(1)
21-48 on file in the office of the Clerk.
2. Project No. F-899(3). On the Primary Road System extension
State Highway No. 411 from the center of Eastern Avenue and Main
Street (Station 40+93.3) to Station 53+27.0, a distance of 1233.7 feet,
known as Project F-899(3). Presently existing access rights will remain
as presently located; however, some access rights will be subject to such
regulations in the interest of public welfare and safety as the City and the
Iowa Highway Commission may agree upon. No additional access ways
shall be permitted by the City without the consent and approval of the
Iowa Highway Commission. Future ingress and egress to the said
highway shall be prohibited except at such designated points at which
access may be permitted by the Iowa Highway Commission upon such
terms and conditions as may be specified from time to time. The
Council may extend, by ordinance, access control to the parts of this
primary road extension as may be included within any future extension
of the corporate limits northward of the City.
140.05 DESIGNATED ACCESS POINTS. Points of access are hereby
permitted as follows. Said points are designated by station, side of street or
highway, side of street or highway, width of driveway and purpose, as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
1. U.S. No. 6. Points of access are hereby permitted on primary
highway U.S. No. 6 beginning at Station 736+00, thence easterly to the
southeast corner of the corporation, at Station 747+21.5.
STATION WIDTH TYPE OF ENTRANCE
740+15 30 feet Commercial
741+36 30 feet Commercial
741+94 24 feet Field Entrance
742+35 30 feet Commercial
743+90 30 feet Commercial
745+00 30 feet Commercial
749+81 45 feet Commercial
752+23 45 feet Commercial
CHAPTER 140 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 679 -
2. State Highway No. 411, South. Points of access are hereby
permitted on primary highway State No. 411 beginning at Station
361+37.4 (U.S. No. 6), thence north to Station 372+77.87.
STATION WIDTH TYPE OF ENTRANCE
356+10 24 feet Farm
362+41 45 feet Commercial
371+50 45 feet Commercial
372+30 45 feet Commercial
3. State Highway No. 411, North. Points of access are hereby
permitted on primary highway State No. 411 from Main Street north to
the City limits (Station 40+93 to Station 53+27) and no other drives and
entrances to said highway except as stated below without the consent and
approval of the Iowa Highway Commission. Said points are designated
as follows:
STATION SIDE OF STREET TYPE OF ENTRANCE
42+33 West (left) Residential
43+12 East (right) Residential
49+60 West (left) Field Entrance
49+60 East (right) Field Entrance
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 689 -
CHAPTER 141
STREET CUTS AND STANDARDS
141.01 Street Cuts 141.03 Fines
141.02 Fees and Standards
141.01 STREET CUTS. No person shall cut cement of a street curb or the
street itself unless authorized by the Council. All street and curb cement cutting
shall be done by the City employees or by a contractor that is approved by the
City.
141.02 FEES AND STANDARDS. The following fees and standards apply
to any street cutting which is done within the City limits:
1. Brick Streets.
A. A fee of $50.00 will be charged if only half the width of
the street is sawed. A fee of $100.00 will be charged if the whole
width of the street is sawed.
B. If work being done is to be parallel with the street, sawing
is required. If material being excavated is of clay, mass of dirt or
frozen material, it will be hauled away and fill sand will be used
to backfill. One foot compacted lifts will be brought to within 12"
of the street surface, then 6" of ¾" road stone or 1" of clean rock
and a minimum of 6" of concrete.
2. Seal-coated Streets.
A. A fee of $75.00 will be charged if only half the width of
the street is sawed. A fee of $150.00 will be charged if the whole
width of the street is sawed. A fee of $50.00 will be charged if
only half the width of the street is sawed and the street has not
been resealed. A fee of $100.00 will be charged if the whole
width of the street is sawed and the street has not been resealed.
B. If material being excavated is of clay, mass of dirt or
frozen material, it will be hauled away and fill sand will be used
to backfill. One foot compacted lifts will be brought to within 12"
of the street surface, then 6" of ¾" road stone or 1" of clean rock.
Then 6" of cold mix will be added to be flush with the existing
street surface.
CHAPTER 141 STREET CUTS AND STANDARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 690 -
3. Asphalt Streets.
A. A fee of $100.00 will be charged if only half the width of
the street is sawed. A fee of $200.00 will be charged if the whole
width of the street is sawed.
B. If material being excavated is of clay, mass of dirt or
frozen material, it will be hauled away and fill sand will be used
to backfill. One foot compacted lifts will be brought to within 12"
of the street surface, then 6" of ¾" road stone or 1" of clean rock.
Then 6" of asphalt or 6" of concrete will be brought to the existing
street surface.
4. Concrete Streets.
A. A fee of $150.00 will be charged if only half the width of
the street is sawed. A fee of $300.00 will be charged if the whole
width of the street is sawed.
B. If the saw cut is within half of the panel from the original
joint, only that half will be replaced. If the cut is in the center of
the panel, the whole panel will be replaced.
C. If material being excavated is of clay, mass of dirt or
frozen material, it will be hauled away and fill sand will be used
to backfill. One foot compacted lifts will be brought to within 8"
below the bottom of the existing concrete, then 6" of ¾" road
stone or 1" of clean rock. The concrete being poured back into
the street will be a minimum of 2" thicker than the original
thickness. A ¾" dowel will be used in the patch at width of 18"
apart. Sixteen inch dowels will be used with half of the dowel
being drilled into the existing slab. Dowels will be located
halfway between the top and bottom of the patch being poured
with a broom finish.
5. Curbs.
A. The fee for cutting of a curb shall be five dollars per foot.
B. The City shall only cut the curb. No removal of the sawed
curb shall be done by the City. The saw cut will be within 6" of
the water flow in curb lines. The curb that is to be cut for sewer
or water repairs may have this fee added on the street cutting fee.
6. Driveways.
CHAPTER 141 STREET CUTS AND STANDARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 691 -
A. Driveways that will be poured to concrete streets shall have
rubber sealant poured into the saw cut.
B. New driveways shall have a minimum of 6" of concrete.
Sidewalks through the driveway will be of the same depth, if all
are within the City right-of-way.
C. Single drive shall be 18 feet at the street. Double drive
shall be 24 feet at the street. Footage includes a branch out at the
street. Variances shall be granted at the discretion of the Public
Works Director.
D. Concrete driveways being constructed on non-concrete
streets shall be at least 18" from the edge of the existing street.
Cold mix or rock may then be used to meet with the existing
street.
141.03 FINES. Violations of this chapter shall result in fines of $100 as well
as restitution to the City for any costs or damages incurred.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 715 -
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
145.01 Enforcement Officer 145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building 145.07 Right to Demolish
145.04 Notice to Owner 145.08 Costs
145.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Police Chief is responsible for
the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02 GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE. All buildings or structures
which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which
constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in
relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare,
by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or
abandonment, are, for the purpose of this chapter, unsafe buildings. All such
unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated
by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the
procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
145.03 UNSAFE BUILDING. “Unsafe building” means any structure or
mobile home meeting any or all of the following criteria:
1. Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, because of (a) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (b)
faulty construction; (c) the removal, movement or instability of any
portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such
building; (d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
(e) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
2. Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or
structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is being used.
3. Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used
or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation,
decay, damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any
health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such
condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 716 -
4. Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is
determined by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5. Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure
remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or
structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period
in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion
thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04 NOTICE TO OWNER. The enforcement officer shall examine or
cause to be examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as
dangerous or damaged and, if such is found to be an unsafe building as defined
in this chapter, the enforcement officer shall give to the owner of such building
or structure written notice stating the defects thereof. This notice may require
the owner or person in charge of the building or premises, within forty-eight
(48) hours or such reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence
either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the
building or structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed
within ninety (90) days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the
enforcement officer. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building,
structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the
required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected and approved by
the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3h])
1. Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by
certified mail to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of
the Code of Iowa, if the owner is found within the City limits. If the
owner is not found within the City limits such service may be made upon
the owner by registered mail or certified mail. The designated period
within which said owner or person in charge is required to comply with
the order of the enforcement officer shall begin as of the date the owner
receives such notice.
2. Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she
may request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written
request for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05 CONDUCT OF HEARING. If requested, the Council shall conduct
a hearing in accordance with the following:
1. Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying
the date, time and place of hearing.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 717 -
2. Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show
cause why the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
3. Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of
fact and may issue such order as it deems appropriate.
145.06 POSTING OF SIGNS. The enforcement officer shall cause to be
posted at each entrance to such building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER.
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF MARENGO, IOWA.” Such notice shall
remain posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal are completed.
Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the enforcement
officer and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making
the required repairs or of demolishing the building.
145.07 RIGHT TO DEMOLISH. In case the owner fails, neglects, or
refuses to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and
remove the building or structure or portion thereof, the Council may order the
owner of the building prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this chapter
and may order the enforcement officer to proceed with the work specified in
such notice. A statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08 COSTS. Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the
City treasury. Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises
involved and levied as a special assessment against the land on which the
building or structure is located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer
for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 719 -
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
146.01 Definitions 146.03 Foundation Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property
146.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are
defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
1. “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure, built under
the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, which was constructed on or after
June 15, 1976, and is required by Federal law to display a seal from the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2. “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field or
tract of land under common ownership upon which ten or more occupied
manufactured homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and includes any building, structure or enclosure used or
intended for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home
community.
3. “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or
so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a
conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so designed,
constructed or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a
place for human habitation by one or more persons; but also includes any
such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in
Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle built before June 15,
1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code and which
contains no State or Federal seals.
4. “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land
upon which three (3) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a
combination of any of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and
operated as a for-profit enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and
electrical services available.
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be
construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents or other
structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution or
company on their own premises and used exclusively to house their own labor
CHAPTER 146 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 720 -
or students. The manufactured home community or mobile home park shall
meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02 CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY. A mobile home or
manufactured home which is located outside a manufactured home community
or mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by being placed on a
permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes except in the
following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)
1. Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on
private property as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used
as a place for human habitation.
2. Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home
which is located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile
home park as of January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real
estate, but is exempt from the permanent foundation requirement of this
chapter until the home is relocated.
146.03 FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS. A mobile home or manufactured
home located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile
home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free foundation system which
meets the support and anchorage requirements as recommended by the
manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The foundation system
must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems of surrounding
residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 & 414.28)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 721 -
CHAPTER 147
WATER WELL PROTECTION
147.01 Shallow Well Protection 147.04 Designating Authority
147.02 Deep Well Restrictions 147.05 Existing Structures or Facilities
147.03 Applicability
147.01 SHALLOW WELL PROTECTION. No structure or facility of the
following enumerated and listed types shall be located within the distances
hereinafter set forth after each structure or facility from a shallow public well
within the City.
1. Well house floor drains — 5 feet;
2. Water treatment plant wastes — 50 feet;
3. Sanitary and industrial discharges — 400 feet;
4. Sanitary and Storm Sewers, Drains:
A. Prohibited within 25 feet;
B. 25 to 75 feet if water main pipe;
C. 75 to 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe.
5. Water Plant and Wells:
A. Water treatment process – prohibited within 0 to 5 feet;
B. Wastes that are treated on site, 5 to 50 feet, prohibited, if
sanitary sewer main pipe;
C. Well house drains to sewers – 0 to 25 feet prohibited, 25 to
75 feet if water main pipe, 75 to 200 feet if sanitary sewer
main pipe;
D. Well house floor drains to surface – 0 to 5 feet prohibited,
5 to 50 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe.
6. Force mains:
A. None permitted within 75 feet;
B. 75 to 400 feet, must be water main materials;
C. 400 to 1000 feet if water main or sanitary sewer main pipe
7. Land application of solid waste — 400 feet;
8. Irrigation of wastewater — 400 feet;
CHAPTER 147 WATER WELL PROTECTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 722 -
9. Concrete vaults and septic tanks — 200 feet;
10. Mechanical wastewater treatment plants — 400 feet;
11. Cesspools and earth pit privies — 400 feet;
12. Soil absorption fields — 400 feet;
13. Lagoons — 1000 feet;
14. Chemicals:
A. Application to ground surface — 200 feet;
B. Above ground storage — 200 feet;
C. On or underground storage — 400 feet;
D. Transmission pipelines (such as fertilizer, liquid petroleum,
or anhydrous ammonia) – 400 feet.
15. Animal pasturage — 50 feet;
16. Animal enclosure — 400 feet;
17. Animal wastes:
A. Land application of solids — 400 feet;
B. Land application of liquid or slurry — 400 feet;
C. Storage tank — 400 feet;
D. Solids stockpile — 400 feet;
E. Storage basin or lagoon — 1000 feet;
F. Earthen silage storage trench or pit – 200 feet.
18. Earthen silage storage trench or pit — 200 feet;
19. Basements, pits, sumps — 10 feet;
20. Flowing streams or other surface water bodies — 50 feet;
21. Cisterns — 100 feet;
22. Cemeteries — 200 feet;
23. Private wells — 400 feet;
24. Solid waste disposal sites — 1000 feet;
25. Railroads – 200 feet.
CHAPTER 147 WATER WELL PROTECTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 723 -
147.02 DEEP WELL RESTRICTIONS. No structure or facility of the
following enumerated and listed types shall be located within the distances
hereinafter set forth from a deep public well within the City.
1. Well house floor drains — 5 feet;
2. Water treatment plant wastes — 50 feet;
3. Sanitary and industrial discharges — 200 feet;
4. Floor drains from pump house to surface:
A. None within 5 feet;
B. 5 to 10 feet — water main materials enclosed in concrete
permitted;
C. 10 to 25 feet — must be water main material;
D. 25 to 75 feet — must be watertight sewer pipe;
5. Floor drains to sewer, water plant wastes, storm or sanitary sewers
or drains:
A. None permitted within 25 feet;
B. 25 to 75 feet, must be water main material;
C. 75 to 200 feet, must be watertight sewer pipe;
6. Force mains:
A. None permitted within 75 feet;
B. 75 to 200 feet, must be water main materials;
7. Land application of solid waste — 100 feet;
8. Irrigation of wastewater — 100 feet;
9. Concrete vaults and septic tanks — 100 feet;
10. Mechanical wastewater treatment plants — 200 feet;
11. Cesspools and earth pit privies — 200 feet;
12. Soil absorption fields — 200 feet;
13. Lagoons — 200 feet;
14. Chemicals:
A. Application to ground surface — 100 feet;
B. Above ground storage — 100 feet;
C. On or underground storage — 200 feet;
CHAPTER 147 WATER WELL PROTECTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 724 -
15. Animal pasturage — 50 feet;
16. Animal enclosure — 100 feet;
17. Animal wastes:
A. Land application of solids — 100 feet;
B. Land application of liquid or slurry — 100 feet;
C. Storage tank — 100 feet;
D. Solids stockpile — 200 feet;
E. Storage basin or lagoon — 200 feet;
18. Earthen silage storage trench or pit — 100 feet;
19. Basements, pits, sumps — 10 feet;
20. Flowing streams or other surface water bodies — 50 feet;
21. Cisterns — 50 feet;
22. Cemeteries — 200 feet;
23. Private wells — 200 feet;
24. Solid waste disposal sites — 200 feet.
147.03 APPLICABILITY. Proscriptions as set forth in Sections 147.01 and
147.02 shall apply to all public water wells existing within the City except
public water wells formerly abandoned for use by resolution of the Council.
147.04 DESIGNATING AUTHORITY. The City Administrator shall
designate each water well within the City as being a “shallow well” or “deep
well” for the purposes of this chapter.
147.05 EXISTING STRUCTURES OR FACILITIES. The use of
structures or facilities existing at the time of enactment of the ordinance
codified in this chapter may be continued even though such use may not
conform with the regulations of this chapter. However, such structure or
facility may not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or substituted subsequent
to adoption of such ordinance.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 5243 imposing the regulations contained herein
was adopted on August 20, 1979.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 755 -
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
150.01 Definitions 150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
150.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are
defined:
1. “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2. “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or
subdivision thereof.
150.02 OWNER REQUIREMENTS. Every owner shall comply with the
following numbering requirements:
1. Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned
number to the principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2. Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be
installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in
a conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than two and one-half
(2½) inches in height and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3. Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as
herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after
being notified in writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to
place the assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs
against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03 BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN. Building numbers shall be
assigned in accordance with the building numbering plan on file in the office of
the Clerk.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 757 -
CHAPTER 151
TREES
151.01 Definition 151.05 Disease Control
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.06 Inspection and Removal
151.03 Duty to Trim Trees 151.07 Planting Permit Required
151.04 Trimming Trees to be Supervised
151.01 DEFINITION. For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of
the street, avenue or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying
between the lot line and the curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the
street, avenue or highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the
street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS. No tree shall be planted in any
parking or street except in accordance with the following:
1. Alignment. All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the
parking midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In
the event a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line ten
(10) feet from the property line.
2. Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking which is less
than nine (9) feet in width, or contains less than eighty-one (81) square
feet of exposed soil surface per tree. Trees shall not be planted closer
than twenty (20) feet from street intersections (property lines extended)
and ten (10) feet from driveways. If it is at all possible trees should be
planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk and the
curb.
3. Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any street any fruitbearing
tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood,
poplar, box elder, Chinese elm, evergreen, willow or black walnut.
151.03 DUTY TO TRIM TREES. The owner or agent of the abutting
property shall keep the trees on, or overhanging the street, trimmed so that all
branches will be at least fifteen (15) feet above the surface of the street and
eight (8) feet above the sidewalks. If the abutting property owner fails to trim
the trees, the City may serve notice on the abutting property owner requiring
that such action be taken within five (5) days. If such action is not taken within
that time, the City may perform the required action and assess the costs against
the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 758 -
151.04 TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED. Except as allowed in
Section 151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or
public place unless the work is done under the supervision of the City.
151.05 DISEASE CONTROL. Any dead, diseased or damaged tree or shrub
which may harbor serious insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other
trees is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
151.06 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL. The Council shall inspect or
cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the City reported or suspected to be
dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to the
following:
1. City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on
any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line
of private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected
by treatment or removal. The Council may also order the removal of any
trees on the streets of the City which interfere with the making of
improvements or with travel thereon.
2. Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that
any such condition exists on private property and that danger to other
trees or to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is
imminent, the Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant
or person in charge of such property to correct such condition by
treatment or removal within fourteen (14) days of said notification. If
such owner, occupant or person in charge of said property fails to
comply within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice, the Council may
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])
151.07 PLANTING PERMIT REQUIRED. Prior to the planting of any
tree in any street or parking, a permit shall be obtained from the City upon
application stating the number of trees to be planted, the type of each tree, and
the planting location of each tree. A fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be required
for each planting permit.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 815 -
CHAPTER 160
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
160.01 Purpose 160.14 Administration
160.02 Definitions 160.15 Flood Plain Development Permit Required
160.03 Lands to Which Chapter Applies 160.16 Application for Permit
160.04 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries 160.17 Action on Permit Application
160.05 Compliance 160.18 Construction and Use to Be as Provided in
160.06 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions Application and Plans
160.07 Interpretation 160.19 Conditional Uses, Appeals and Variances
160.08 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability 160.20 Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances
160.09 Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) Districts Is Based
160.10 Floodway (Overlay) District – FW 160.21 Conditions Attached to Variances
160.11 Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District – FF 160.22 Appeals to the Court
160.12 General Flood Plain (Overlay) District - FP 160.23 Nonconforming Uses
160.13 Shallow Flooding (Overlay) District – SF 160.24 Amendments
160.01 PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve
the rights, privileges and property of the City and its residents and to preserve
and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare and comfort and convenience of
its residents by minimizing flood losses with provisions designed to:
1. Reserve sufficient flood plain area for the conveyance of flood
flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased
substantially.
2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities.
3. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction or substantial improvement.
4. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
5. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood
Insurance Program.
160.02 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases
used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1. “Base flood” means the flood having one percent (1%) chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See 100-year flood.)
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 816 -
2. “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its
floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also
see “lowest floor.”
3. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.
4. “Existing construction” means any structure for which the “start
of construction” commenced before the effective date of the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map. May also be referred to as
“existing structure.”
5. “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a
factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of these flood
plain management regulations.
6. “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision”
means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
7. “Factory-built home” means any structure designed for residential
use which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or
assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation on a building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factorybuilt
homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular
homes and also includes “recreational vehicles” which are placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for and
ready for highway use.
8. “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels
of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
9. “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the
overflow of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of
surface waters from any source.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 817 -
10. “Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would reach at
a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance,
the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the
occurrence of the 100-year flood.
11. “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map
prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance
Study which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
12. “Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water as a result of a flood.
13. “Flood plain management” means an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and
promoting the wise use of flood plains, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and
flood plain management regulations.
14. “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including
utility and sanitary facilities which will reduce or eliminate flood damage
to such structures.
15. “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those
portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably
required to carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that
confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one
foot.
16. “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the flood plain, other
than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed
without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
17. “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing in the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 818 -
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or,
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified by either (i) an approved state program as determined by
the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the
Interior in states without approved programs.
18. “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building including a basement except when all the following criteria are
met:
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize
hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that
satisfy the provisions of Section 160.11(4)(A); and
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled,
etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as
building access, parking or storage; and
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater,
furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are
located at least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and
D. The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this
section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C and D
above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that
does not satisfy the criteria above.
19. “Minor Projects” mean small development activities (except for
filling, grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.
20. “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks)
means those structures or development for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate
Map.
21. “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factorybuilt
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 819 -
completed on or after the effective date of these flood plain management
regulations.
22. “100-Year Flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a
one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every
one hundred (100) years.
23. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
24. “Routine Maintenance of Existing Buildings and Facilities”
means repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable
condition that do not trigger a building permit, provided they are not
associated with a general improvement of the structure or repair of a
damaged structure. Such repairs include:
A. Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing,
replacing roofing tiles and replacing siding;
B. Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;
C. Basement sealing;
D. Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
E. Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or
air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
25. “Special flood hazard area” means the land within a community
subject to the “100-year flood.” This land is identified as Zone A on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
26. “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement or permanent
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 820 -
construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings,
the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
27. “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground
or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks and other
similar uses.
28. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
29. “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure
which satisfies either of the following criteria:
A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either (i) before the “start of
construction” of the improvement, or (ii) if the structure has been
“substantially damaged” and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use. The term
also does not include any alteration of an “historic structure,”
provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
designation as an “historic structure.”
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a
building by twenty-five percent (25%) or more. All additions
constructed after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, shall be added to any proposed addition in determining
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 821 -
whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed
twenty-five percent.
30. “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms
of the flood plain management regulations.
31. “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development
to be fully compliant with this chapter.
160.03 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES. The provisions of this
chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the
Official Flood Plain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the
Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Flood Plain and Shallow Flooding
(Overlay) Districts. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps prepared as part of the
Flood Insurance Study for Iowa County and Incorporated Areas, City of
Marengo, Panels 19095C0062E, and 0066E, dated August 2, 2011, is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.
The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the Flood
Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this chapter.
160.04 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT
BOUNDARIES. The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be
determined by scaling distances on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. When
an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the
Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The Board of
Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error
in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
160.05 COMPLIANCE. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
160.06 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not
intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. Any ordinances
inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
160.07 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 822 -
be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
160.08 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The standards
required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This
chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated Flood Plain (Overlay)
District areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall
not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
160.09 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS.
The flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided
into the following districts:
1. Floodway District (FW)
2. Floodway Fringe District (FF)
3. General Flood Plain District (FP)
4. Shallow Flooding District (SF).
The boundaries are as shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. Within
these districts all uses not allowed as permitted uses or permissible as
conditional uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this chapter is
granted after due consideration by the Board of Adjustment.
160.10 FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - FW.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not
include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other
obstruction, the storage of material or equipment, excavation or
alteration of a watercourse.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
B. Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking
areas, airport landing strips.
C. Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses,
tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 823 -
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target
ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking
and horseback riding trails.
D. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and
play areas.
E. Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above
uses.
2. Conditional Uses. The following uses which involve structures
(temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon
issuance of a conditional use permit by the Board of Adjustment as
provided for in Section 160.19. Such uses must also meet the applicable
provisions of the Floodway District Performance Standards.
A. Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
B. Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement
enterprises.
C. Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands,
signs, and billboards.
D. Extraction of sands, gravel, and other materials.
E. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, and wharves.
F. Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.
G. Other uses similar in nature to uses described in subsection
1 and in this subsection which are consistent with the provisions
of subsection 3 and the general spirit and purpose of this chapter.
3. Performance Standards. All Floodway District uses allowed as a
permitted or conditional use shall meet the following standards:
A. No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that
would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level.
Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels
shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of
development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
B. All uses within the Floodway District shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 824 -
(2) Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.
(3) Use construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage.
C. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage
ditch or any other facility or system.
D. Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if
permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the
Floodway Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to
present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
E. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage
potential and shall not be for human habitation.
F. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant,
flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited. Storage of other material may be allowed if readily
removable from the Floodway District within the time available
after flood warning.
G. Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes
and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood
carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In
addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
H. Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have
some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum
amount necessary.
I. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the
streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering or due
to the action of flood flows.
160.11 FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - FF. All uses
within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the extent that they are
not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and
provided they meet applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe
District. All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
and shall meet the following applicable performance standards.
1. All structures shall:
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 825 -
A. Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure.
B. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
C. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage.
2. Residential Buildings. All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level.
Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be
no lower than one foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at such
elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed,
subject to favorable consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where
existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by
fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the
structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated
with flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided with a
means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the
100-year flood.
3. Nonresidential Buildings. All new or substantially improved nonresidential
buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or
together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to
such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer
registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing
methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the
100-year flood; and that the structure, below the 100-year flood level, is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation
to North American Vertical Datum) to which any structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
4. All new and substantially improved structures.
A. Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not
including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 826 -
registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access and low damage potential storage.
B. New and substantially improved structures must be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
C. New and substantially improved structures must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
5. Factory-built Homes.
A. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing
factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is
a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level.
B. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing
factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors.
6. Utility and Sanitary Systems.
A. On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be
located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or
contamination from the system during flooding.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 827 -
B. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters.
Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall
be provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater
than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
C. New or replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the system. Water supply treatment facilities (other than on-site
systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or
greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
D. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the
system and the risk associated with such flood damaged or
impaired systems.
7. Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive
or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Other material and
equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to major
flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters
or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
8. Flood control structural works such as levees, flood-walls, etc.
shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a
minimum of 3 feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate
interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
9. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to
maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by
the Department of Natural Resources.
10. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals
(including the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable
performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision proposals intended
for residential use shall provide all lots with a means of access which
will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 828 -
Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots
(whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for those
areas located within the Flood Plain (Overlay) District.
11. Accessory Structures.
A. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory
to a residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation
requirements where the following criteria are satisfied:
(1) The structure shall not be used for human
habitation.
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters.
(4) The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The structure’s service facilities such as electrical
and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to
at least one foot above the 100-year flood level.
B. Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance coverage of the structure and its contents.
12. Recreational Vehicles.
A. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
Section 160.11(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes when the following criteria are
satisfied.
(1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site
for less than 180 consecutive days, and,
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and
ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 829 -
B. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more
than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of Section 160.11(5) of this chapter regarding
anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
13. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the stream
bed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due
to channel degradation and meandering.
160.12 GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - FP.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
General Flood Plain District to the extent they are not prohibited by any
other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not
include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other
obstructions; the storage of materials or equipment; excavation or
alteration of a watercourse.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
B. Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking
areas, and airport landing strips.
C. Private and public recreation uses such as golf courses,
tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target
ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking
and horseback riding trails.
D. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and
play areas.
2. Conditional Uses. Any use which involves placement of
structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions; the storage of
materials or equipment; excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be
allowed only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Board of
Adjustment as provided for in Section 160.19. All such uses shall be
reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources to determine (i)
whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway
or floodway fringe and (ii) the 100-year flood level. The applicant shall
be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with
sufficient technical information to make the determination.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 830 -
3. Performance Standards.
A. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in
the floodway as determined by the Department of Natural
Resources shall meet the applicable provisions and standards of
the Floodway (Overlay) District (Section 160.10).
B. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in
the floodway fringe as determined by the Department of Natural
Resources shall meet the applicable standards of the Floodway
Fringe (Overlay) District (Section 160.11).
160.13 SHALLOW FLOODING (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - SF. All uses
within the Shallow Flooding District shall be permitted to the extent that they
are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and
provided they meet the applicable performance standards of the Shallow
Flooding District. The performance standards for the Shallow Flooding District
shall be the same as the performance standards for the Floodway Fringe District
with the following exceptions:
1. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection
elevation shall be equal to the number of feet as specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (or a minimum of 2.0 feet if no number is specified)
above the highest natural grade adjacent to the structure.
2. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection
elevation shall be equal to the elevation as specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
3. In Zones AO and AH, drainage paths must be designed around
structures on slopes to guide water away from structure.
160.14 ADMINISTRATION. The Zoning Administrator shall administer
and enforce this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator. The
duties and responsibilities of the Administrator include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the following:
1. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
2. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure
that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State or local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the
Department of Natural Resources for flood plain construction.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 831 -
3. Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in relation to
North American Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures or (ii) the
elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been
floodproofed.
4. Notify adjacent communities and/or countries and the Department
of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
5. Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
6. Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report
form supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
7. Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations
or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
8. Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Council of
potential conflicts.
160.15 FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED. A
Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured
prior to any flood plain development (any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations)
including the placement of factory-built homes.
160.16 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Application for a Flood Plain
Development Permit shall be made on forms supplied by the Administrator and
shall include the following information.
1. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
2. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
3. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
4. Elevation of the 100-year flood.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 832 -
5. Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.
6. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the
improvements.
7. Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
160.17 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION. The Administrator shall,
within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed
flood plain development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall
approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be
informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall
not issue permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
160.18 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN
APPLICATION AND PLANS. Flood Plain Development Permits issued on
the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications
and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a
professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State of
Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing or other
flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
160.19 CONDITIONAL USES, APPEALS AND VARIANCES. The
Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide (i) applications for conditional uses
upon which the Board is authorized to pass under this chapter; (ii) appeals, and
(iii) requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter; and shall take any
other action which is required of the Board.
1. Conditional Uses. Requests for conditional uses shall be
submitted to the Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of
Adjustment for consideration. Such requests shall include information
ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional
information deemed necessary by the Board of Adjustment.
2. Appeals. Where it is alleged there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 833 -
official in the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may
appeal such action. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of
Adjustment and with the official from whom the appeal is taken and
shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal. The official from whom
the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the
documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
3. Variances. The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request
in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will
not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following
applicable standards.
A. Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of good
and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
(iii) a determination that the granting of the variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local
codes or ordinances.
B. Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood
would result. Consideration of the effects of any development on
flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal
degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
C. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
D. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this
chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the
signature of the Administrator that (i) the issuance of a variance
will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and (ii)
such construction increases risks to life and property.
E. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or
approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 834 -
4. Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment.
A. Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment of
an appeal, an application for a conditional use or a request for a
variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing,
any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and
present written or oral evidence. The Board may require the
appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably
deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or
evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or
agency, including the Department of Natural Resources.
B. Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an
appeal, conditional use or variance within a reasonable time. In
passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm
wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in
writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its
decision. In granting a conditional use or variance, the Board
shall consider such factors as contained in this section and all
other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe such
conditions as contained in Section 160.21.
160.20 FACTORS UPON WHICH THE DECISION TO GRANT
VARIANCES IS BASED. In passing upon applications for variances, the
Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this
chapter and:
1. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
2. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
3. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.
4. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
5. The importance of the service provided by the proposed facility to
the City.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 835 -
6. The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
7. The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding for
the proposed use.
8. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
9. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for the area.
10. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
11. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
12. The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
(sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
13. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
160.21 CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO VARIANCES. Upon
consideration of the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be
limited to:
1. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
2. Limitation on periods of use and operation.
3. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
4. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical
alternative to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
5. Floodproofing measures designed to be consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, durations,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors
associated with the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall
require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are
consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated
flood factors for the particular area.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 836 -
160.22 APPEALS TO THE COURT. Any person or persons, jointly or
severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to
a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is
illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within thirty days after the filing of the decision
in the office of the Board.
160.23 NONCONFORMING USES.
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject
to the following conditions:
A. If such use is discontinued for 18 consecutive months, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
B. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall
not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
C. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is
more than fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Except as provided in subsection B above, any use which has
been permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a
conforming use.
160.24 AMENDMENTS. The regulations and standards set forth in this
chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or
repealed. No amendment, supplement, change, or modification shall be
undertaken without prior approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 901 -
CHAPTER 165
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
165.01 Purpose 165.10 Accompanying Material
165.02 Definitions 165.11 Certificates
165.03 Plats in Unincorporated Areas 165.12 Design and Development Standards
165.04 Preliminary Approval by Commission 165.13 Improvements
165.05 Auditor’s Plats 165.14 Variations and Exceptions
165.06 Final Approval by Commission 165.15 Fees
165.07 Approval by the Council 165.16 Enforcement
165.08 Information Required on Preliminary Plat 165.17 Changes and Amendments
165.09 Information Required on Final Plat
165.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum
standards for the design, development and improvement of all new subdivisions
and resubdivisions so that existing developments will be protected and so that
adequate provisions are made for public services and to promote the health,
safety and general welfare in the City.
165.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms or works
are defined.
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, twenty
(20) feet or less in width, affording secondary means of access to
abutting property.
2. “Auditor’s plat” means a plat prepared at the request of the
County Auditor to clarify property descriptions for the purposes of
assessment and taxation.
3. “Building line” means a line on a plat between which line and
public right-of-way no buildings or structures may be erected.
4. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of
the City.
5. “Cul-de-sac” means a dead-end street permanently closed to
through traffic and being terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
6. “Easement” means a right-of-way granted for the purpose of
limited private, public and quasi-public uses across private land.
7. “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other plot or parcel of
land which is or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance,
transfer or improvement.
8. “Major street” means a street, other than a local service street, as
designated on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan of the City.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 902 -
9. “Planning officer” means the person designated by the Council to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
10. “Plat” means a map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s
plan of the subdivision is presented and which the subdivider submits for
approval and intends, in final form, to record.
11. “Proprietor’s plat” means a plat as defined herein submitted by
the owner of the land being platted, or by said owner’s agent, or other
private entity, acting with the consent of the owner.
12. “Residential street” means a local service street used primarily for
access to abutting property.
13. “Subdivision” means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into three (3) or more lots, parcels or other divisions of land for the
purpose of immediate or future sale or transfer or building development.
The term includes the resubdivision of land and when appropriate to the
context relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
The division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than
forty (40) acres, not involving any new road, street, easement or other
dedication, shall not be considered a subdivision, as defined above, and
shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. Such division into
parcels of more than 40 acres shall not be further divided without
meeting all of the requirements of this chapter.
165.03 PLATS IN UNINCORPORATED AREAS. With regard to
subdivisions located in the unincorporated area of the County within the area
bounded on the east, north and west by the levee of Drainage Districts No. 10
and No. 12, on the south by Highway No. 6, on the southeast by the east line of
Section 30, and on the southwest by the west line of Section 36, the provisions
of this chapter shall apply.
165.04 PRELIMINARY APPROVAL BY COMMISSION. Whenever the
owner or owners of any tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the
City or within the area described in Section 165.03 of this chapter, wishes to
make a subdivision of the same, said owner shall cause to be prepared a
preliminary plat of said subdivision and shall submit twelve (12) copies of said
preliminary plat and such other information as hereinafter required to the
Commission for its preliminary study and approval. The Commission shall
refer two (2) copies of the preliminary plat to the planning officer, who shall
examine said preliminary plat as to its compliance with the ordinances and
regulations of the City, the existing street system, and good municipal utility
practices. The planning officer shall submit recommendations along with a
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 903 -
copy of the preliminary plat to the Commission for its consideration. The
preliminary plat shall contain such information and data as outlined in Section
165.08 hereof. The Commission shall study such preliminary plat to see if it
conforms with the standards and requirements as outlined in this chapter and
shall approve or reject such plat within forty-five (45) days after the date of
submission thereof to the Commission. If the Commission does not act within
forty-five (45) days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved;
provided, however, that the subdivider may agree to an extension of the time for
a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. The approval of the preliminary plat by
the Commission shall be null and void unless the final plat for at least a portion
of the preliminary plat is presented within 180 days after date of approval.
Before approving a preliminary plat, the Commission may in its discretion hold
a public hearing, notice of which shall be given by publication in a newspaper
in general circulation in the City or by placing in the United States mail
appropriate form of notice setting the time and place at which said plat shall be
considered by the Commission.
165.05 AUDITOR’S PLATS. With regard to Auditors’ plats as
distinguished from proprietor’s plats, the Commission and Council shall have
the right to waive provisions governing preliminary approval and public
improvements outlined in Sections 165.08, 165.12 and 165.13 of this chapter,
providing there is on file with the Commission a copy of the request of the Iowa
County Auditor ordering such plat and a letter from said Auditor stating that the
plat as submitted meets the requirements for which the Auditor has ordered the
plat.
165.06 FINAL APPROVAL BY COMMISSION. The subdivider shall also
submit to the Commission for its approval or rejection twelve (12) copies of a
final plat of the subdivision which shall contain the data and information
outlined in Section 165.09 of this chapter. If the Commission approves the plat,
such approval and the date thereof shall be noted on the plat over the signature
of the Secretary of the Commission. The approval of the final plat by the
Commission shall be null and void unless the final plat is submitted to the
Council within one year after date of approval by the Commission.
165.07 APPROVAL BY THE COUNCIL. After approval of the final plat
of the subdivision by the Commission, the recommendation of approval and ten
(10) copies of the final plat shall be submitted to the Council by the Secretary of
the Commission for final approval and for the acceptance of all streets, alleys,
easements, parks or other areas reserved for or dedicated to the public, along
with the required surety bonds or checks guaranteeing that the improvements
required under Section 165.13 herein shall be installed. If the Commission does
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 904 -
not approve the final plat, the Council may approve said plat and accept the
public areas and easements thereon only by a three-fourths vote of the entire
membership of the Council. Approval of the final plat by the Council shall be
null and void if the plat is not recorded within thirty (30) days after date of
approval, unless application for an extension of time is made in writing during
said thirty-day period to the Council, and granted.
165.08 INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PRELIMINARY PLAT. Each
subdivider of land should confer with the Commission before preparing the
preliminary plat in order to become thoroughly familiar with the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan and with other municipal regulations affecting
the area in which the proposed subdivision lies. The owner shall submit twelve
(12) copies of a preliminary plat to the Commission which shall be drawn to a
scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') by a registered
engineer and licensed land surveyor and shall show the following:
1. The complete legal description of the property to be platted,
including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate
traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions.
2. Existing contour intervals of not more than two (2) feet, provided,
however, that a minimum of two (2) contours shall be shown on any plat.
3. The location of property lines and all such surface features as
buildings, railroads, utilities, water courses and similar items affecting
the development. Also, the location and size of such subsurface features
as existing or nearest available storm and sanitary sewers, water mains,
culverts, gas mains, above and below ground electric transmission lines
or cables, and drain tiles.
4. A vicinity sketch at a scale of not more than five hundred (500)
feet to the inch shall be shown on or accompany the proposed plat. This
map shall show how streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision may
connect with existing and proposed streets and alleys in neighboring
subdivisions or undeveloped property, to produce the most advantageous
development of the entire area. This sketch shall show the location of
any nearby parks, schools, or other public facilities that might be affected
by the proposed subdivision.
5. All existing adjacent subdivisions, streets and tract lines of
acreage parcels together with the names of record owners of
unsubdivided parcels of land immediately adjoining the proposed
subdivision and between it and the nearest existing streets.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 905 -
6. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded,
with the name and address of the owner and subdivider; also north point,
scale, date, name of surveyor and engineer.
7. Sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and provision for major
streets in accordance with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
8. The zoning district or districts in which the land to be subdivided
is located according to the zoning ordinance.
9. For all major streets except collectors and local service streets the
minimum radius of curvature shall be three hundred (300) feet on the
centerline; for collector streets one hundred (100) feet and local service
streets fifty (50) feet. The maximum grade for any streets shall not
exceed seven percent (7%), except in the case of local service streets
where ten percent (10%) grade shall be permissible. Changes in grades
for all streets shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length
equal to fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in rate of grade. The
grade alignment and resultant visibility especially at intersections shall
be worked out in detail to meet the approval of the Superintendent of
Streets.
10. Any plat that cannot be reasonably served by public sewer shall
show the results of soil percolation tests made by the Engineer preparing
the plat. Such tests shall be made in accordance with specifications
approved by the Council or County Health Department.
11. An attorney’s opinion of the abstract covering the property to be
included in the final plat shall be submitted in duplicate showing all
taxes due have been previously paid and that there are no outstanding
liens or encumbrances on the property. The names of all record title
holders and any other information that might otherwise affect the title of
lots in the proposed subdivision shall be shown. The opinion shall be
written by an attorney admitted to the practice of law in the State of
Iowa.
Any plat not containing all information specified above shall not be considered
by the Commission.
165.09 INFORMATION REQUIRED ON FINAL PLAT. Following
preliminary approval, twelve (12) copies of the final plat shall be submitted to
the Commission for study and review. Ten (10) copies of the final plat as
ultimately approved by the Commission shall be necessary for submission to the
Council for its approval. This plat shall be made from an accurate survey by a
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 906 -
licensed land surveyor and engineer and drawn to a scale of one hundred (100)
feet to the inch or larger. The final plat shall show the following:
1. The boundaries of the property, the lines of all proposed streets
and alleys with their width, and any other areas intended to be dedicated
to public use. The boundaries shall be accurately tied to the nearest
section corner. The allowable unadjusted error of closure on the traverse
of the boundaries of the plat shall be 1 in 10,000. Latitude and departure
computations on the traverse closure shall be submitted with the plat.
2. The lines of adjoining streets and alleys with their width and
names.
3. All lots lines, lot and block numbers, building lines and
easements, with figures showing their dimensions.
4. All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
boundaries of the subdivided area, or of the lots, streets, alleys,
easements and building line setbacks and any other similar public or
private uses. The linear dimensions shall be expressed in foot and
decimals of a foot.
5. Radii, arc and chords, points of tangency, central angles for all
curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners.
6. All surveyor’s monuments, together with their descriptions.
Monumentation shall meet the requirements of Chapter 354 of the Code
of Iowa.
7. Title and complete legal description of property subdivided,
showing its location and extent, points of compass, scale of plat, and
certification and name of engineer or surveyor staking the lots.
165.10 ACCOMPANYING MATERIAL. The following material shall be
required to be submitted prior to or at the time the final plat is submitted to the
Council for approval.
1. Plans and profiles shall be submitted of all streets and alleys, 50
feet horizontal scale and 5 feet vertical scale recommended. Profiles
shall show location, size and grade of all conduits, sewers, pipe lines, etc.
to be placed under the streets and alleys. Profiles of east and west streets
shall be drawn so that the west end of the profile shall be at the left side
of the drawing and profiles of north and south streets shall be drawn so
that the south end of the profile shall be at the left side of the drawing.
2. Any easements or deeds, properly executed, for all streets or roads
intended to be dedicated for public use.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 907 -
165.11 CERTIFICATES. The final plat shall also be accompanied by the
following at the time it is presented for filing:
1. A certificate by the owner and spouse, if any, that the subdivision
is with their free consent and is in accordance with the desire of the
owner and spouse. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by
the owner and spouse before some officer authorized to take the
acknowledgments of deeds.
2. A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that
the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their
desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond as provided for in
Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be recorded in lieu of the
consent of the mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or lienholder
consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be
recorded for any areas conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public.
3. A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free
from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured
by bond in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
4. A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
165.12 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. No subdivision
plat shall be approved by either the Commission or by the Council unless it
conforms to the following minimum standards and requirements, except those
plats referred to in Section 165.05 as Auditor’s Plats.
1. Acre Subdivision. Whenever the area is divided into lots
containing one or more acres and there are indications that such lots will
eventually be resubdivided into small building lots, consideration shall
be given to the street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so
that additional minor streets can be opened which will permit a logical
arrangement of smaller lots.
2. Relation to Adjoining Street System. The arrangement of streets
in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of the
principal existing streets in adjoining subdivisions, or for a proper
intersection where said streets in the new subdivision shall connect
therewith, or their proper projection where adjoining property is not
subdivided insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements.
The width of such streets in new subdivisions shall not be less than the
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 908 -
minimum street widths established herein. The street and alley
arrangement shall also be such as to cause no hardship to owners of
adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for
convenient access to it. The platting of half streets shall be discouraged.
Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent
to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley shall be
platted.
3. Street Width.
A. The width for major streets shall conform to the widths
designated on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
B. The minimum width for local service streets shall be sixty
(60) feet, except that in cases where the topography or special
conditions make a street of less width more suitable, the
Commission may reduce the above requirements.
C. Dead-end streets shall not be over six hundred (600) feet in
length and shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet, unless,
because of unusual conditions the Commission shall approve a
street of greater length and/or less width. All dead-end streets
shall terminate in a circular right-of-way or cul-de-sac with a
minimum diameter of one hundred (100) feet or other equally
suitable provision for vehicular turning space.
D. Easements of not less than five (5) feet in width shall be
provided on each side of all rear lot lines and side lines where
necessary for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers,
gas, water, telephone and other utilities. Easement of greater
width may be required along lot lines or across lots where
necessary for the extension of main sewers and similar utilities.
4. Blocks. No block shall be longer than 1,000 feet, except where
topography or unusual conditions permit a greater length.
5. Lots.
A. All side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street centerlines unless the Commission shall agree that
a variation to this requirement will provide for better street and lot
arrangement. Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from
major traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 909 -
B. The minimum dimensions for lots shall be in accordance
with the bulk regulations of the zoning ordinance for the district
within which the subdivision is located; provided, however, that
the minimum depth for a lot shall be 100 feet.
C. Corner lots shall be of such width as to permit the
maintenance of all yard requirements as required by the zoning
ordinance.
D. All lots at street intersections shall have a radius of not less
than fifteen (15) feet at the street corner. A greater radius shall be
required for intersections involving one or more major streets. A
cut-off or chord may be substituted for the circular arc.
6. Street Names. Street names for streets which are in alignment
with or extensions of existing streets shall be the same. Street names
shall be subject to Commission and Council approval.
7. Building Lines. Building lines shall be shown on all lots intended
for residential, commercial or industrial use. Such building lines shall
not be less than the minimum yard requirements of the zoning ordinance
for the district within which the property is located.
8. Character of Development. The Commission and Council shall
have the right to agree with the subdivider regarding the type and
character of development that will be permitted in the subdivision, and
may require that certain minimum regulations regarding this matter be
incorporated in deed restrictions. Such regulations shall be intended to
protect the character and value of the surrounding development and shall
also tend to secure the most appropriate development of the property
being subdivided.
9. Easements Along Streams. Whenever any stream or major
surface water course is located in an area that is being subdivided, the
subdivider shall, at the subdivider’s own expense, make adequate
provisions for straightening, widening or otherwise improving the
channel so that it will property carry the surface water. The subdivider
shall also provide and dedicate to the City or County an easement along
each side of the stream, which easement shall be for the purpose of
widening, improving or protecting the stream. The width of such
easement shall be adequate to provide for any necessary channel
relocation and straightening, but in no case shall such easement be less
than twenty (20) feet.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 910 -
165.13 IMPROVEMENTS. Before the final plat of any area shall be
approved by the Council and recorded, the subdivider shall make and install the
improvements described in this section. In lieu of final completion of the
minimum improvements before the plat is finally approved, the subdivider shall
post a bond, approved by the City Attorney and City Treasurer, with the City,
which bond will insure to the City that the improvements will be completed by
the subdivider within one year after final approval of the plat. The amount of
the bond shall not be less than the estimated cost of the improvements and the
amount of the estimate must be approved by the Council. If the improvements
are not completed within the specified time, the City may use the bond or any
portion thereof to complete the same. For plats located in the unincorporated
areas within the area described in Section 165.03 of this chapter, the
requirements of this section shall apply. The Commission and Council may
waive the requirements of this section provided they are satisfied that the
regulations governing the unincorporated areas within which the subdivision is
located are sufficient to insure adequate conformance with these regulations.
The minimum improvements installed or for which bond is posted, in any
subdivision, before the plat can be finally approved shall be in accordance with
the following:
1. The subdivider shall grade and improve all new streets between
the right-of-way lines within the subdivided area. The paving on such
new streets shall be built according to the standards and specifications of
the City, but in no case shall it consist of less than a concrete curb and
gutter, and an asphaltic concrete surface course laid on a base approved
by the Superintendent of Streets or six (6) inches of reinforced or seven
(7) inches of non-reinforced Portland cement concrete with integral curb
and gutter. Minimum pavement widths shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
2. The subdivider shall, whenever necessary, grade any portion of
the property subdivided into lots so that each lot will be usable and
suitable for the erection of residences or other structures thereon.
3. The subdivider shall construct sanitary and storm water sewers
according to the standards and specifications of the City, and provide a
connection for each lot to the sanitary sewer. Where existing sewer
outlets are not within reasonable distance, installation of private sewer
facilities or septic tanks shall be permissible as a temporary measure
pending future sewer service; provided the subdivider shall furnish a
report from the County Health Department and Public Works Director,
stating that the proposed lots have been tested and found suitable for
septic tank installations.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 911 -
4. The subdivider shall provide for the installation of water mains
and fire hydrants in the subdivided area, and such installation shall be
made prior to the street pavement construction and shall be in accordance
with the standards and specifications of the City.
5. The subdivider shall provide for the installation of sidewalks
along all new or existing streets in the subdivision. The sidewalks shall
be built according to standards and specifications of the City.
6. Permanent monuments shall be set at each corner of the perimeter
of the subdivision and at the corner of each block within the subdivision
and at the corner of each lot. All monuments shall be made of permanent
material, sensitive to a dip needle and at least 30 inches long, and shall
conform with standard specifications of the City.
7. The Council and Commission may require that all utility lines
except electric lines of nominal voltage in excess of 15,000 volts, be
installed underground. The subdivider shall be responsible for making
the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for installation of
such facilities. Said utility lines shall be installed in such a manner so as
not to interfere with other underground utilities. Underground utility
lines which cross underneath the right-of-way of any street, alley or way
shall be installed prior to the improvement of any such street, alley or
way in the subdivision. Incidental appurtenances, such as transformers
and their enclosures, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meters and meter
cabinets may be placed above ground but shall be located so as not to be
unsightly or hazardous to the public. Such incidental appurtenances shall
be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the City. If
overhead utility lines or wires are permitted, they shall be placed in the
easements provided in the rear of the lots. In their determination on
whether or not to require underground utilities, the Council and
Commission may consider that soil, topographical or other conditions
make such installations within the subdivision unreasonable or
impractical.
8. All plans, specifications, installation and construction required by
this chapter shall be subject to review, approval and inspection by the
Public Works Director or an authorized representative.
A. The Council may require contracts for all public
improvements to be executed on forms furnished and approved by
the City Attorney and the Council.
B. The subdivider shall furnish the Public Works Director
with a construction schedule prior to commencement of any
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 912 -
and/or all construction, and shall notify the Public Works Director
not less than 48 hours in advance of readiness for required
inspection. The subdivider shall reimburse the City for the costs
expended for all inspection services and tests furnished and
conducted by or on behalf of the City.
9. The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and/or
construction of all improvements required by this chapter, and shall
warrant the design, materials and workmanship of such improvements,
installation and construction for a period of two (2) years from and after
completion. Such warranty shall be by bond or other acceptable
collateral; and shall be subject to review by the City Attorney; shall
assure the expedient repair or replacement of defective improvements
under warranty; and shall indemnify the City from all costs or losses
resulting from or contributed to such defective improvements.
165.14 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS. Whenever the tract proposed
to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such
development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the
requirements contained in this chapter would result in substantial hardships or
injustices, the Council, upon written recommendation of the Commission, may
modify or vary such requirements to the end that the subdivider is allowed to
develop the property in a reasonable manner; provided, however, all such
variations and exceptions granted hereunder shall be in harmony with the
intended spirit of this chapter and granted with the view toward protecting the
public welfare and interest of the City and surrounding area.
165.15 FEES. Before a preliminary plat shall be considered by the
Commission, the subdivider or agent shall deposit with the Clerk a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00). A receipt for such filing fee shall be filed with the preliminary
plat. Before a final plat shall be considered by the Commission, the subdivider
or agent shall deposit with the Clerk a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), plus
one dollar ($1.00) for each lot included in the final plat. A receipt for such
filing fee shall be filed with the final plat.
165.16 ENFORCEMENT.
1. No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the
County Recorder’s office or have any validity until it shall have been
approved in the manner prescribed herein.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue permits for any structure
located on a lot in any subdivision, the plat of which has been prepared
after the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter but
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 913 -
which has not been approved in accordance with the provisions
contained herein.
3. The Council shall not permit any public improvements over which
it has any control to be made or any money expended for improvements
in any area that has been subdivided or upon any street that has been
platted after the date of the adoption of such ordinance unless the
subdivision or street has been approved in accordance with the
provisions contained herein.
165.17 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. Any regulation or provision of
this chapter may be changed and amended from time to time by the Council;
provided, however, such changes and amendments shall not become effective
until after study and report by the Commission and until after a public hearing
has been held, public notice of which shall have been given in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARENGO, IOWA
- 901 -
CHAPTER 170
ZONING REGULATIONS
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 360 entitled City of Marengo, Iowa, Zoning Ordinance, adopted March 8,
1999, and amendments thereto are contained in the following chapter of this Code of
Ordinances and are in full force and effect. The following ordinances have been adopted
amending the Zoning Regulations of the City and have not been codified herein, but are
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED SUBJECT
236 October 8, 1984 Zoning Map
242 August 12, 1986 Zoning Map
243 November 10, 1986 Zoning Map
245 February 23, 1987 Zoning Map
267 October 14, 1991 Zoning Map
268 October 14, 1991 Zoning Map
278 October 12, 1992 Zoning Map
294 August 8, 1994 Zoning Map
305 March 13, 1995 Zoning Map
323 December 11, 1995 Zoning Map
326 December 18, 1995 Zoning Map
350 May 26, 1998 Zoning Map
351 May 26, 1998 Zoning Map
357 November 23, 1998 Zoning Map
365 February 28, 2000 Zoning Map
371 June 26, 2001 Adult Entertainment Business Regulations
373 January 28, 2002 Zoning Map
381 November 25, 2002 C-2A General Commercial Business District
382 November 25, 2002 Site Plan to Accompany Zoning Permit
385 October 13, 2003 Zoning Map
392 April 26, 2004 Zoning Map
405 November 17, 2005 Zoning Map
417 November 26 2007 Zoning Map
421 June 8, 2009 Rezone C-2 to R-1, Lot 5, Block 9, McFall’s
Addition
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
1
CITY OF MARENGO
ZONING ORDINANCE
Adopted: March 8, 1999
Prepared by:
The East Central Iowa Council of Governments
108 Third Street SE, Suite 300
Cedar Rapids, Iowa 52401
(319) 365-9941
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01 Adoption and Repeal 3
1.02 Short Title 3
1.03 Intent and purpose 3
1.04 Compatibility with the City’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan 4
1.05 Rules 4
1.06 Definitions 4
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
1.07 Administration and Enforcement 14
1.08 Zoning Administrator 14
1.09 Board of Adjustment 14
1.10 Appeals to the Board of Adjustment 15
1.11 Special Exceptions: Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures 16
1.12 Variances: Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures 17
1.13 Planning and Zoning Commission 18
1.14 City Council 18
1.15 Changes and Amendments 18
1.16 Additional Fees 20
1.17 Interpretation of Provisions 20
1.18 Violations and Penalties 20
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS
1.19 Establishment of Districts and Official Zoning Map 21
1.20 Changes in Official Zoning Map 21
1.21 Interpretation of District Boundaries 22
1.22 Applicability of Regulations 23
1.23 District Regulations 23
ZONING DISTRICTS
1.24 A-1 -- Agricultural 27
1.25 R-1 -- One and Two Family Dwelling Residential 30
1.26 R-2 -- Multiple Family Dwelling Residential 32
1.27 RMH -- Residential Manufactured Home 35
1.28 C-1 -- Central Business District 37
1.29 C-2 -- Highway Commercial 40
1.30 I-1 -- Light Industrial 43
1.31 I-2 -- Heavy Industrial 46
1.32 P-1 -- Public Use 48
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
1.33 Fence, Wall and Hedge Regulations 49
1.34 Parking and Loading Space Requirements 50
1.35 Severability 51
1.36 Repeal 52
1.37 Effective Date 52
3
THE CITY OF MARENGO
ZONING ORDINANCE
1.01 ADOPTION AND REPEAL
This is an Ordinance amending the Marengo Zoning Ordinance by repealing said Ordinance and all
subsequent amendments thereto, and enacting this Ordinance in lieu thereof to establish comprehensive
zoning regulations for the City of Marengo, Iowa, and providing for the administrative enforcement, and
amendment thereof; and to repeal all Ordinances or resolutions in conflict therewith. This Ordinance is
adopted by authority of, and for the purpose set forth in the Code of Iowa.
1.02 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known, cited, and referred to as the Marengo Zoning Ordinance of 1999.
1.03 INTENT AND PURPOSE
The Marengo Zoning Ordinance, as set forth in the text and map which constitute this Ordinance, is
adopted with the purpose of improving and protecting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and
general welfare of the people and in accordance with the Code of Iowa Chapter 414.3 (1997). The
fulfillment of this purpose is to be accomplished by seeking:
A. To lessen congestion on the public streets.
B. To avoid undue concentration of population.
C. To prevent the overcrowding of land, thereby ensuring proper living and working conditions and
preventing the development of blight and slums.
D. To establish adequate standards for the provision of light, air, and open spaces.
E. To facilitate the provision of adequate transportation, and of other public requirements and
services such as water, sewerage, schools, and parks.
F. To zone all properties with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the City.
G. To protect residential, business, commercial, and industrial areas alike from harmful
encroachment by incompatible uses and to ensure that land allocated to a class of uses shall not be
usurped by other inappropriate uses.
H. To avoid the inappropriate development of lands and provide for adequate drainage, curbing of
erosion, and reduction of flood damage.
I. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform.
J. To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as
would not comply with the restrictions or limitations imposed herein.
K. To foster a more rational pattern of relationship between residential, business, commercial, and
manufacturing uses for the mutual benefit of all.
4
L. To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance-producing uses.
M. To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or of any amendment
thereto.
N. To define the powers and duties of the administrative and enforcement officers.
1.04 COMPATIBILITY WITH THE CITY’S COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
The standards and requirements contained in this Ordinance and the district mapping reflected on the
Zoning District Map have all been made in accordance with the officially adopted Comprehensive Land
Use Plan of Marengo, Iowa.
1.05 RULES
In the interpretation of this Ordinance, the rules of this Section shall be observed and applied as follows,
except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
A. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
C. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, and any other similar
entities.
D. The word "City" means the City of Marengo; the word "County" means Iowa County, Iowa; the
word "State" means the State of Iowa.
E. The words "City Council" mean the City Council of the City of Marengo, Iowa.
F. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any
caption or illustration, the text shall control.
1.06 DEFINITIONS
In the interpretation of this Ordinance, the definitions of this Section shall be observed and applied as
follows, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
A. Accessory Building, Structure, or Use--A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a
building or land on the same lot or parcel of ground and serving a purpose customarily incidental
to the use of the principal building or use of land.
B. Agriculture--The use of land for the purpose of raising and harvesting crops; or for the raising,
breeding, or management of livestock, poultry, fish, or honeybees; or for dairying, truck
gardening, forestry, nurseries, or orchards; for the noncommercial on-farm storage or processing
of agricultural products; or for any similar agricultural, horticultural, silvacultural, or aquacultural
use. No farms shall be operated for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or rendering
plants or for the slaughtering of animals, except such animals as have been raised on the premises
or have been maintained on the premises for the use and consumption of persons residing on the
premises. No land use may be classified as Agriculture unless the said parcel is of at least five (5)
acres in size.
5
C. Airport--Any area of land or water which is used or intended for use for the landing and taking
off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings
or other airport facilities or right-of ways, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and
tie-down areas, hangers and other buildings and open spaces.
D. Alley--Any dedicated public way, twenty (20) feet or less in width, affording a secondary means
of vehicular access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
E. Alterations, Structural--Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, or girders.
F. Apartment--A room or suite of rooms used as the dwelling of a family, including bath and culinary
accommodations, located in a building in which there are a multiple of these units.
G. Automobile Repair--The general repair, engine rebuilding, collision service or reconditioning of
motor vehicles.
H. Automobile Service Station--An establishment for the retail sale of fuel, lubricants, tires or other
similar products and supplies for vehicles, including minor accessory parts. It may also include
minor parts installation, towing, servicing, vehicle washing facilities, and minor repairs of vehicles
and trailer rental when secondary to the above activities. Major repairs and sale of vehicles
expressly excluded.
I. Balcony--An unroofed platform, unenclosed except by a railing, which projects from the outer
wall of any building above ground level with or without support other than the building.
J. Basement--That portion of a building which is partly below grade but having more than one-half
its height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. For the purpose of this Ordinance a
basement shall not be considered a story unless designed or used for habitable space or business
purposes
K. Bed and Breakfast--Any single family or multi-family dwelling unit used for the purpose of
overnight or temporary lodging for one (1) or more persons wherein meals may also be provided.
L. Billboard--All structures, regardless of the material used in the construction of the same, that are
erected, maintained or used for public display of posters or signs, whether the structure is placed
on the wall or painted on the wall itself, pictures or other pictorial reading matter which advertises
a business or attraction which is not carried on or manufactured in or upon the premises upon
which said signs or located.
M. Board--Board of Adjustment as described in Chapter 414.7 of the Code of Iowa.
N. Boarder--An individual other than a member of the family occupying a dwelling unit who, for a
consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations, meals, and may be provided personal care,
financial services, counseling or other such services.
O. Boarding House--A building other than a hotel or motel where, for compensation and by prearrangement
for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three (3) or more
persons.
6
P. Broadcast Tower--A structure for the transmittal or broadcast of radio, television, radar, or
microwaves which exceeds the maximum height permitted in the district in which it is located;
provided, however that noncommercial radio towers not exceeding fifty (50) feet in height shall
not be considered broadcast towers.
Q. Building--Any structure designed or built for the support, shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and includes any structure.
R. Building, Height of--The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height level between eaves and
ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
S. Building Line--A line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this Ordinance, a
minimum building line is the same as a front set-back line.
T. Building, Main or Principal--A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on
which it is situated.
U. Business Establishment--A place of business carrying on operations, the ownership and
management of which are separate and distinct from those of any other place of business located
on the same zoning lot.
V. Car Wash--Any building or portion thereof, containing facilities for the primary purpose of
washing vehicles, using production line methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning
device, or other mechanical devices; or providing space, water, equipment, or soap for the
complete or partial hand-washing of such vehicles, whether by attendant or customer.
W. Cellar--That portion of a building partially or wholly, underground, having half or more than half
its clear height below the grade plane. A cellar shall be non-habitable and shall not be counted as a
story.
X. Church--A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, that by design and
construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services and associated
accessory uses.
Y. Clinic, Medical or Dental--An organization of specializing physicians and/or dentists, who have
their offices in a common building. A clinic shall not include inpatient care.
Z. Child Day Care Facility--A "Child Day Care Facility" is a facility in which six or more children
are received for part or all of a day for care and/or instruction. The facility shall be approved and
licensed by the State of Iowa. The term "Child Day Care Facility", includes but is not limited to
the following: nursery schools, child care centers, day nurseries, kindergartens, preschools and
play groups, but does not include bona fide kindergartens or nursery schools operated by public or
private elementary or secondary school systems.
A2. Deck--A covered or uncovered platform area projecting from the wall of a building, accessible at
or from above grade, and attached to the ground.
B2. Drive Up--Any establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging
procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained
while remaining in their motor vehicles.
7
C2. Dwelling--Any building or portion thereof which is designed for and used exclusively for
residential purposes. Said building shall have an outside dimension of no less than twenty two
(22) feet for the main body, and 660 square feet of floor area above grade, excluding any attached
garage, if any.
D2. Dwelling, Single-Family--A building designed with accommodations for exclusive occupancy by
one (1) family.
E2. Dwelling, Two-Family--A building designed with accommodations for occupancy exclusively by
two (2) families living independently of each other.
F2. Dwelling, Multiple--A building designed with accommodations in order to be occupied
exclusively by more than two (2) families living independently of each other.
G2. Efficiency Unit-- A dwelling unit consisting of one principle room exclusive of bathroom, kitchen,
hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the principal room, providing such dining alcove
does not exceed 125 square feet in area.
H2. Family--One (1) person or two (2) or more persons related by direct lineal descent, marriage,
adoption or placement by a governmental or social service agency, occupying a dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping organization. A family may also be two (2), but not more than two (2)
persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption.
I2. Family Group Care Home--A residential facility having fifteen (15) beds or less providing 24-hour
room, board, personal assistance, and a program of services designed to meet the special needs of
mentally or physically disabled persons who cannot live alone. The home must be duly approved
and licensed as required by applicable state and local regulations.
J2. Farm--An area of not less than five (5) acres which is used for the growing of the usual farm
products such as vegetables, fruits and grain, and their storage on the area, as well as for the
raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals.
K2. Floodplain--Refer to Marengo Floodplain Ordinance.
L2. Frontage--All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or
terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the
property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
M2. Garage, Private--A building that is subordinate or used for the storage of not more than four (4)
motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the buildings to which it is accessory.
Not more than one (1) of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two (2) ton
capacity.
N2. Garage, Public--A building or portion thereof other than a private or storage garage, designed or
used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, or storing motor-driven vehicles.
O2. Garage, Storage--A building or portion thereof designed or used for term storage of personal
belongings by pre-arrangement, and at which motor fuels and oils are not sold, and motor driven
vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
P2. Garden House--An accessory structure of not more than 140 square feet in area and having a
height of eight (8) feet or less constructed primarily for storage.
8
Q2. Gas Station--Any building or premises used for the retail sale of petroleum products for the use of
motor vehicles, and including such products as kerosene, fuel oil, lubricants, tires, batteries,
antifreeze, motor vehicle accessories, and other items associated with the sale of such products;
and the rendering of minor repairs and servicing of motor vehicles.
R2. Grade--The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building except when any wall approximately parallels and is not more than five (5) feet from a
street line, then the elevation of the street shall be grade. The purpose is to regulate the number of
stories and height of a structure.
S2. Home Occupation--Any occupation or activity carried on within a dwelling unit or accessory
building by a member of the family residing on the premises, which occupation or activity is
incidental and secondary to the residential occupancy and does not change the residential character
thereof and meets the following shall be permitted.
1. Is operated in its entirety within the residence or permitted accessory building and only by
the person or persons maintaining a dwelling therein and not more than one (1) person
who is not a resident on the premises shall be employed;
2. There shall be no alteration of the principal residential building which changes the
character and appearance thereof as a dwelling;
3. Does not display or create outside the building any external evidence of the operation of a
home occupation;
4. Does not utilize more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit, not to
exceed 400 square feet in area;
5. There shall not be more than one (1) commercial vehicle used in connection with the
home occupation parked on the premises.
6. Does not utilize mechanical or electrical equipment other than the type normally found in
a dwelling unit and there shall be no outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the
home occupation;
7. Does not involve the sale of commodities or stock of goods upon the premises in excess of
30 cubic feet in volume.
8. No home occupation will be permitted which is obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive by
reason of the potential emission or transmission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors,
toxic or noxious matter or glare, heat or other emissions.
9. No sign, other than one (1) unlighted sign not over one (1) square foot in area attached flat
against the dwelling and displaying only the occupant’s name and occupation, shall
advertise the presence or conduct of the home occupation.
T2. Hotel--A commercial building licensed by the State and occupied and used principally as a place
of lodging for guests. Hotels may or may not provide meals.
U2. Institution--An establishment occupied or operated by a private or public non-profit corporation,
association, organization, or group for use or benefit of the general public.
9
V2. Junk/Salvage Yard--Any lot or portion thereof where waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled, or handled, including the dismantling or
"wrecking" of automobiles or other machinery, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and
places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and
equipment; but not including areas where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building.
W2. Kennel--An establishment where small animals are bred, raised, trained, groomed or boarded for
compensation, sale or other commercial purposes.
X2. Loading Space--An off-street space within the main building or on the same lot providing for the
standing, loading, or unloading of commercial vehicles, having a minimum dimension of twelve
(12) by thirty-five (35) feet and a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
Y2. Lot--A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one main building together with its
accessory buildings officially approved and having its principal frontage upon a dedicated street.
The boundaries of the lot shall be determined by its lot lines.
Z2. Lot, Corner--A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersections.
A3. Lot, Depth of--The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
B3. Lot, Double Frontage--A lot having a frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets, as distinguished
from a corner lot.
C3. Lot, Interior--A lot other than a corner lot.
D3. Lot Lines--The lines bounding a lot as defined herein:
1. Front Lot Line: In the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the street.
In the case of a corner lot, or double frontage lot, "front lot line" shall mean that line
separating said lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and in
the application for a zoning compliance permit.
2. Rear Lot Line: That lot line opposite and most distant front lot line. In the case of a lot
pointed at the rear or triangular shaped, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel
to the front lot line not less than ten (10) feet long farthest from the lot line and wholly
within the lot.
3. Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line
separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from
another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.
E3. Lot of Record--A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the
office of the County Recorder.
F3. Lot Width--The width of a lot measured at the building line and at right angles to its depth where
the minimum building line or setback intersects the side lot lines.
G3. Lot, Reversed Corner--A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot.
10
H3. Main Building--A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is
situated.
I3. Main Use--The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for
which the premises exists.
J3. Manufactured Home--A factory-built structure, built under authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, is
required by federal law to display a seal from the United States Department of housing and urban
development, and was constructed on or after June 15, 1976. If a manufactured home is placed in a
manufactured home park, the home must be titled and is subject to the manufactured home square
foot tax. If a manufactured home is placed outside of a manufactured home park, the home is to be
assessed and taxed as real estate. A manufactured home shall not be constructed with a permanent
hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent
site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A
mobile home constructed to the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards is
not a manufactured home unless it has been converted to real property and is taxed as a site built
dwelling as is provided in Code of Iowa (1997), section 435.26. For the purpose of any of these
regulations, manufactured homes shall be considered the same as a single-family detached
dwelling.
K3. Manufactured Home Park--Any site, lot, field, or tract of land under common ownership upon
which two or more occupied mobile homes, manufactured homes, modular homes, or a
combination of the homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall
include any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of such mobile home park.
The term "manufactured home park" shall not be construed to include mobile homes, buildings,
tents, or other structures temporarily maintained by an individual, educational institution, or
company on their own premises and used exclusively to house their own labor or students.
A "manufactured home park" must be classified as to whether it is a residential manufactured
home park or a recreational manufactured home park or both. The manufactured home park
residential landlord tenant act only applies to residential manufactured home parks.
L3. Modular Home--A factory-built structure which is manufactured to be used as a place of human
habitation, is constructed to comply with the Iowa state building code for modular factory-built
structures, and must display the seal issued by the state building code commissioner. If a modular
home is placed in a mobile home park, the home is subject to the annual tax as required by Section
435.22, Code of Iowa (1997). If a modular home is placed outside a manufactured home park, the
home shall be considered real property and is to be assessed and taxed as real estate.
M3. Motel--A building or group of buildings in which lodging is provided and offered primarily to
transient occupancy and in which each unit has convenient access to a parking space for the use of
the unit's occupants.
N3. Multiple Dwelling Unit--A building arranged, designed, and intended for use as a residence by two
or more families living independently of each other.
O3. Nonconforming Building--A building or portion thereof that does not conform to the provisions of
this Ordinance relative to height, bulk, area or yard size requirements for the district in which it is
located.
11
P3. Nonconforming Use--A use which lawfully occupied a building or land but does not conform to
the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Q3. Nursery--Land, buildings, structures, or combination thereof for the display, storage, cultivation,
processing or transporting of trees, shrubs, plants or other horticultural products offered for sale or
installation and including products used for gardening and landscaping.
R3. Nursing Home--An institution which is advertised, announced, or maintained for the express or
implied purpose of providing nursing or convalescent care for persons unrelated to the licensee. A
nursing home is a home for chronic or convalescent patients who, on admission, are not as a rule,
acutely ill and who do not usually require special facilities, such as an operating room, x-ray
facilities, laboratory facilities, and obstetrical facilities. A nursing home provides care for persons
who have remedial ailments, for which continuing medical and skilled nursing care is indicated;
who, however, are not sick enough to require general hospital care. A major factor which
distinguishes a nursing home is that the residents will require the individualization of medical
care. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a "nursing home" shall also be considered a "convalescent
home." Such institution as is in compliance with the provisions of Sections 135C.1 (13), nursing
facility, and (17), residential care facility, Code of Iowa (1997).
S3. Open Space--The land area of a site not covered by buildings, right-of-ways, parking structures, or
accessory buildings, except recreational structures, and which is available to all occupants of units
for whose use the space is intended. "Open Space" does not include school sites and commercial
areas.
T3. Patio—A covered or uncovered surfaced outdoor living area at grade, abutting and accessible from
a dwelling.
U3. Parking Space—An asphalt, concrete or similar permanent dust-free surface intended for off-street
vehicular parking.
V3. Plan--The adopted Comprehensive Land Use Plan of the City of Marengo.
W3. Porch—A covered entrance to a building consisting of a platform area, with open or enclosed
sides, projecting from the wall of a building.
X3. Principal Use--The main use of land or structures as distinguished from secondary or accessory
use. For example, a house is a principal use in a residential area; a garage or pool is an accessory
use.
Y3. Private--In reference to a building, structure, utility, facility, or use, "private" means owned by
someone other than a unit of government, or an agency of government, unless the context clearly
indicates that "private" is being used in a broader sense of something not open or available to the
general populace.
Z3. Public--In reference to a building, structure, utility, facility, or use, "public" means owned and/or
operated by a unit of government or an agency thereof, unless the context clearly indicates that
"public" is being used in the broader sense of something available to the general populace.
A4. Public Utility (service use)--A system owned or operated by a licensed public utility company or
by a railroad company. Such systems do not include those owned and operated by the City of
Marengo or other governmental agency.
12
B4. Restaurant--A business where the principal business is the dispensing and the consumption of
edible foodstuff and/or beverage at indoor tables, including a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop,
delicatessen, lunch room, bar, cocktail lounge or tavern. The total seating area located within the
enclosed portion of the premises is more than fifty (50%) percent of the total floor area.
C4. Setback--The distance required to obtain the front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this
Ordinance.
D4. Sign--Any structure or part thereof or device attached thereto or painted, or represented thereon,
which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or
representation used as, or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction, or advertisement.
Signs include billboards.
E4. Special exception--The use allowed in a zoning district after approval has been granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment according to the provisions set forth in Section 1.11 of this
Ordinance.
F4. Story--That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the next floor above. The topmost story shall be that habitable portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling above.
G4. Story, Half--A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at
least two opposite exterior walls are not more than three (3) feet above the floor of such story,
except that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for janitor or caretaker or his
family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story.
H4. Street--An approved public or private thoroughfare which provides the principal means of
vehicular access to abutting property and/or for vehicular passage.
I4. Street, cul-de-sac--A local street terminating in a turnaround.
J4. Structural Alterations--Any change in the configuration of the exterior walls, foundation or roof of
a building which results in an increase in the area, height or volume of the building.
K4. Structure--Anything constructed or installed on the ground or which is attached to something
located on the ground. “Structures” include buildings, radio and TV towers, sheds and permanent
signs. “Structures” exclude vehicles, sidewalks and paving.
L4. Tavern--An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the drink to the general
public and where food or packaged liquors may be served or sold only as an accessory to the
primary use.
M4. Travel Trailer or Motor Home--A vehicle with or without motive power used or so manufactured
or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways
and so designed to permit the vehicle to be used as a place of human habitation by one or more
persons. If such vehicle shall be customarily or ordinarily used as a place of human habitation for
more than 90 days in any 18 month period, it shall be classed as a mobile home, regardless of the
size and weight limitation provided herein.
N4. Trailer Camp or Tourist Camp Ground--An area providing spaces for two or more travel trailers,
camping trailers, or tent sites for temporary occupancy, with necessary incidental services,
sanitation, and recreation facilities to serve the traveling public.
13
O4. Use--The use of property is the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, intended, or for which is occupied or maintained.
P4. Variance--The term "Variance" shall mean a modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance which would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual
property on which the variance is granted. The crucial points of variance are (a) undue hardship,
(b) unique circumstances and (c) applying to property. The authority to grant variances is vested in
the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
Q4. Yard--An open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines unoccupied and unobstructed
by any portion of a structure. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a
side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance
between the lot lines and the main building line shall be used.
R4. Yard, Front--A yard extending across the front of a lot and being the minimum horizontal distance
between the street or place line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the
projections of the usual uncovered steps. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as
parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension, except where owner shall elect to
front his building on a street parallel to the lot line having the greater dimension.
S4. Yard, Rear--A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building line or any projections thereof
other than the projections of uncovered steps. On all lots the rear yard shall be in the rear of the
front yard.
T4. Yard, Side--A yard between the main building line and the side line of the lot, and extending from
the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance
between a side lot line and the side of the main building line or any projections of uncovered steps.
U4. Zone--A portion of the City delineated on the zoning map which sets forth requirements and
development standards for the use of land and buildings in, above or below the zone.
14
1.07 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
The administration and enforcement of this ordinance is hereby vested in four (4) offices of the City of
Marengo, as shown below and described herein:
Zoning Administrator
Board of Adjustment
Planning and Zoning Commission
City Council and Mayor
1.08 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
A. DUTIES: A zoning administrator designated by the City Council shall administer and enforce this
Ordinance. He or she may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City
Council may direct. In addition, the zoning administrator’s office shall be responsible for:
1. Issuance of all zoning permits and certificates and maintenance of records thereof;
2. Maintenance of permanent records of this ordinance, including, but not limited to, all
maps, amendments, special exceptions, variances, appeals and applications thereof;
3. Forwarding to the Planning and Zoning Commission all amendments to this ordinance that
are initially filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator.
4. Forwarding to the Board of Adjustment all applications for special exceptions, variances,
appeals or other matters which the Board of Adjustment is required to pass under this
ordinance.
5. Initiating, directing, and reviewing, from time to time, a study of the provisions of this
ordinance, and to make reports of its recommendations to the planning and zoning
commission not less than once a year.
B. ENFORCEMENT: If the zoning administrator shall find that any of provisions of this ordinance
are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall
order discontinuance of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural
changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or may take any other action
authorized by this Code to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
1.09 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. CREATION OF MEMBERSHIP: The Board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by
the City Council. Two (2) members shall reside outside of the Marengo City limits but within the
two (2) mile limit. They shall be appointed by the Iowa County Board of Supervisors. The terms of
office shall be set by resolution of the City.
B. PROCEEDINGS: The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its
affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this code. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairperson, or in his or her
absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All
meetings shall be open to the public. The presence of four (4) members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum.
15
The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member
upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately
filed in the office of the Zoning administrator and shall be a public record.
C. FINALITY OF DECISIONS: All decisions and findings of the Board on any appeal or upon any
application for a variance or special exception, after a public hearing, shall in all instances, be the
final administrative decision and shall be subject to judicial review as by law may be provided.
The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse an order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to effect any
variation in the application of this Ordinance.
D. APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: Any person or persons, or any board,
taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment may seek review by a court of record within 30 days of such decision, in the manner
provided by the laws of the State and particularly by Chapter 414, Code of Iowa and Section 1.10
of this Ordinance.
E. POWERS AND DUTIES: The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by the zoning administrator under this ordinance;
2. To hear and pass upon the applications for special exceptions and variances from the terms
provided in this Ordinance in the manner prescribed by the standards established herein;
and,
3. To hear and decide all matters referred to it upon which it is required to pass under this
Ordinance.
1.10 APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be made concerning interpretation or administration of
this Ordinance. Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board or bureau of the governing body of the city affected by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days by filing with
the Zoning Administrator and with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
paper constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time not exceeding 30 days from the date of
appeal for the hearing, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within a reasonable time, not exceeding 15 days from the date of the hearing. At
the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
D. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning
Administrator from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice
16
of appeal is filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property.
In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning
Administrator from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
1.11 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS: CONDITIONS GOVERNING APPLICATIONS; PROCEDURES
A. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide only such special exceptions as the Board is
specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this Ordinance; and to decide such questions as
are involved in determining whether special exception should be granted; and to grant special
exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this code, or to deny
special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this code.
A special exception shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
1. A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of this
Ordinance under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it
is requested.
2. Notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the public hearing by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Marengo and shall be
mailed to all property owners within a distance of two hundred feet (200') of the affected
property.
B. PUBLIC HEARING: A notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with the State of
Iowa Open Meetings Law (Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa). The public hearing shall be held and
any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney.
C. FINDINGS: The Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section
of this code described in the application to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the
special exception will not adversely affect the public interest.
D. CONDITIONS TO BE PRESCRIBED: In granting any special exception, the Board of
Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under
which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and
punishable under Section 1.18 of this Code. The Board of Adjustment shall prescribe a time limit
within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be begun or completed, or
both. Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time limit set shall void the
special exception.
E. FEES: Any person, firm, corporation, or agent, who shall file an application for a special
exception under the terms of this Ordinance, shall be charged a fee in accordance with a schedule
of fees established by resolution by the City of Marengo.
17
1.12 VARIANCES: CONDITIONS GOVERNING APPLICATION; PROCEDURES
The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this
code as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to the special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this code would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the
terms of this code shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
A. A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
1. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure,
or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in
the same district;
2. That literal interpretation of the provisions of this code would deprive the applicant of
rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this
Ordinance;
3. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege
that is denied by this code to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. No
non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and
no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered
grounds for the issuance of a variance; and,
4. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the
applicant.
B. PUBLIC HEARING: A notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with the State of
Iowa Open Meetings Law (Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa). The public hearing shall be held and
any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney.
C. FINDINGS: The Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that the reasons set forth in the
application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that
will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this code, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
D. CONDITIONS TO BE PRESCRIBED: In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violations of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is
granted shall be deemed a violation of this code and punishable under Section 1.18 of this code.
E. FEES: Any person, firm, corporation, or agent, who shall file an application for a variance under
the terms of this Ordinance, shall be charged a fee in accordance with a schedule of fees
established by resolution by the City of Marengo.
18
1.13 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
The Planning and Zoning Commission as established under the provisions of the Code of Iowa, shall
discharge the following duties under this ordinance:
A. Receive and review all applications for approval of non-listed uses and report findings and
recommendations to the City Council;
1. The planning and zoning commission may allow land-uses (permitted or special
exception) which, though not contained by name in a zoning district list of permitted or
special exceptions, are deemed to be similar in nature and clearly compatible with the
listed uses.
2. All non-listed uses which are approved by the City Council shall be added to the
appropriate use list by ordinance at the time of periodic updating and revision.
B. Receive and review all applications for changes or amendments to this Ordinance or zoning map
and report findings and recommendations to the City Council;
C. Receive from the Zoning Administrator recommendations as related to the effectiveness of this
ordinance and report conclusions to the City Council;
D. Hear and decide matters upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance.
1.14 CITY COUNCIL
The City Council of Marengo, Iowa as established under the provisions of the Code of Iowa, shall
discharge the following duties under this ordinance:
A. Receive recommendation from Planning and Zoning for amendments to this ordinance (text or
map), and determine the final disposition of any such matter;
B. Decide upon all matters which it is required to pass under this ordinance.
1.15 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
A. PROCEDURE: The regulations imposed and the districts created by this Ordinance may be
amended from time to time by the City Council, but no such amendments shall be made without
public hearing before the City Council and after a report upon the amendment from the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
If the Planning and Zoning Commission makes no report within thirty (30) days from the date of
passage of the Council's motion referring the matter to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
City Council may proceed with a public hearing without such report or recommendation. At least
seven (7) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper
having general circulation in the City of Marengo.
In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends disapproval of the change or, in
the event of a protest against such change filed with the City Council and signed by the owners of
twenty (20) percent or more either of the area of the lots included in the proposed change or of
those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed two
hundred (200) feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto, extending the depth on one
19
lot or not to exceed two hundred (200) feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such
amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of at least three-fourths of all the
members of the City Council.
B. FORM OF APPLICATION: Amendments to this Ordinance may be proposed by any
governmental body, or by any person or organization. An application for an amendment or
rezoning shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and contain the items listed below. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may waive the need for certain items in the application if
deemed appropriate.
1. The legal description and local address of the property.
2. The present zoning classification and the zoning classification requested for the property
and the existing use and proposed use of the property.
3. The names and addresses of the owners of all property within two hundred (200) feet of
the property for which the change is requested.
4. A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the present zoning classification is no
longer valid.
5. A Plat or Site Plan showing the locations, dimensions, and use of the applicant's property
and all property within two hundred (200) feet thereof, including streets, alleys, railroads,
and other physical features.
6. A Site Plan containing the following information:
(a) North arrow, scale and date of preparation of the plan..
(b) Location of existing rights-of-way, easements and infrastructure (streets, sewers,
water lines, etc.).
(c) Size and location of existing and proposed structures and drives on the subject
property, and existing structures and drives on surrounding properties.
(d) Location of floodplain, final grades and elevations of proposed buildings.
(e) Location of proposed drives, parking areas and landscaping.
(f) Platted setback lines.
(g) Name and address of landowner.
(h) Name and address of architect, landscape architect, engineer, surveyor, or other
person involved in the preparation of the plan.
20
C. MINIMUM SIZE OF AREAS: No amendment to this ordinance shall be adopted whereby the
zoning classification of an area is changed unless the area meets the following requirements as to
minimum size:
New District Classification Minimum Area Required
A-1, R-1, R-2 No restrictions.
RMH Three (3) acres. The area shall abut either an R-2, C-1 or
C-2 district.
C-1, C-2 If the area abuts an existing C-1, C-2, I-1 or I-2 district
on one side, one (1) acre; otherwise three (3).
I-1, I-2 Five (5) acres.
D. DENIAL OF AMENDMENT: No application for a zoning amendment which has been denied
by the City Council shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the order of
denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of condition found to be valid by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
E. CONDITIONS TO BE PRESCRIBED: In granting any rezoning, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
Ordinance. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under
which the variance is granted shall be deemed a violation of this code and punishable under
Section 1.18 of this code.
F. FEES: Before any action is taken upon an application as provided in this Article, the applicant
shall pay to the Zoning administrator a fee in such amount as may be established by resolution of
the City Council. The Zoning administrator shall forthwith pay over such fees to the credit of the
General Fund of the City of Marengo, Iowa. The failure to approve an application for rezoning
shall not be construed as any reason for refunding the fee to the applicant.
1.16 ADDITIONAL FEES: The Zoning administrator is directed to issue permits, under the Zoning
Ordinance, for the construction, reconstruction or alteration of residential, commercial or industrial
buildings, and to charge fees therefore in such amounts as may be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. Such fees as are required shall be credited to the General Fund of the City
of Marengo, Iowa.
1.17 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Ordinance are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants,
the most restrictive or that imposing higher standards, shall govern.
1.18 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this
code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days and may be required to pay
all costs and expenses involved in the prosecution of the violation. Alternatively, any person, firm,
or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
21
guilty of a municipal infraction pursuant to Section 364.22 Code of Iowa (1997). Each day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The owners, or tenant of any building, structure, land or part thereof, and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a violation
or fails to comply with any provision of this Code may each be charged with a misdemeanor or
municipal infraction and upon conviction suffer the penalties provided herein in the event a
misdemeanor is charged and the penalties contained in Section 364.22, Code of Iowa (1997) if a
municipal infraction is charged. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the City of
Marengo may, in addition to other remedies, institute an injunction, mandamus, or other
appropriate lawful action necessary to prevent, correct, or abate such violation.
1.19 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
A. Marengo is hereby divided into districts which shall be designated as follows and described in
Sections 1.24 through 1.32 of this Ordinance:
A-1 -- Agricultural
R-1 -- One and Two Family Dwelling Residential
R-2 -- Multiple Family Dwelling Residential
RMH -- Manufactured Home Park Residential
C-1 -- Central Business District
C-2 -- Highway Commercial
I-1 -- Light Industrial
I-2 -- Heavy Industrial
P-1 -- Public Use
B. The locations and boundaries of these districts are shown on the official zoning map which
together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this Ordinance.
C. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk, and bearing the Seal of the City under the following statement:
“This is to certify that this is the official Zoning Map referred to in Ordinance No._____of the City
of Marengo, Iowa, passed on this ___ day, ________, 1999.”
D. The Official Zoning Map, or a true copy of the same, shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk
and shall be final authority as to the correct zoning status of the land, water areas, buildings, and
other structures in the City.
1.20 CHANGES IN OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
A. If in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.15 of this Ordinance and Chapter 414.4 Code of
Iowa, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning
Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has
been approved by the City Council, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows:
22
"By official action of the City Council, the following changes were made on the Official Zoning
Map." (Indicating the changes by ordinance numbers and date of publication.)
No amendment of this Ordinance which involves a matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map
shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map.
B. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to
interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may by
Ordinance adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.
The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior
Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official
Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be
identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the Seal of the
City under the following words:
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map
adopted as part of Ordinance No._____of the City of Marengo, Iowa."
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or
any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
C. Any unauthorized change, of any kind whatsoever, in the Official Zoning Map by any person or
persons, shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and be punishable as provided in Section
1.18.
1.21 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streets, highways, or alleys
shall be construed to follow such center lines;
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following
such lot lines;
C. Boundaries indicated as following corporate limits shall be construed as following corporate
limits;
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the
main right-of-way;
E. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in
the event of change in the shore line shall be constructed to move with the actual shore line;
boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes,
or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (A) through
(E) shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be
determined by dimensions shown on the map, or in the absence of dimensions, by the scale of the
map; and
23
G. In the case of further uncertainty, and/or where physical or cultural features existing on the ground
are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not
covered by subsections (A) through (F) above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district
boundaries.
1.22 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS
A. SCOPE OF REGULATIONS: This Ordinance shall apply to all structures, land, and uses within
the corporate limits of Marengo, Iowa. No building or structure; no use of any building, structure
or land; and no lot of record or zoning lot, now or hereafter existing, shall hereafter be established,
altered, moved, divided, or maintained in any manner except in accord with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. DIVISION OF ZONING LOTS: No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two or
more zoning lots and no portion of any improved zoning lot shall be sold, unless all zoning lots
resulting from each division or sale shall conform with applicable regulations of the zoning district
in which the property is located.
C. ANNEXED TERRITORY: All territory which may be annexed to the City of Marengo after
adoption of this Ordinance shall be classified A-1 Agricultural until such classification shall have
been changed by amendment in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. This section
shall not apply to property located in the unincorporated area of Iowa County which is currently
zoned by provisions of this Ordinance.
D. VACATED STREETS: Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official
action of the Council the district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be
automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall
then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulation of the extended districts.
1.23 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
A. PERMITTED USES: No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any other use other than a
use permitted hereinafter in the zoning district in which such building or tract of land shall be
located, with the following exceptions:
1. Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this ordinance.
2. Special exceptions, allowed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, Section
1.11. Special exceptions are subject to the issuance of special exception permits in
accordance with the provisions of Section 1.11.
B. NONCONFORMING USES: Uses already established on the effective date of this ordinance and
rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof, shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. If within the districts established by this Section or amendments that may later be adopted
there exist lots, structures, and use of land and structures which were lawful before this
code was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under
the terms of this code or future amendments, it is the intent of this code to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
Such uses are declared by this code to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts
involved.
24
2. It is further the intent of the code that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures, signs or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
3. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Section shall be deemed to require a change in
the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction
was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code and
upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual
construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that the demolition or
removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding,
such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work
shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
C. NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND: Where, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this code, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the
terms of this code as enacted and amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a
greater use of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this code.
2. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the
lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
code.
3. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one
hundred eighty days (180), any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this Code for the district in which such land is located.
D. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES: Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this code that could not be built under the terms of this code by reason
of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its
location on the lot, such structure may be so continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
1. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity.
2. Any nonconforming structure which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, flood,
explosion, or act of God to the extent of less than 60 percent of the structure’s assessed
value may be restored to the same degree of nonconformity or less.
3. Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of 60 percent of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this code. The determination of the replacement cost
must be determined by a licensed property appraiser.
E. NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES: If a lawful use of a structure or of structure
and premises in combination exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code
25
that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this code, the lawful use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this code in the district in which
it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally
altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in
which it is located;
2. A nonconforming use may be converted only to a conforming use. Once a use is converted
to a conforming use, it shall not be converted back to a nonconforming use.
3. Any structure or structure and land in combination in or on which a nonconforming use
is superseded by a conforming use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which such structure is located and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be
resumed;
4. When a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination, is
discontinued or abandoned for twelve (12) consecutive months, the structure
thereafter shall not be used except in conformance with regulations of the district in which
it is located;
5. Where nonconforming use status applied to a structure and land in combination, removal
or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-conforming status of the land.
F. REPAIRS OR MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES: Nothing in this
code shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening of or restoring to a safe condition of any
building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
G. SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMITTED: Any use for which a special exception is permitted as
provided in this code shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be
deemed a conforming use in such district.
H. YARD REQUIREMENTS: All required yards shall meet the following requirements and shall be
consistent with public safety and health.
1. Where an industrial or commercial district adjoins a residential district, transitional yards
shall be provided in accordance with the regulations indicated in the respective zoning
district. Transitional yards shall be unobstructed, except as permitted in Section 1.23 H (2)
in this Ordinance.
2. Permitted obstructions and detached accessory structures shall not, in the aggregate,
occupy more than 50 percent of any required yard.
I. ACCESSORY BUILDING REQUIREMENTS: Detached accessory buildings or structures
shall be limited to twenty (20) feet in height. Accessory buildings may be erected as part of the
principal building, or may be connected thereto by a breeze-way or similar structure, provided all
yard requirements for a principal building are complied with. No accessory building shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced.
No detached accessory building shall be placed in front of the principal building on the zoning lot.
An accessory building or structure shall be erected only in the rear yard and it shall occupy less
26
than thirty percent (30 %) of the required rear yard except for private garage. Private garages must
meet minimum principal structure front and side yard requirements.
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated
with a permitted use or special exception shall be permitted, provided they are operated and
maintained under the sames ownership, do not include structures or structural features inconsistant
with the uses to which they are accessory and are located on the same lot.
J. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS: Refer to the comprehensive flood hazard and damage
prevention regulations contained in the Marengo Floodplain Ordinance in the City Code.
K. SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND WATER SUPPLY REGULATIONS: In all districts where a
proposed building, structure or use will involve the use of sewage facilities, and public sewer
and/or water is not available, the sewage disposal system and domestic water supply shall comply
with all requirements and standards of the Iowa County Department of Health.
1. In any district in which residences are permitted and where neither public water supply nor
public sanitary sewer is available, the lot area and frontage requirements shall be as
follows, or the minimum required for the particular district, whichever is greater:
(a) Lot area: 20,000 square feet
Lot width at building line: 100 feet
2. In any district in which residences are permitted and only a public water supply system is
available (no public sanitary sewer), the lot area and frontage requirements shall be as
follows, or the minimum required for the particular district, whichever is greater:
(a) Lot area: 15,000 square feet
Lot width at building line: 100 feet
27
1.24 A-1 -- AGRICULTURAL
A-1 Agricultural District zoning is intended to provide areas of managed growth in which agricultural and
other non-urban uses of land may continue until such time as the City is able to provide services and urban
development can occur. Upon provision of City services, the City or the property owner may initiate
rezoning to uses consistent with adjacent land uses.
A. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Agriculture, agricultural activities and grazing of livestock.
2. Churches, temples and similar places of worship; also cemeteries and mausoleums.
3. Greenhouses and plant nurseries.
4. Kennels for raising, breeding and boarding of all dogs or other small animals.
5. Parks, forests and wildlife preserves.
6. Private riding stables.
7. Public and parochial schools (elementary and secondary).
8. Single-family dwellings.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES: Accessory uses and buildings
incidental to and on the same lot as the principal use, as follows:
1. Private garage or carport.
2. Farm buildings incidental to agricultural uses.
3. Home occupations as permitted in Section 1.06 S2.
4. Temporary buildings for use incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
5. Roadside stands for the sale of products grown on the premises.
C. SPECIAL USES: The following special exceptions are permitted in the A-1 District subject to
Section 1.11 of this Ordinance.
1. Public Utilities and service uses; community buildings.
2. Hospitals; philanthropic; educational and charitable institutions.
3. Airports and heliports which meet or exceed the most current FAA Standards and
Regulations.
4. Mining and extraction of raw materials, including sand and gravel pits.
28
D. MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH
minimum minimum
lot area lot width
Single-family dwelling (non-farm) 20,000 sq. ft. 100 feet
Churches, temples and similar places of worship; 1 acre 150 feet
also cemeteries and mausoleums
Nurseries and greenhouses 1 acre 200 feet
Public and parochial schools (elementary and secondary) 1 acre 200 feet
Parks, forests and wildlife preserves 1 acre 250 feet
Private riding stables; kennels 1 acre 250 feet
Agriculture, agricultural activities and grazing of livestock 5 acres 250 feet
Special exceptions: As specified by the Board of Adjustment
E. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
Front Total Minimum Rear
Yard Side Yard One Side Yard
Single-family dwelling (1 and 1 1/2 stories) 50 feet 30 feet 10 feet 50 feet
Single-family dwelling (2 and 2 1/2 stories) 50 feet 35 feet 15 feet 50 feet
Agriculture, agricultural activities No requirements
and grazing of livestock
Nurseries and Greenhouses All Structures to be set back not less than 50 feet from
lot lines
Parks, forests and wildlife preserves All Structures to be set back not less than 50 feet from
lot lines
Private riding stables All Structures to be set back not less than 50 feet from
lot lines
Public and parochial schools All Structures to be set back not less than 50 feet from
(elementary and secondary) lot lines
Kennels All Structures to be set back not less than 200 feet from
lot lines
Special exceptions: As specified by the Board of Adjustment
F. MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND BULK LIMITATIONS: No principal use structure shall exceed 35
feet in height or 3 stories; no accessory use structure shall exceed 20 feet in height.
29
G. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING LOADING SPACE: Off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required in Section 1.34.
H. SIGN REGULATIONS: The following are allowable uses in the A-1 District:
1. Church bulletin boards.
2. One board or sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area referring to the construction,
lease, hire, or sale of a building, premises or lots; which sign shall refer to property on
which the sign is located, and shall be removed as soon as the premises are sold or leased
or construction is completed.
3. Signs, not exceeding 10 square feet in area, identifying the premises or indicating the
product grown or material or equipment used on the premises.
30
1.25 R-1 -- ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING RESIDENTIAL
To establish and preserve residential neighborhoods as desired by large numbers of people, free from other
uses except those which are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district.
A. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
1. One and two family dwellings.
2. Agriculture uses, provided no offensive odors or dust is created and provided further, that
no retail sales or the raising and keeping of livestock or poultry shall be permitted on the
premises.
3. Churches, temples and similar places of worship; also cemeteries and mausoleums.
4. Public and parochial schools (elementary and secondary).
5. Recreational and social facilities, as follows:
(a) Golf courses
(b) Public parks, recreation areas and playgrounds.
(d) Swimming pools, noncommercial.
(e) Country Clubs; tennis clubs and courts, noncommercial.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES: Accessory uses and buildings
incidental to and on the same lot as the principal use, as follows:
1. Private garage or carport.
2. Farm buildings incidental to agricultural uses.
3. Home occupations as permitted in Section 1.06 S2.
4. Temporary buildings for use incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
5. Day nurseries and nursery schools.
6. Temporary real estate tract offices - for the purposes of conducting the sale of lots of the
tract upon which such tract office is located, which use shall terminate upon completion of
the project.
C. SPECIAL USES: The following special exceptions are permitted in the R-1 District, subject to
provisions of Section 1.11 of this Ordinance.
1. Public Utilities and service uses; community buildings.
2. Hospitals; philanthropic; educational and charitable institutions.
31
D. MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH
minimum minimum
lot area lot width
One-family dwelling 8,000 sq. ft. 70 feet
Two-family dwelling 10,000 sq. ft. 80 feet
Churches, temples and similar places of worship; 10,000 sq. ft. 100 feet
also cemeteries and mausoleums
Public and parochial schools (elementary and secondary) 1 acre 200 feet
Recreational and social buildings 1 acre 200 feet
Agriculture uses 5 acres 250 feet
Special exceptions: As specified by the Board of Adjustment
E. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
Front Interior Minimum Rear
Yard Side Yard One Side Yard
One and two family dwelling 25 feet 15 feet 5 feet 35 feet
(1 and 1 1/2 stories)
One and two family dwelling 25 feet 20 feet 10 feet 35 feet
(2 and 2 1/2 stories)
Agriculture uses No requirements
Churches; schools; recreational All Structures to be set back not less than 35 feet from
and social buildings lot lines
Special exceptions: As specified by the Board of Adjustment
F. MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND BULK LIMITATIONS: No principal use building or structure
shall exceed 3 stories or 35 feet; no accessory use structure shall exceed 20 feet.
G. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE: Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required in Section 1.34 of this Ordinance.
H. SIGN REGULATIONS: The following are allowable uses in the R-1 District:
1. Church bulletin boards.
2. One board or sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area referring to the construction,
lease, hire, or sale of a building, premises or lots; which sign shall refer to property on
which the sign is located, and shall be removed as soon as the premises are sold or leased
or construction is completed.
32
1.26 R-2 -- MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING RESIDENTIAL
The R-2 Multiple Family Dwelling Residential District is intended to establish and preserve areas
containing single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings. It is intended to provide a wide range
of housing types while maintaining a residential character designed to exclude those uses which are not
compatible with residential use.
A. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Any use permitted in R-1.
2. Multiple-family dwellings, including row dwellings and condominium dwellings.
3. Boarding or rooming houses.
4. Religious, educational, or philanthropic institutions.
5. Hospitals, nursing, convalescent and retirement homes.
8. Private clubs, lodges, or veterans organizations, excepting those holding a beer permit or
liquor license.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
1. All accessory uses and structures permitted and described under R-1.
C. SPECIAL USES: The following special exceptions are permitted in the R-2 District, subject to
provisions of Section 1.11 of this Ordinance.
1. Public Utilities and service uses.
2. Community building.
D. MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH
minimum minimum
lot area lot width
One-family dwellings 6,500 sq. ft. 50 feet
Two-family dwellings 7,500 sq. ft. 60 feet
Multiple-family dwellings 10,000 sq. ft. 80 feet
Row housing 2,500 sq. ft. 20 feet
(per dwelling unit)
Boarding and rooming houses 10,000 sq. ft. 100 feet
Churches, temples and similar places of worship; 10,000 sq. ft. 100 feet
also cemeteries and mausoleums
Private clubs, lodges, or veterans organizations 10,000 sq. ft. 100 feet
33
Hospitals, nursing, convalescent and retirement homes 1 acre 200 feet
Public and parochial schools (elementary and secondary) 1 acre 200 feet
Recreational and social buildings 1 acre 200 feet
Agriculture uses 5 acres 250 feet
Special exceptions: As specified by the Board of Adjustment
E. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
Front Interior Minimum Rear
Yard Side Yard One Side Yard
All dwellings (1 and 1 1/2 stories) 25 feet 15 feet 5 feet 40 feet
All dwellings (2 and 2 1/2 stories) 25 feet 17 feet 8 feet 40 feet
All dwellings (3 stories or up to 45 feet) 25 feet 25 feet 10 feet 40 feet
Agriculture No requirements
Churches; schools; recreational All Structures to be set back not less than 35 feet from
and social buildings lot lines
Hospitals, nursing, convalescent All Structures to be set back not less than 35 feet from
and retirement homes lot lines
Boarding and rooming houses All Structures to be set back not less than 35 feet from
lot lines
Private clubs, lodges, or veterans All Structures to be set back not less than 35 feet from
organizations lot lines
Special exceptions: As specified by the Board of Adjustment
F. MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND BULK LIMITATIONS: No principal use building or structure
shall exceed 45 feet in height and no accessory use structure shall exceed 20 feet.
G. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE: Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required in Section 1.34 of this Ordinance.
34
H. SIGN REGULATIONS: The following are allowable uses in the R-2 District:
1. Church bulletin boards.
2. One board or sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area referring to the construction,
lease, hire, or sale of a building, premises or lots; which sign shall refer to property on
which the sign is located, and shall be removed as soon as the premises are sold or leased
or construction is completed.
35
1.27 RMH -- RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME
The RMH Residential Manufactured Home District is intended to accommodate manufactured home parks
in those areas of the community where such a use will be compatible with existing and projected
development. This district will generally be located in outlying areas of the city and should be well served
by adequate sewers, water service, streets, police and fire protection, and similar public facilities and
services.
A. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Any use permitted in R-1.
2. Manufactured home parks, in accordance with this Ordinance and applicable State
statutes.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Any use incidental to the primary use of the manufactured home park such as a direct
service facility building, park management building, maintenance building, community
building, storm shelter, or uses of a similar nature.
2. Accessory uses permitted in the R-1 District.
C. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
1. For any permitted use excepting a manufactured home park, the minimum requirement
shall be set out for the R-1 District.
2. All manufactured homes must be placed within a manufactured home park. In addition, the
following requirements must be met:
(a) The minimum total manufactured home park area shall be three (3) acres;
(b) Each yard abutting on a public street shall be considered a front yard and shall be
a minimum of fifty (50) feet;
(c) All other yards, whether side or rear, shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet when
adjacent to and other “R” District and thirty (30) feet when adjacent to an “A”,
“C”, or “I” District;
(d) The minimum lot space for each manufactured home shall be 4,000 square feet
and shall measure at least fifty (50) by eighty (80) feet;
(e) Manufactured homes shall be located on each space so that there will be at least a
twenty (20) foot clearance between each manufactured home, a five (5) foot open
space between the manufactured home including any permanently enclosed
appendage, and any driveway or sidewalk; and a ten (10) foot open space at the
rear of the manufactured home.
D. PLAN REQUIRED: Each petition for a change to the RMH zoning classification submitted to the
City Council shall be accompanied by a manufactured home park plan. Said plan shall show each
manufactured home space, the water, electrical and sewer lines, the location of fire hydrants,
36
service buildings, driveways, sidewalks, recreation areas, required yards, parking facilities,
lighting and landscaping.
If public water and sanitary sewerage facilities are not available to the manufactured home park
site, private water and sewerage facilities shall be provided in accordance with the County
Environmental Department and Iowa Department of Natural Resources and subject to approval by
the City Council. The plan shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
City Council, who may approve or disapprove said plan or require such changes thereto, as are
deemed necessary to effectuate the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
E. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE: Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required in Section 1.34 of this Ordinance.
F. SIGN REGULATIONS: The following are allowable uses in the R-3 District:
1. Church bulletin boards.
2. One board or sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area referring to the construction,
lease, hire, or sale of a building, premises or lots; which sign shall refer to property on
which the sign is located, and shall be removed as soon as the premises are sold or leased
or construction is completed.
3. One indirectly lighted sign may be erected facing each public street on which the mobile
home park fronts, showing the name of the mobile home park and other information
pertinent thereto; provided such sign shall not have an area of more than twenty (20)
square feet.
37
1.28 C-1 -- CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT COMMERCIAL
To establish and preserve a central business district convenient and attractive for a wide range of retail
uses and business, government and professional offices and places of amusement in a setting conducive to
and safe for a high volume of pedestrian traffic.
A. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Dwelling units above a store or shop on or above the second floor, or are located behind
another permitted use and entry to the dwelling unit is from the back of the building.
2. Commercial amusements.
3. Business offices, professional offices, studios.
4. Personal service and repair shops.
5. Financial institutions.
6. Retail business.
7. Restaurants and taverns.
8. Wholesale display and sales rooms and offices.
9. Medical and dental clinics and drugstores.
10. Private clubs and lodges.
11. Business and vocational schools.
12. Public utilities.
13. Printing, publishing and engraving.
14. Bakery and catering service.
15. Temples, Churches, and Public Buildings
16. Laundries and dry cleaning establishments.
17. Theaters.
18. Hotels and motels.
19. Hardware stores.
20. Other commercial uses determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be of the
same general character as the uses permitted in Section 1.28 A, and found not to be
obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive by reason of the potential emission or transmission of
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious matter or glare or heat.
38
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES: Accessory uses and buildings
incidental to and on the same lot as the principal use.
C. MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH: In the C-1 district, there shall be provided not less
than 3,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit on a lot.
D. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS: In the C-1 district, each structure shall be set back not
more than fifteen (15) feet from the front lot line.
E. TRANSITIONAL YARD REQUIREMENTS
1. Where a C-1 side lot coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residence district,
a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such yard shall be equal in dimension to
the minimum side yard which would be required under this Ordinance for a residential use
on the adjacent residential lot.
2. Where a C-1 rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent residence district, a
yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard shall be equal in dimension to
the minimum side yard which would be required under this Ordinance for a residential use
on the adjacent residential lot.
3. Where the extension of a C-1 front or side lot line coincides with a front lot line of an
adjacent residence district, a yard equal in depth to the minimum front yard required by
this Ordinance on such adjacent residential lot shall be provided along such front or side
lot lines.
F. MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND BULK LIMITATIONS: Maximum principal use building height
may not exceed 50 feet or 4 stories. No accessory use structure shall exceed 20 feet.
G. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE: Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section 1.34 of this Ordinance.
H. SIGN REGULATIONS: The following are allowable uses in the C-1 District:
1. Church bulletin boards.
2. Exterior signs located on the street frontages of principal buildings referring only to a use
or uses located within such building, and attached or integral thereto, provided that:
(a) Such signs shall not have an aggregate surface area in excess of twenty (20)
percent of the total surface area of the building elevation to which they are
attached;
(b) Signs which project out from the building more than eighteen (18) inches must be
at least twelve (12) feet above grade and may only project a maximum of six (6)
feet.
(c) No sign shall project more than four (4) feet above the roof line or parapet where
one exists.
39
3. One free standing or post sign referring only to a use or uses conducted on the premises
may be erected in any yard abutting a public street, provided:
(a) That such sign shall not have a surface area in excess of one hundred (100) square
feet on any one side and not more than two sides of said sign shall be used for
advertising purposes.
(b) The bottom of the surface area of such sign shall not be less than twelve (12) feet
above ground surface upon which it is erected.
40
1.29 C-2 -- HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
To establish and preserve general commercial areas outside of the Central Business District. The uses are
intended to accommodate both the local retail consumer and the automobile traveling public.
A. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Any use permitted in the C-1 District.
2. Motels and hotels.
3. Restaurants.
4. Motor vehicle sales, service and repair, service stations, and car washes (note: repair
implies mechanical and electrical repairs only).
5. Farm implement displays and sales, service and repair.
6. Mobile home sales and building materials dealers.
7. Bowling alleys, skating rinks, dance halls, theaters, golf driving ranges and miniature golf.
8. Supermarkets and retail business.
9. Financial institutions.
10. Fruit, vegetable and produce stands.
11. Shopping centers or malls.
12. Convenience stores.
13. Other commercial uses determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be of the
same general character as the uses permitted in Section 1.29 A, and found not to be
obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive by reason of the potential emission or transmission of
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious matter or glare or heat.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES: Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same
lot as the principal use.
C. SPECIAL USES: The following special exceptions are permitted in the C-2 District, subject to
provisions of Section 1.11 of this Ordinance:
1. Public utilities, and service uses.
2. Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, and kennels.
3. Night clubs and taverns
4. Feed mills and grain elevators.
5. Amusement parks, carnivals, circuses, fairs, road shows.
41
6. Automobile body repair shops.
7. Radio, Cellular or television broadcasting tower or station.
D. MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH: Same as required in C-1 District.
E. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS: In the C-2 district, each structure shall be set back not
less than 25 feet from each lot line. However, each veterinary clinic, animal hospital, and kennel
exercising runway must be set back no less than two hundred (200) feet from any residential
district boundary.
F. TRANSITIONAL YARD REQUIREMENTS
1. Where a C-2 side lot coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residence district,
a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such yard shall be no less than twenty
five (25) feet.
2. Where a C-2 rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent residence district, a
yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard shall be no less than twenty five
(25) feet.
3. Where the extension of a C-2 front or side lot line coincides with a front lot line of an
adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided. Such yard shall be no less than twenty
five (25) feet.
G. OPEN SPACE REQUIRED: The total land area devoted to open space and landscaping shall not
be less than ten (10) percent of the gross land area included in the building lot. Such open space
shall be maintained as grassed and landscaped area and shall not include access drives, parking
areas, structures or buildings, except ornamental structures included as part of the landscaping
theme.
H. MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND BULK LIMITATIONS: No principal use building or structure
shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet. No accessory use structure shall exceed 20 feet.
I. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE: Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section 1.34 of this Ordinance.
J. SIGN REGULATIONS
1. Church bulletin boards.
2. Exterior signs located on the street frontages of principal buildings referring only to a use
or uses located within such building, and attached or integral thereto, provided that:
(a) Such signs shall not have an aggregate surface area in excess of twenty (20)
percent of the total surface area of the building elevation to which they are
attached;
(b) Signs which project out from the building more than eighteen (18) inches must be
at least twelve (12) feet above grade and may only project a maximum of six (6)
feet.
42
(c) No sign shall project more than four (4) feet above the roof line or parapet where
one exists.
3. One free standing or post sign referring only to a use or uses conducted on the premises
may be erected in any yard abutting a public street, provided:
(a) That such sign shall not have a surface area in excess of two hundred (200) square
feet on any one side and not more than two sides of said sign shall be used for
advertising purposes.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall prohibit the erection of any sign that interferes
with visibility for either vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
4. Billboards and outdoor advertising signs, subject to the following provisions:
(a) All yard and height requirements for a permitted principal structure shall be
complied with; provided however, that when a billboard is erected between two
buildings that are within one hundred (100) feet of the structure, no part of said
billboard shall be located closer to any street right-of-way line than a line drawn
from the nearest front corner of the two buildings.
(b) The surface area on any one side shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet
in area. Double faced signs are permitted. If a single faced sign is erected, the back
shall be suitably painted or otherwise covered to present a neat and clean
appearance.
(c) The ground area around the billboard shall be kept clean and all brush and tall
grass shall be cleared away.
(d) Billboards attached to the building shall not project above the roof line of the
building or be located on the roof of a building.
(e) Billboards located on the same street facing the same traffic flow shall not be
located closer than six hundred (600) feet. Each side of a double faced sign shall
be considered as facing traffic flowing in the opposite direction.
43
1.30 I-1 -- LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
To establish and preserve areas for industrial and related uses of such a nature that they do not create
serious problems of compatibility with other kinds of land uses, and to make provision for certain kinds of
commercial uses which are necessary to service the immediate needs of people in these areas.
A. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Any use permitted in the C-2 District, except no new residential uses shall be permitted.
2. Contractor's, architect’s and engineer’s offices, shops and storage yards.
3. Bottling works.
4. Dairy processing facility.
5. Truck or bus garage and repair shop.
6. Farm implement sales, service, repair and assembly.
7. Grain elevator and feed mill.
8. Building material sales and storage.
9. Railroads.
10. Wholesaling and warehousing but not including the bulk storage of liquid fertilizers or
flammable liquids.
11. Freight terminal.
12. Automobile body repair and paint shop.
13. Glass production and sales.
14. Frozen food lockers.
15. Welding and blacksmith shop.
16. Personnel storage lockers and warehouses.
17. High technology wholesaling and manufacturing to include electronics, medical and
biogenetics, computers and soft-ware research, and related activities.
18. Public utility and service uses.
19. Light machinery production and manufacturing.
20. General manufacturing and production.
21. Cartage and express facilities.
44
22. Living quarters for watchmen and their families, located on the premises where they are
employed in such capacity.
23. Laboratories for research and testing.
24. Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of
such construction.
25. Animal pound or kennel.
26. Concrete mixing, concrete products manufacturing, ready-mix plants.
27. Lumber yards.
28. Other manufacturing, processing, storage, or commercial uses determined by the Planning
and Zoning Commission to be of the same general character as the uses permitted in
Section 1.30 A, and found not to be obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive by reason of the
potential emission or transmission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious
matter or glare or heat.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES: Accessory uses and buildings
incidental to and on the same lot as the principal use.
C. SPECIAL USES: The following special exceptions are permitted in the I-1 District, subject to
provisions of Section 1.11 of this Ordinance:
1. Radio, Cellular or television broadcasting tower or station.
2. Stock yards and/or sales barns and yards.
3. Airports and heliports.
4. Chemical processing and production.
5. Recreation buildings and community centers.
6. Sewage treatment plants, municipal.
7. Stadiums, auditoriums, and arenas (open or enclosed).
8. Other manufacturing, processing, storage, or commercial uses determined by the Board of
Adjustment to be of the same general character as the uses permitted in Section 1.30 A,
and found not to be obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive by reason of the potential
emission or transmission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious matter
or glare or heat.
D. REQUIRED CONDITIONS: No use shall be permitted to be established or maintained which by reason
of its nature or manner of operation is or may become hazardous, noxious, or offensive owing to
the emission of dust, odor, smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibrations, refuse matter or watercarried
waste.
E. MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH: No minimum requirements.
45
F. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
Front Side Rear
Yard Yard Yard
All uses in I-1 district 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
G. TRANSITIONAL YARD REQUIREMENTS
1. Where a I-1 side or rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent
Residence or Commercial District, a yard shall be provided along such side or rear lot line
not less than 25 feet in depth and shall contain landscaping and planting.
2. Where a lot within the I-1 District fronts on a street which forms the boundary line
between the I-1 District and a Residence or Commercial District, then such lot shall
provide a front yard of not less than 25 feet in depth.
H. OPEN SPACE REQUIRED: The total land area devoted to open space and landscaping shall not
be less than ten (10) percent of the gross land area included in the building lot. Such open space
shall be maintained as grassed and landscaped area and shall not include access drives, parking
areas, structures or buildings, except ornamental structures included as part of the landscaping
theme.
I. MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND BULK LIMITATIONS: Maximum principal use building height
may not exceed 75 feet. No accessory use structure shall exceed 20 feet.
J. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE: Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section 1.34 of this Ordinance.
K. SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs permitted in and limited by the C-2 District regulations.
46
1.31 I-2 -- HEAVY INDUSTRIAL
To establish and preserve areas for necessary industrial and related uses of such a nature that they
require isolation from many other kinds of land uses, and to make provision for commercial uses which
are necessary to service the immediate needs of people in their areas.
A. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Stone quarries
2. Bulk storage of petroleum products and commercial fertilizers.
3. Asbestos, brick and clay products manufacture.
4. Asphalt plants.
5. Flour, feed and grain milling storage.
6. Structural iron and steel fabrication.
7. Heavy machinery manufacture.
8. Paint and varnish manufacture.
9. All other uses permitted under I-1.
10. Other manufacturing, processing, storage, or commercial uses determined by the Planning
and Zoning Commission to be of the same general character as the uses permitted in
Section 1.31 A, and found not to be obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive by reason of the
potential emission or transmission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious
matter or glare or heat.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES: Accessory uses and buildings
incidental to and on the same lot as the principal use.
C. SPECIAL USES: The following special exceptions are permitted in the I-2 District, subject to
provisions of Section 1.11 of this Ordinance:
1. Radio and television broadcasting and microwave towers or stations.
3. Materials recycling.
4. Fertilizer manufacture.
5. Junk yards, including automobile wrecking and/or salvage.
6. Stock yards, slaughter houses, poultry processing and packaging, and/or sale barns and
yards.
7. Explosive manufacture or storage.
47
8. Other manufacturing, processing, storage, or commercial uses determined by the Board of
Adjustment to be of the same general character as the uses permitted in Section 1.32 A,
and found not to be obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive by reason of the potential
emission or transmission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious matter
or glare or heat.
D. REQUIRED CONDITIONS: The best practical means know for the disposal of refuse matter or
water-carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, noise, vibration, smoke,
gas, or similar nuisance, shall be employed.
E. MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH: No minimum requirements.
F. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
Front Side Rear
Yard Yard Yard
All uses in I-2 district 50 feet 25 feet 40 feet*
* Except that where a railroad right-of-way lies immediately adjacent to the rear of the lot, the rear yard
requirement need not apply.
G. TRANSITIONAL YARD REQUIREMENTS
1. Where a I-2 side or rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent
Residence District, a yard shall be provided along such side or rear lot line
not less than 200 feet in depth and shall contain landscaping and planting.
2. Where a lot within the I-1 District fronts on a street which forms the boundary line
between the I-1 District and a Residence or Commercial District, then such lot shall
provide a front yard of not less than 50 feet in depth.
H. OPEN SPACE REQUIRED: The total land area devoted to open space and landscaping shall not
be less than ten (10) percent of the gross land area included in the building lot. Such open space
shall be maintained as grassed and landscaped area and shall not include access drives, parking
areas, structures or buildings, except ornamental structures included as part of the landscaping
theme.
I. MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND BULK LIMITATIONS: Maximum principal use building height
may not exceed 80 feet. No accessory use structure shall exceed 20 feet.
J. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE: Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section 1.34 of this Ordinance.
K. SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs permitted in and limited by the C-2 District regulations.
48
1.32 P-1 -- PUBLIC USE
It is intended that the Public Use (P-1) district provide reference on the zoning map to public uses of land.
Thus land owned by the United States Federal Government, the State of Iowa, Iowa County, City of
Marengo, or the Local School District, as well as any park or playground, may be designated Public Use.
A. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Use of land, buildings or structures of the aforementioned federal and state governments
or political subdivisions thereof.
2. Parks and playgrounds.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES: Accessory uses and buildings
incidental to and on the same lot as the principal use.
C. SPECIAL USES: None.
D. MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WITH: None.
E. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS: None.
F. MAXIMUM HEIGHT: No principal use structure shall exceed 3 stories or 40 feet in height. No
accessory use structure shall exceed 20 feet.
G. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE: Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section 1.34 of this Ordinance.
H. SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs shall be regulated by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
49
1.33 FENCE, WALL AND HEDGE REGULATIONS: Fences, walls and hedges shall meet the following
requirements:
A. HEIGHT: Fences, walls and hedges may be erected, maintained, or grown within a lot line on
residentially-zoned property or adjacent thereto to a height not exceeding five (6) feet above the
ground level which is located in a required side yard, a height not exceeding four (4) feet above the
ground level which is located in a required front yard, and a height not exceeding six (6) feet
above the ground level which is located in a required rear yard.
Citizens with a request for fence heights exceeding six (6) feet shall apply to the Board of
Adjustment for a permit.
Where such lot line is adjacent to nonresidentially-zoned property, there shall be an seven (7) foot
limit on the height of a fence or wall.
B. CORNER LOT REQUIREMENTS: On a corner lot in any residential district, no fence, wall,
hedge or other planting, signs or structure that will obstruct vision between a height of two and
one-half (2 1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting street shall be
erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed, the right-of-way lines as such
corner and a straight line joining said right-of-way lines at points which are twenty-five (25) feet
distant from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, and measured along the right-of-way lines.
C. SWIMMING POOL REQUIREMENTS: Fenced enclosures shall be provided for all outdoor
swimming pools with a depth of eighteen (18) inches or more and shall be subject to the following
requirements:
1. An outdoor swimming pool, the edge of which is less than four feet (4’) above grade, shall
be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four feet (4’) in height. The fence shall be
so constructed as not to allow a five inch (5”) diameter sphere to pass through the fence. A
principal or an accessory building may be used as a part of such enclosure.
2. All gates or doors opening through an enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and
self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in
actual use, except the door of any building which forms a part of the enclosure need not be
so equipped.
D. DOG RUNS: Dog runs shall be enclosed by a fence of sufficient height and construction to
contain the dog at all times.
E. BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCE REQUIREMENTS: Barbed wire and electric
fences shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Barbed wire fences shall not be allowed in residential or commercial zones areas.
2. Barbed wire and electric fences shall be prohibited within five (5) feet of a public
sidewalk or within four (4) feet of a street right-of-way where a public sidewalk does not
exist.
3. Except for the enclosure of livestock operations in agricultural districts, electric fences
shall not be permitted in any district.
50
1.34 PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
A. LOADING SPACES REQUIRED: In any district, in connection with every building or part
thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area over 10,000 square feet or more, which is to be
occupied by a commercial or industrial use as described in the respective zoning districts, there
shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building, at least one (1) off-street
loading space plus one (1) additional such loading space for each 20,000 square feet or major
fraction thereof of gross floor area , so used , in excess of 10,000 square feet. In addition, each
loading space shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Each loading space shall not be less than twelve (12) feet in width and forty (40) feet in
length.
2. Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or open space, except where
adjoining an “R” district, in which case the transitional yard requirements shall prevail.
B. OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED: In all districts, except C-1, in connection with every
industrial, commercial, residential, recreational or institutional uses, space for parking and storage
of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule. Off-street parking
facilities shall be primarily for the parking of private automobiles of occupants, patrons or
employees of the principal use served.
1. Automobile sales and service garages: fifty (50%) percent of gross floor area.
2. Banks, business and professional offices: fifty (50%) percent of gross floor area, but in no
case less than five (5) spaces.
3. Bowling alleys: five (5) spaces for each lane.
4. Churches and schools: one (1) space for every eighty (80) square feet of principal
auditorium, including balcony, if any. Where no auditorium is involved, one (1) space for
each two (2) staff members.
5. Dance and assembly halls: two hundred (200%) percent of floor area used for dancing or
assembly.
6. Dwellings: two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
7. Funeral homes: one (1) space for each five (5) seats in the principal auditorium.
8. Furniture and appliance stores: fifty (50%) percent of gross floor area.
9. Hospitals: one (1) space for each four (4) beds, plus one (1) space for each three (3)
employees, plus one (1) space for each two (2) staff doctors.
10. Hotels, motels, lodging houses: one (1) space for each bedroom.
11. Manufacturing plants: one (1) space for each three (3) employees on the maximum
working shift, but in no case less than one (1) space for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
51
12. Nursing and retirement homes: one (1) space per eight (8) beds, plus one (1) space per
three (3) employees, plus one (1) space for each resident staff member.
13. Restaurants, taverns and night clubs: two hundred (200%) percent of gross floor area.
14. Retail stores, shops, super markets: over 2,000 square feet floor area – two hundred fifty
(250%) percent of gross floor area.
15. Retail stores, shops, super markets: under 2,000 square feet floor area – one hundred
(100%) percent of gross floor area.
16. Theaters and assembly halls with fixed seats: one (1) space for each five (5) seats.
17. Wholesale establishments and warehouses: one (1) space for each two (2) employees, but
in no case less than one (1) space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
18. In case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not specifically
mentioned herein, the provisions of a use which is so mentioned and to which said use is
similar, shall apply.
C. ACCESS DRIVES: Where a parking lot does not abut on a public or private street, alley or
Easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive not less than ten (10) feet in width in
the case of a Dwelling, and not less than sixteen (16) feet in width in all other cases leading to the
loading or unloading spaces and parking areas required hereunder in such manner as to secure the
most appropriate development of the property in question; provided, however, such access drive
shall not be located in any residential district, except where serving a permitted use.
D. OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS: Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public
or private parking area, including a commercial parking lot, shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
1. No part of any parking space shall be closer than five (5) feet to any established street
right-of-way line. In case the parking lot adjoins an “R” district, it shall be subject to the
respective transitional yard requirements.
2. All required off-street parking areas for more than two (2) vehicles shall be surfaced with
an asphaltic or portland cement pavement or similar surface, so as to provide a durable and
dustless surface. They shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water
accumulation within the area and shall be arranged and marked to provide for safe and
orderly loading and unloading and parking and storage of vehicles.
3. Lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be arranged to reflect the light
away from the adjoining premises in any “R” district.
E. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS: Off-street parking areas in residential districts
shall be provided on the same lot with the principal use.
1.35 SEVERABILITY: This Ordinance and the various parts, sections, subsections, and clauses thereof, are
hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or clause is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected
thereby. If any part, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid as applied to a particular property, building, or other structure, it is hereby provided that the
52
application of such portion of the Ordinance to other property, buildings, or structures shall not be affected
thereby. Whenever any condition or limitation is included in an order authorizing any special exception
permit, variance, grading permit, zoning compliance permit, certificate of occupancy, site plan approval,
or designation of nonconformance, it shall be conclusively presumed that the authorizing officer or body
considered such condition or limitation necessary to carry out the spirit and purpose of this Ordinance or
the requirement of some provision hereof, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and that the
officer or Board would not have granted the authorization to which the condition or limitation pertains
except in the belief that the condition or limitation was lawful.
1.36 REPEAL: The existing zoning regulations of the City of Marengo, as amended, are hereby repealed. In
addition, the existing ordinances regulation the use of mobile homes in the City, as amended, is hereby
repealed. The adoption of this Ordinance, however, shall not affect nor prevent any pending or future
prosecution of, or action to abate, any existing violation of said Ordinances, as amended, if the violation is
also a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance.
1.37 EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance, upon its adoption and publication according to the Code of Iowa,
shall take effect and be in force on and after __________________________________.
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARENGO, IOWA,
THIS 8th DAY OF MARCH, 1999.
(s)___________________________________
Mayor; City of Marengo, Iowa
ATTEST:
(s)__________________________________
Clerk, City of Marengo, Iowa