CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01  Title	1.08  Amendments
1.02  Definitions	1.09  Catchlines and Notes
1.03  City Powers	1.10  Altering Code
1.04  Indemnity	1.11  Severability
1.05  Personal Injuries	1.12  Warrants
1.06  Rules of Construction	1.13  General Standards for Action
1.07  Extension of Authority	1.14  Standard Penalty
1.01	TITLE.  This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of Ordinances of the City of Onawa, Iowa.
1.02	DEFINITIONS.  Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision.  Other words and phrases used herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision:
1.	“Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary means of access to abutting property.  
2.	“City” means the City of Onawa, Iowa.
3.	“Clerk” means the city clerk of Onawa, Iowa.
4.	“Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5.	“Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Onawa, Iowa.
6.	“Council” means the city council of Onawa, Iowa.
7.	“County” means Monona County, Iowa.
8.	“May” confers a power.
9.	“Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
10.	“Must” states a requirement.
11.	“Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
12.	“Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Onawa, Iowa, as embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
13.	“Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
14.	“Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
15.	“Shall” imposes a duty.
16.	“Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
17.	“State” means the State of Iowa.
18.	“Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
19.	“Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the provision.
1.03	CITY POWERS.  The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents, and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing functions. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04	INDEMNITY.  The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.  The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein or not. 
1.05	PERSONAL INJURIES.  When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused.  The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person to appear and defend.  A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury.  The City may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by the City in the suit. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06	RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.  In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term “statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term “ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07	EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.  Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08	AMENDMENTS.  All ordinances that amend, repeal or in any manner affect this Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09	CATCHLINES AND NOTES.  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references, and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents of a section.
1.10	ALTERING CODE.  It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented. 
1.11	SEVERABILITY.  If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12	WARRANTS.  If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative search warrant.  No owner, operator or occupant, or any other person having charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure, building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13	GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.  Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the Council or any commission, board or officer or employee of the City and does not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be exercised in light of the following standard:  The discretionary power to grant, deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14	STANDARD PENALTY.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for violation of any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least sixty-five dollars ($65.00) but not to exceed six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00).  The court may order imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days in lieu of a fine or in addition to a fine. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])



[The next page is 9]
 
CHAPTER 2 
CHARTER 
2.01  Title	2.04  Number and Term of Council
2.02  Form of Government	2.05  Term of Mayor
2.03  Powers and Duties of City Officers	2.06  Copies on File
2.01	TITLE.  This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Onawa, Iowa.†
2.02	FORM OF GOVERNMENT.  The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03	POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.  The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04	NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.  The Council consists of two Council Members elected at large and one Council Member from each of four wards as established by this Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05	TERM OF MAYOR.  The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06	COPIES ON FILE.  The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)





? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?


 
CHAPTER 3 
PRECINCTS AND WARDS
3.01	BOUNDARIES.  The following are established as the boundaries for each of the four wards and precincts in the City:
1.	The City of Onawa is divided into a north and a south half by the centerline of Iowa Avenue as extended from the east corporate limit to the west corporate limit.
2.	Beginning on the north corporate limit at the centerline of Fifteenth (15th) Street, thence south along the centerline of Fifteenth (15th) Street to the centerline of Gaukel Drive, thence east along the centerline of Gaukel Drive to the centerline of Twelfth (12th) Street, thence south along the centerline of Twelfth (12th) Street to the centerline of Jasper Street, thence east along the centerline of Jasper Street to the centerline of Eleventh (11th) Street, thence south along the centerline of Eleventh (11th) Street to the centerline of Iowa Avenue, thence east along the centerline of Iowa Avenue to the centerline of Tenth (10th) Street, thence south to the south corporate limit.
3.	Use of the lines described above will divide the City of Onawa into four sections of substantially equal population.
A.	The northeast section shall be Ward 1 and Precinct 1;
B.	The northwest section shall be Ward 2 and Precinct 2; 
C.	The southwest section shall be Ward 3 and Precinct 3;
D.	The southeast section shall be Ward 4 and Precinct 4.






[The next page is 15]

 
CHAPTER 4 
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS 
4.01  Municipal Infraction	4.04  Civil Citations
4.02  Environmental Violation	4.05  Alternative Relief
4.03  Penalties	4.06  Criminal Penalties
4.01	MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.  A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
4.02	ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.  A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation.  However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific violations: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1.	A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2.	The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or manufacturing of grain products.
3.	The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03	PENALTIES.  A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1.	Standard Civil Penalties.
A.	First offense – not to exceed $750.00
B.	Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.
2.	Special Civil Penalties.
A.	A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each day a violation exists or continues.
B.	A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.  However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1)	The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
(2)	The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24) hours from the time that the violation begins.
(3)	The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8) hours.
4.04	CIVIL CITATIONS.  Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction.  A copy of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311.  A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court.  The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4]) 
1.	The name and address of the defendant. 
2.	The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation. 
3.	The location and time of the infraction. 
4.	The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both.
5.	The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid. 
6.	The time and place of court appearance. 
7.	The penalty for failure to appear in court. 
8.	The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
4.05	ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.  Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action.  Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[8])
4.06	CRIMINAL PENALTIES.  This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation.  Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
 



[The next page is 21]
 
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01  Oaths	5.07  Conflict of Interest
5.02  Bonds	5.08  Resignations
5.03  Powers and Duties	5.09  Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04  Books and Records	5.10  Vacancies
5.05  Transfer to Successor	5.11  Gifts
5.06  Meetings		   
5.01	OATHS.  The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the following: 
1.	Qualify for Office.  Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond.  The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as elected, no later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2.	Prescribed Oath.  The prescribed oath is:  “I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Onawa as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3.	Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths.  The following are empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of their respective offices:
A.	Mayor
B.	City Clerk
C.	Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02	BONDS.  Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following: 
1.	Required.  The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2.	Bonds Approved.  Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3.	Bonds Filed.  All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
4.	Record.  The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03	POWERS AND DUTIES.  Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04	BOOKS AND RECORDS.  All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.  Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05	TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.  Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06	MEETINGS.  All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in accordance with the following:
1.	Notice of Meetings.  Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the time, date, and place of each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2.	Meetings Open.  All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3.	Minutes.  Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting.  The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present.  The vote of each member present shall be made public at the open session.  The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4.	Closed Session.  A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5.	Cameras and Recorders.  The public may use cameras or recording devices at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6.	Electronic Meetings.  A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07	CONFLICT OF INTEREST.  A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law.  A contract entered into in violation of this section is void.  The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1.	Compensation of Officers.  The payment of lawful compensation of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
2.	Investment of Funds.  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
3.	City Treasurer.  An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as Treasurer of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
4.	Stock Interests.  Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract.  The competitive bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
5.	Newspaper.  The designation of an official newspaper.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
6.	Existing Contracts.  A contract in which a City officer or employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
7.	Volunteers.  Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
8.	Corporations.  A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
9.	Contracts.  Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
10.	Cumulative Purchases.  Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3k])
11.	Franchise Agreements.  Franchise agreements between the City and a utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
12.	Third Party Contracts.  A contract that is a bond, note or other obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3m])
5.08	RESIGNATIONS.  An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered.  A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was elected if, during that time, the compensation of the office has been increased. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09	REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.  Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order.  The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal.  The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10	VACANCIES.  A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled, at the Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2])
1.	Appointment.  By appointment, following public notice, by the remaining members of the Council.  The appointment shall be made within sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs and shall be for the period until the next regular City election unless there is an intervening special election for the City, in which event the election for the office shall be placed on the ballot at such special election.  If the Council chooses to proceed under this subsection, the Council shall publish notice of the appointment in accordance with Section 372.13 of the Code of Iowa.  If the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an election, the Council shall call a special election as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2a])
2.	Special Election.  By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2b])
(Ord. 459 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
5.11	GIFTS.  Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
 



[The next page is 29]
 
CHAPTER 6 
CITY ELECTIONS 
6.01  Nominating Method to be Used	6.04  Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02  Nominations by Petition	6.05  Filing; Presumption; Withdrawals; Objections
6.03  Adding Name by Petition	6.06  Persons Elected
6.01	NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.  All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02	NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.  Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by nomination paper or papers signed by not less than ten (10) eligible electors, residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03	ADDING NAME BY PETITION.  The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04	PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.  Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy.  The petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)
6.05	FILING; PRESUMPTION; WITHDRAWALS; OBJECTIONS.  The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06	PERSONS ELECTED.  The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
 



[The next page is 35]
 
CHAPTER 7 
FISCAL MANAGEMENT 
7.01  Purpose	7.05  Operating Budget Preparation
7.02  Finance Officer	7.06  Budget Amendments
7.03  Cash Control	7.07  Accounting
7.04  Fund Control	7.08  Financial Reports
7.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City. 
7.02	FINANCE OFFICER.  The City Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter. 
7.03	CASH CONTROL.  To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following shall apply: 
1.	Deposit of Funds.  All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer.  If any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance, or Council directive.   
2.	Deposits and Investments.  All moneys belonging to the City shall be promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law, including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
3.	Petty Cash Fund.  The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash fund for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery transportation charges, and small fees customarily paid at the time of rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent.  At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the finance officer shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts.  It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services or personal expenses.
4.	Change Fund.  The finance officer is authorized to draw a warrant/check on the Utility Fund for establishing a change fund for the purpose of making change without comingling other funds to meet the requirements of the office.  Said change fund shall be in the custody of the Clerk, who shall maintain the integrity of the fund.
7.04	FUND CONTROL.  There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in accordance with the following:  
1.	Revenues.  All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
2.	Expenditures.  No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.  
3.	Emergency Fund.  No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
4.	Debt Service Fund.  Except where specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to meet payments of principal and interest.  Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
5.	Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Except where specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
6.	Utility and Enterprise Funds.  A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council.  A surplus may exist only after all required transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the Utility or Enterprise Fund.  A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating account or the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in excess of:
A.	The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months, and
B.	The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
7.	Balancing of Funds.  Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05	OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.  The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with the following:
1.	Proposal Prepared.  The finance officer is responsible for preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
2.	Boards and Commissions.  All boards, commissions and other administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as required by the Council.
3.	Submission to Council.  The finance officer shall submit the completed budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of each year.
4.	Council Review.  The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
5.	Notice of Hearing.  Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date established for the hearing.  Proof of such publication must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
6.	Copies of Budget on File.  Not less than twenty (20) days before the date that the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
7.	Adoption and Certification.  After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor and the County Board of Supervisors.  The tax levy certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget.  Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06	BUDGET AMENDMENTS.  A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1.	Program Increase.  Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2[384, 388])
2.	Program Transfer.  Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.   
(IAC, 545-2.3[384, 388])
3.	Activity Transfer.  Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the Council.   
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
4.	Administrative Transfers.  The finance officer shall have the authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a specific activity without prior Council approval.   
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
7.07	ACCOUNTING.  The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the following: 
1.	Books of Original Entry.  There shall be established and maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and disbursed.   
2.	General Ledger.  There shall be established and maintained a general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording unappropriated surpluses.    
3.	Checks.  Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Clerk following Council approval, except as provided by subsection 5 hereof.   
4.	Budget Accounts.  There shall be established such individual accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the Council.  Each individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing appropriation.  No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
5.	Immediate Payment Authorized.  The Council may by resolution authorize the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest cost.  Any such payments made shall be reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such payment.  The resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include but is not limited to payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
6.	Utilities.  The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08	FINANCIAL REPORTS.  The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports: 
1.	Monthly Reports.  There shall be submitted to the Council each month a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and activity for the preceding month.
2.	Annual Report.  Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal year.  A copy of the annual report must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)



[The next page is 45]
 
CHAPTER 8 
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
8.01  Purpose	8.06  Applications
8.02  Definitions	8.07  Approval
8.03  Period of Partial Exemption	8.08  Exemption Repealed
8.04  Amounts Eligible for Exemption	8.09  Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05  Limitations		   
8.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, and distribution centers.
8.02	DEFINITIONS.  For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.	“Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for which the exemption is received.
2.	“Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the storage of goods that are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.  Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
3.	“New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new buildings and structures that are constructed as additions to existing buildings and structures.  New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure that does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the City Council of the City upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development.
4.	“Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities, including (but not limited to) the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use and corporate research services that do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
5.	“Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03	PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.  The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, and distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period of five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04	AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.  The amount of actual value added, which is eligible to be exempt from taxation, shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1.	For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)  
2.	For the second year, sixty percent (60%) 
3.	For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)  
4.	For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)  
5.	For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
8.05	LIMITATIONS.  The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06	APPLICATIONS.  An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1.	The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation.
2.	Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue.
8.07	APPROVAL.  A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction.  If the City Council resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing thereon.  Thereafter, at least thirty (30) days after such hearing, the City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning.  Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08	EXEMPTION REPEALED.  When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09	DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.  A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
 
CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL

EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect.

ORDINANCE NO.	ADOPTED	NAME OF AREA
286	August 18, 1994	Onawa Urban Renewal Area
319	February 10, 1998	Amendment No. 1 to the Onawa Urban Renewal Area
324	November 24, 1998	Amendment No. 2 to the Onawa Urban Renewal Area
423	February 28, 2012	Onawa Urban Renewal Amended Area
		




? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION

EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect.

ORDINANCE NO.	ADOPTED	NAME OF AREA
342	December 12, 2000	Central Business District Urban Revitalization Area
343	December 12, 2000	Residential Urban Revitalization Area
357	November 27, 2001	Additional Property Added to the Residential Urban Revitalization Area
417	June 28, 2011	Onawa Urban Revitalization Area
		
		





[The next page is 71]
 
CHAPTER 15 
MAYOR
15.01  Term of Office	15.04  Compensation
15.02  Powers and Duties	15.05  Voting
15.03  Appointments	
15.01	TERM OF OFFICE.  The Mayor is elected for a term of two years. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02	POWERS AND DUTIES.  The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1.	Chief Executive Officer.  Act as the chief executive officer of the City and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City, except for supervisory duties delegated to the City Administrator, give direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments, and have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2.	Proclamation of Emergency.  Have authority to take command of the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of emergency or public danger exists.  Within the City limits, the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
3.	Special Meetings.  Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.    
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4.	Mayor’s Veto.  Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment, or resolution passed by the Council.  The Mayor may veto an ordinance, amendment, or resolution within fourteen days after passage.  However, the Mayor may not veto an ordinance, amendment, or resolution if the Mayor was entitled to vote on such measure at the time of passage.  The Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
5.	Reports to Council.  Make such oral or written reports to the Council as required.  These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
6.	Negotiations.  Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered into in accordance with law or ordinance.  The Mayor shall not represent the City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.
7.	Contracts.  Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of the City.
8.	Professional Services.  Upon order of the Council, secure for the City such specialized and professional services not already available to the City.  In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with the Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.  
9.	Licenses and Permits.  Sign all licenses and permits that have been granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by another municipal officer.
10.	Nuisances.  Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
11.	Absentee Officer.  Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03	APPOINTMENTS.  The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem, and the Mayor also appoints, with Council approval, the following officials: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1.	Police Chief
2.	Municipal Housing Agency Board
3.	Library Board of Trustees
4.	Park and Recreation Board
15.04	COMPENSATION.  The salary of the Mayor is $500.00 per month. †
(Ord. 494 – Apr. 19 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05	VOTING.  So long as the City is governed by the Mayor-Council form of government composed of a Mayor and a Council consisting of two Council members elected at large, and one Council member from each of four wards, the Mayor may vote to break a tie vote on motions not involving ordinances, resolutions, or appointments made by the Council alone. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)

 
CHAPTER 16 
MAYOR PRO TEM 
16.01  Vice President of Council	16.03  Voting Rights
16.02  Powers and Duties	16.04  Compensation
16.01	VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.  The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall serve as vice president of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02	POWERS AND DUTIES.  Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor to perform such duties.  In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from employment officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ, or discharge without the approval of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03	VOTING RIGHTS.  The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04	COMPENSATION.  If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])





? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 17 
CITY COUNCIL 
17.01  Number and Term of Council	17.04  Council Meetings
17.02  Powers and Duties	17.05  Appointments
17.03  Exercise of Power	17.06  Compensation 
17.01	NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.  The Council consists of two Council Members elected at large and one Council Member from each of four wards as established by the Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four years.
17.02	POWERS AND DUTIES.  The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.	General.  All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2.	Wards.  By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards, or create new wards.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
3.	Fiscal Authority.  The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof.  It shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement, or repairs that may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38[1])
4.	Public Improvements.  The Council shall make all orders for the construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
5.	Contracts.  The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts.  No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)
6.	Employees.  The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
7.	Setting Compensation for Elected Officers.  By ordinance, the Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a regular City election.  A change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03	EXERCISE OF POWER.  The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1.	Action by Council.  Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council.  Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council.  A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a public improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion.  Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded.  A measure that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2.	Overriding Mayor’s Veto.  Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s veto, the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3.	Measures Become Effective.  Measures passed by the Council become effective in one of the following ways:
A.	An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.    
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
B.	A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
C.	A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
D.	If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
E.	If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04	COUNCIL MEETINGS.  Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of this Code of Ordinances.  Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the following:
1.	Regular Meetings.  The time and place of the regular meetings of the Council shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
2.	Special Meetings.  Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3.	Quorum.  A majority of all Council members is a quorum.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4.	Rules of Procedure.  The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5.	Compelling Attendance.  Any three members of the Council can compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.  
17.05	APPOINTMENTS.  The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers, duties, compensation, and term of office:
1.	City Administrator
2.	City Clerk
3.	City Attorney
4.	Planning and Zoning Commission 
5.	Zoning Administrator
6.	Zoning Board of Adjustment
7.	City Engineer
8.	Cemetery Sexton
9.	Cable Television Commission
17.06	COMPENSATION.  The salary of each Council member is $25.00 for each meeting.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
 



[The next page is 83]
 
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK 
18.01  Appointment and Compensation	18.08  Records
18.02  Powers and Duties: General	18.09  Attendance at Meetings
18.03  Publication of Minutes	18.10  Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04  Recording Measures	18.11  Notify Appointees
18.05  Publication	18.12  Elections
18.06  Authentication	18.13  City Seal
18.07  Certify Measures	
18.01	APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.  At its first meeting in January following the regular City election, the Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve for a term of two years.  The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02	POWERS AND DUTIES:  GENERAL.  The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances, and the law. 
18.03	PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.  Within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting, the Clerk shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published.  Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04	RECORDING MEASURES.  The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])
18.05	PUBLICATION.  The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows: 
1.	Time.  If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less than four (4) or more than twenty (20) days before the date of the election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
2.	Manner of Publication.  A publication required by this Code of Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
18.06	AUTHENTICATION.  The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07	CERTIFY MEASURES.  The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08	RECORDS.  The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner: 
1.	Ordinances and Codes.  Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2.	Custody.  Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3.	Maintenance.  Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations.  Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
4.	Provide Copy.  Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])
5.	Filing of Communications.  Keep and file all communications and petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally.  The Clerk shall endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09	ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.  The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards, and commissions.  The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such meetings. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10	ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS.  The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which issued. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11	NOTIFY APPOINTEES.  The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they shall assume the duties of their offices. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12	ELECTIONS.  The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.				       (Ord. 459 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
18.13	CITY SEAL.  The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or proper to authenticate.  The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which are the words “ONAWA, IOWA” and around the margin of which are the words “CITY SEAL.”





? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 19 
CITY TREASURER 
19.01  Appointment	19.03  Duties of Treasurer
19.02  Compensation	
19.01	APPOINTMENT.  The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of the position of Treasurer. 
19.02	COMPENSATION.  The Clerk receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of the Treasurer. 
19.03	DUTIES OF TREASURER.  The duties of the Treasurer are as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.	Custody of Funds.  Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City in the manner provided by law and Council direction.   
2.	Record of Fund.  Keep the record of each fund separate.  
3.	Record Receipts.  Keep an accurate record of all money or securities received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom, and for what purpose received.  
4.	Record Disbursements.  Keep an accurate account of all disbursements, money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.  
5.	Special Assessments.  Keep a separate account of all money received by the Treasurer from special assessments.  
6.	Deposit Funds.  Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by the Council.
7.	Reconciliation.  Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
8.	Debt Service.  Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all payments of interest and principal.
9.	Other Duties.  Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by resolution or ordinance.  




? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY 
20.01  Appointment and Compensation	20.05  Review and Comment
20.02  Attorney for City	20.06  Provide Legal Opinion
20.03  Power of Attorney	20.07  Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04  Ordinance Preparation	20.08  Prepare Documents
20.01	APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.  The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve for a term of two years.  The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.02	ATTORNEY FOR CITY.  The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court, tribunal, commission, or board.  The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03	POWER OF ATTORNEY.  The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the same. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04	ORDINANCE PREPARATION.  The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05	REVIEW AND COMMENT.  The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06	PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.  The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the Mayor, Council, or City Administrator. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07	ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.  The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the Mayor or Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08	PREPARE DOCUMENTS.  The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms, and other writings that may be required for the use of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?



 
CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
21.01  Purpose	21.06  Duties
21.02  Objectives	21.07  Council’s Retained Powers
21.03  Qualifications	21.08  Mayor
21.04  Appointment and Term	21.09  Council Relations
21.05  Compensation	
21.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a City Administrator to be appointed by the Council pursuant to the provisions of Section 372.4, Code of Iowa.
21.02	OBJECTIVES.  The objectives of the City Administrator are:
1.	To provide for the efficient and effective management of all facets of City government under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council. 
2.	To provide optimum coordination, communication, and cooperation between and among City departments, boards and commissions, and City staff under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council. 
3.	To promote efficient, fair and equitable personnel management and administration.
4.	To establish and maintain governmental organization, which will support and promote retail, industrial and other economic development. 
5.	To provide for the systematic and orderly flow of information to and from the Council, its department heads and staff and citizens of the community. 
21.03	QUALIFICATIONS.  The City Administrator shall be a person competent by education and/or experience to perform the duties imposed upon such person by this chapter.  The City Administrator: 
1.	Shall possess a Bachelors degree in public administration or related area; or shall have a minimum of three (3) years of practical experience in public administration or related area. 
2.	Shall reside within the corporate limits of the City following appointment. 
3.	Shall devote full time to the diligent and faithful performance of duties hereunder and shall not, during the term as City Administrator, engage in any other employment or self employment activities or endeavors or hold any other office or position, except with the approval of the Council, by motion. 
4.	Shall not, during the term as City Administrator, hold any position as officer or director of any “for profit” organization that does business or carries on any activities in the City, nor shall the City Administrator own more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of any corporation which does business or carries on activities within the City.
21.04	APPOINTMENT AND TERM.  The Administrator is to be appointed by a majority vote of all members of the Council, shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council and shall be subject to removal and termination by majority vote of all members of the Council, subject to the provisions and protections of Section 372.15, Code of Iowa. 
21.05	COMPENSATION.  The City Administrator shall receive such annual salary and benefits as the Council shall from time to time determine by resolution, and payment shall be made from the treasury of the City in the manner provided for the payment of compensation and allocation of benefits to other officers and employees of the City.
21.06	DUTIES.  The City Administrator shall have the following duties:
1.	Supervise enforcement and execution of all City ordinances and resolutions and applicable State and Federal laws and regulations within the City.
2.	Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the Mayor or majority of the Council members.
3.	Recommend to the Council such measures as may be necessary or expedient for the good government and welfare of the City. 
4.	Generally supervise and direct the administration of the City government. 
5.	Supervise and conduct the business affairs of the City and cause accurate records to be kept by modern and efficient accounting methods.
6.	Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for the City, supervise all purchases of material and supplies and ensure that such material and supplies are received and are of the quality and character called for by the contract. 
7.	Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance and management of all City property, capital improvement, and undertakings of the City, including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings, specifications and estimates for capital improvements.
8.	Be responsible to the Council for the administration of the City as directed by the Council.  All City departmental administration requiring the attention of the Council shall be brought before the Council by the Administrator, Council involvement in administration initiated by the Council must be coordinated through the Administrator. 
9.	Supervise and direct through established procedures, all officers, departments and employees of the City and central administration.
10.	Represent the City, as directed by the Council, in negotiations and relations with employees, contractors, consultants, other governmental units, and civic organizations in which the City may have an interest.
11.	Cooperate with, assist and advise all administrative agencies, City boards and commissions and act as the Council’s liaison and representative to such entities. 
12.	Investigate, as directed by the Mayor or Council, the affairs and conduct of any department agency, officer, or employee of the City, as deemed appropriate. 
13.	Keep the Council fully advised of the financial and other conditions of the City, and of its future needs. 
14.	Supervise the City Clerk, Superintendent of Utilities, Police Chief, City boards, commissions and all City departments in the preparation of, administration and operation of the City’s annual budget. 
15.	Make to the Council periodic reports of the general condition of the City in writing at such intervals as the Council directs. 
16.	Advise, assist and consult with the City Attorney on all City legal matters. 
17.	Supervise the City Clerk, Superintendent of Utilities, and appointed Zoning Administrator in the issuance of all licenses and permits and provide for and cause the records to be kept of the issuance and revocation of such licenses and permits.  Council approval prior to issuance shall be obtained when required by ordinance or statute. 
18.	Supervise and assist the City Clerk to insure that all necessary and proper records required by ordinances, State or Federal law or regulation are properly maintained. 
19.	Formulate and recommend employment and personnel policies, compensation schedules and benefits with the approval of the Council and cooperate and assist the City Attorney/City Negotiator in all manners relating to collective bargaining. 
20.	Compile and maintain current and up-to-date information regarding all funding sources of the City, including State and Federal grant and loan programs; plan, develop, prepare and submit, with the approval and at the direction of the Council, applications for grants, loans and other sources of funding and administer all such funding. 
21.	Make recommendations to the Council and participate in projects and endeavors to support and promote economic growth and development in the City. 
22.	Faithfully represent the Council and the City in intergovernmental relations.
23.	Recommend to the Council action regarding appointed officers or employees of the City and also recommend to and seek direction from the Council when the Administrator and a department head are not in agreement in regard to the employment, reclassification, suspension, discipline, or discharge of a City employee. 
24.	Perform such other duties as the Mayor or Council may direct. 
21.07	COUNCIL’S RETAINED POWERS.  Without limitation, the Council shall retain and enjoy the following powers:
1.	Appoint the City Attorney.
2.	Appoint the City Clerk.
3.	Appoint the Superintendent of Utilities.
4.	Control and direct the activities of the City Administrator.
5.	Make and establish the policies of the City.
6.	Make decisions on employment and termination of all City employees.
21.08	MAYOR.  Without limitation, the Mayor shall retain and enjoy the following powers:
1.	Serve as the Chief Executive Officer with responsibility for the general public relations of the City and intergovernmental affairs. 
2.	Preside at all Council meetings. 
3.	Appoint the Police Chief. 
4.	Cooperate with the City Administrator in the furtherance of the policies of the Council. 
5.	Fulfill all legal obligations and responsibilities provided by ordinance or State law. 
21.09	COUNCIL RELATIONS.  The City Administrator shall not take part in any City election except by casting his or her vote, and shall not appoint a City elected official to any City office or employment. 
 
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY
22.01  Purpose	22.08  Nonresident Use
22.02  Public Library	22.09  Expenditures
22.03  Library Trustees	22.10  Annual Report
22.04  Qualifications of Trustees	22.11  Injury to Books or Property
22.05  Organization of the Board	22.12  Theft
22.06  Powers and Duties	22.13  Notice Posted
22.07  Contracting with Other Libraries	
22.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment of a free public library for the City of Onawa and for the creation and appointment of a Library Board of Trustees, and to specify that Board’s powers and duties.
22.02	PUBLIC LIBRARY.  There is hereby established a free public library for the City of Onawa to be known as the Onawa Public Library.  
22.03	LIBRARY TRUSTEES.  The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board, consists of five members.  All members are to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
22.04	QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.  Three members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens of and residents of the City, and the fourth and fifth members shall be bona fide citizens of and residents of Monona County, Iowa, but need not necessarily be citizens of or residents of the City.  Members shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years.
22.05	ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.  The organization of the Board shall be as follows: 
1.	Term of Office.  All appointments to the Board shall be for six (6) years, except to fill vacancies.  Each term shall commence on July first.  Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total number or as near as possible, to stagger the terms.
2.	Vacancies.  The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if such member is absent from six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City or the County as the case may be.  Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.  
3.	Compensation.  Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.  
22.06	POWERS AND DUTIES.  The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
1.	Officers.  To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and such other officers as it deems necessary.  
 
2.	Physical Plant.  To have charge, control and supervision of the Library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
3.	Charge of Affairs.  To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4.	Hiring of Personnel.  To employ a Library Director, and authorize the Library Director to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of the Library Director, assistants and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting in favor thereof.  
5.	Removal of Personnel.  To remove the Library Director, by a two-thirds vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty, subject however, to the provisions of Chapter 70 of the Code of Iowa.
6.	Purchases.  To select, or authorize the Library Director to select, and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
7.	Use by Nonresidents.  To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists.   
8.	Rules and Regulations.  To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and management of the Library and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9.	Expenditures.  To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the rules of the Board.  
10.	Gifts.  To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.   
11.	Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts.  To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City by action against the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
12.	Record of Proceedings.  To keep a record of its proceedings.    
13.	County Historical Association.  To have authority to make agreements with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of the association.  The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.    
22.07	CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.  The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the following: 
1.	Contracting.  The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County, or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library by their respective residents.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
2.	Termination.  Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the contracting parties.  It also may be terminated by a majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties.  Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the contracting party at the last general election.  The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the election.  The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.  
22.08	NONRESIDENT USE.  The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of the City or County in any one or more of the following ways: 
1.	Lending.  By lending the books or other materials of the Library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.   
2.	Depository.  By establishing depositories of Library books or other materials to be loaned to nonresidents.  
3.	Bookmobiles.  By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.  
4.	Branch Library.  By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other Library materials to nonresidents.  
22.09	EXPENDITURES.  All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library.  Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
22.10	ANNUAL REPORT.  The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of the fiscal year.  This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library during the year, together with such further information as may be required by the Council. 
22.11	INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.  It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the Library or reading room. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.12	THEFT.  No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with the intent to deprive the Library thereof. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
22.13	NOTICE POSTED.  There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library a notice stating: 
1.	Failure To Return.  Failure to return Library materials for two (2) months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one (1) month or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or equipment.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2.	Detention and Search.  Persons concealing Library materials may be detained and searched pursuant to law.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)

 
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
23.01  Planning and Zoning Commission	23.04  Compensation
23.02  Term of Office	23.05  Powers and Duties
23.03  Vacancies	
23.01	PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.  The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consists of six members appointed by the Council.  The Commission members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any elective office in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)
23.02	TERM OF OFFICE.  The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be four years.  The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03	VACANCIES.  If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointee. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04	COMPENSATION.  All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05	POWERS AND DUTIES.  The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
1.	Selection of Officers.  The Commission shall choose annually at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2.	Adopt Rules and Regulations.  The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3.	Zoning.  The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4.	Recommendations of Improvements.  No statuary, memorial or work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the City for the erection or location thereof until and unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written notice requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5.	Review and Comment on Plats.  All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6.	Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements.  No plan for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other public improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the City or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the Commission and the Commission shall have had thirty (30) days within which to file its recommendations thereon.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7.	Fiscal Responsibilities.  The Commission shall have full, complete, and exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8.	Limitation on Entering Contracts.  The Commission shall have no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
9.	Annual Report.  The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
 
CHAPTER 24
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
(CHAPTER 24 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 449)
 



[The next page is 115]
 
CHAPTER 25
MUNICIPAL HOUSING AGENCY BOARD
25.01  Appointment and Term	25.03  Chairperson
25.02  Compensation	25.04  Powers and Duties
25.01	APPOINTMENT AND TERM.  A Municipal Housing Agency Board of Commissioners consisting of five (5) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.  Following appointment of the initial commission according to law, members shall be appointed for two-year terms.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 403A.5)
25.02	COMPENSATION.  Commissioners shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including traveling expenses, incurred in the discharge of duties. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 403A.5)
25.03	CHAIRPERSON.  The Mayor shall designate a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the members. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 403A.5)
25.04	POWERS AND DUTIES.  The Board shall transact business for the Municipal Housing Agency and shall exercise all of the powers, duties and authority of the Municipal Housing Agency as provided in Chapter 403A of the Code of Iowa.



? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 26
CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION 
26.01  Cable Television Commission	26.04  Compensation
26.02  Term of Office	26.05  Powers and Duties
26.03  Vacancies	
26.01	CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION.  There shall be appointed by the Council a City Cable Television Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consisting of six (6) members, who shall be citizens of the City and qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the operation and control of one local access channel of any cable television franchise.  At least one of the Commission members shall be the Mayor or a Council member.  Other members shall be sought from the school, the religious community, and the business and service communities.  Membership need not be from each of these groups.
26.02	TERM OF OFFICE.  The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be four (4) years.  The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year. 
26.03	VACANCIES.  If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointee. 
26.04	COMPENSATION.  All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council. 
26.05	POWERS AND DUTIES.  The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
1.	Selection of Officers.  The Commission shall choose annually at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
2.	Adopt Rules and Regulations.  The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
3.	Annual Report.  The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.  
4.	Liaison.  The Commission shall act as liaison to the cable provider and the City Council.




[The next page is 141]

 
CHAPTER 30 
POLICE DEPARTMENT
30.01  Department Established	30.07  Police Chief: Duties
30.02  Organization	30.08  Departmental Rules
30.03  Peace Officer Qualifications	30.09  Summoning Aid
30.04  Required Training	30.10  Taking Weapons
30.05  Compensation	30.11  Contract Law Enforcement
30.06  Peace Officers Appointed	
30.01	DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.  The police department of the City is established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the corporate limits of the City.
30.02	ORGANIZATION.  The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the Council.
30.03	PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.  In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11) 
30.04	REQUIRED TRAINING.  All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.  Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2]) 
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
30.05	COMPENSATION.  Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06	PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.  The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief subject to the consent of a majority of the Council.  The Mayor shall select, subject to the approval of Council, the other members of the department.    
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
30.07	POLICE CHIEF:  DUTIES.  The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of the Council.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.	General.  Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or ordinance.
2.	Enforce Laws.  Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3.	Writs.  Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the Police Chief.
4.	Accident Reports.  Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the State Department of Transportation.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5.	Prisoners.  Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
6.	Assist Officials.  When requested, provide aid to other City officers, boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7.	Investigations.  Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8.	Record of Arrests.  Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
9.	Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
10.	Command.  Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment, and materials of the department.
30.08	DEPARTMENTAL RULES.  The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for the operation of the department. 
30.09	SUMMONING AID.  Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
30.10	TAKING WEAPONS.  Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items that are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have within such person’s control, to be disposed of according to law.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
30.11	CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT.  In lieu of the appointment of a police chief by the Mayor as provided by Section 30.06, the Council may contract with the County Sheriff or any other qualified lawful entity to provide law enforcement services within the City and in such event the Sheriff or such other entity shall have and exercise the powers and duties of the Police Chief as provided herein.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 28E.30)



[The next page is 155]
 
CHAPTER 35 
FIRE DEPARTMENT 
35.01  Establishment and Purpose	35.08  Constitution
35.02  Organization	35.09  Accidental Injury Insurance
35.03  Training	35.10  Liability Insurance
35.04  Compensation	35.11  Calls Outside Fire District
35.05  Election of Officers	35.12  Mutual Aid
35.06  Fire Chief: Duties	35.13  Authority to Cite Violations
35.07  Obedience to Fire Chief	35.14  Fire Protection Agreements
35.01	ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.  A volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02	ORGANIZATION.  The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03	TRAINING.  All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.04	COMPENSATION.  Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.05	ELECTION OF OFFICERS.  The department shall elect a Fire Chief and such other officers as its constitution and bylaws may provide, but the election of the Fire Chief shall be subject to the approval of the Council.  In case of absence of the Fire Chief, the officer next in rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all the powers of Fire Chief.
35.06	FIRE CHIEF:  DUTIES.  The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.	Enforce Laws.  Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
2.	Technical Assistance.  Upon request, give advice concerning private fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and development of fire emergency plans.
3.	Authority at Fires.  When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or 

 
take any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4.	Control of Scenes.  Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5.	Authority to Barricade.  When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire Department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6.	Command.  Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency, discipline, and control of the Fire Department.  The members of the Fire Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7.	Property.  Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to the Fire Department with the exception of titled vehicles or real estate. The disposition of any titled vehicle or the sale, gift, or lease of any real estate must be approved by the Council. 	 (Ord. 480 – Dec. 16 Supp.)
8.	Notification.  Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately.  For all other fires causing an estimated damage of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within ten (10) days following the end of the month.  The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
9.	Right of Entry.  Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of making such investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be necessary to be made and that is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10.	Recommendation.  Make such recommendations to owners, occupants, caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11.	Assist State Fire Marshal.  At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
12.	Records.  Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel, firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type and location of buildings.
13.	Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.07	OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief.
35.08	CONSTITUTION.  The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective, must be approved by the Council.
35.09	ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.  The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the corporate limits of the City.  All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by the contract.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.10	LIABILITY INSURANCE.  The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
35.11	CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT.  The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
35.12	MUTUAL AID.  Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments.  Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
35.13	AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.  Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for violations of State and/or local fire safety regulations.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
35.14	FIRE PROTECTION AGREEMENTS.  The City may from time to time enter into fire protection agreements with Monona County townships or other communities.  All such agreements shall be in writing, be approved by the Council and township or other communities, and shall be filed with the Secretary of State.




? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS 
36.01  Purpose	36.05  Notifications
36.02  Definitions	36.06  Police Authority
36.03  Cleanup Required	36.07  Liability
36.04  Liability for Cleanup Costs	
36.01	PURPOSE.  In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and cleanup of hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
36.02	DEFINITIONS.  For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.	“Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous substance. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2.	“Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the land, into a water of the State, or into the atmosphere which creates an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3.	“Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other means.  “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
4.	“Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles, stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers, and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03	CLEANUP REQUIRED.  Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition.  The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person.  If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline.  In the event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public health, safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup.  If the bill for those services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by all legal means.  If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any State or Federal funds available for said cleanup.
36.04	LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.  The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the following:
1.	The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition. 
2.	The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
3.	The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.
4.	The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents of the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused that that person.
36.05	NOTIFICATIONS.
1.	A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and the Police Chief of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as possible but not later than six (6) hours after the onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition.  The Police Department shall immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.   
2.	Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the Police Chief, who shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
36.06	POLICE AUTHORITY.  If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an authorized representative may:
1.	Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a hazardous condition, and
2.	Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under this section.
36.07	LIABILITY.  The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the responsible person as defined in Section 36.02(4).




[The next page is 185]
 
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
40.01  Assault	40.05  Failure to Disperse
40.02  Harassment	40.06  Loitering
40.03  Disorderly Conduct	40.07  Disturbing the Peace
40.04  Unlawful Assembly	40.08  Loud Motor Vehicle Stereo or Radio
40.01	ASSAULT.  No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1.	Pain or Injury.  Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
2.	Threat of Pain or Injury.  Any act that is intended to place another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts and such other person are voluntary participants in a sport, social, or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity and does not create an unreasonable risk of serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an assault.  Provided, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds or at an official school function regardless of the location, the act is not an assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02	HARASSMENT.  No person shall commit harassment.
1.	A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
A.	Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
B.	Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
C.	Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
D.	Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2.	A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.  “Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03	DISORDERLY CONDUCT.  No person shall do any of the following:
1.	Fighting.  Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1])
2.	Noise.  Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[2])
3.	Abusive Language.  Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[3])
4.	Disrupt Lawful Assembly.  Without lawful authority or color of authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[4])
5.	False Report of Catastrophe.  By words or action, initiate or circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[5])
6.	Disrespect of Flag.  Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault.  As used in this subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6]) 
A.	“Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
B.	“Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
C.	“Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be flown from a pole or mast.
D.	“Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make imperfect.
E.	“Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
F.	“Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
7.	Obstruct Use of Street.  Without authority or justification, obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[7])
8.	Funeral or Memorial Service.  Within 1,000 feet of the building or other location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within 1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
A.	Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the funeral procession.
B.	Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
C.	Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
(Ord. 468 – Oct. 15 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04	UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.  It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of them will commit a public offense.  No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
40.05	FAILURE TO DISPERSE.  A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.  No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)  
40.06	LOITERING.  It is unlawful for any person congregating, standing or loitering on any sidewalk or street or at any other place within the City to hinder or prevent any person from passing by or to annoy any passing person by making insulting remarks, gestures or noises.
40.07	DISTURBING THE PEACE.  It is unlawful for any person to disturb the public peace and quiet within the City by loud and unusual noises, conversation or conduct, or by any other means.
40.08	LOUD MOTOR VEHICLE STEREO OR RADIO.  No person shall operate any motor vehicle stereo (stereo, tape player, compact disc player, radio or any other sound amplification device) in a public place or on any public right-of-way that can be heard a distance of 50 feet or more from the motor vehicle stereo.  The provisions of this section may be enforced following personal observation or hearing, or both, of any police officer or upon receipt of a complaint made or filed with the police department by any person observing and hearing a violation.  The City Administrator may grant a temporary variance to this section to facilitate special events.  The City Administrator is specifically authorized to revoke the grant variance if the applicant shall fail to meet any of the limitations placed upon the grant of the variance or other circumstances occurring subsequent to the grant of the variance requiring such revocation, or both.  



[The next page is 193]

 
CHAPTER 41 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY 
41.01  Distributing Dangerous Substances	41.07  Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators
41.02  False Reports to or Communications with Public	41.08  Antenna and Radio Wires
Safety Entities	41.09  Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
41.03  Providing False Identification Information	41.10  Discharging Weapons
41.04  Refusing to Assist Officer	41.11  Throwing and Shooting
41.05  Harassment of Public Officers and Employees	41.12  Urinating and Defecating
41.06  Interference with Official Acts	41.13  Fireworks
41.01	DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.  No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02	FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.  No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1.	Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur.
2.	Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or assistance.  
3.	Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who enters the information on a citation.
41.03	PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.  No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04	REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.  Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as required.  No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05	HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.  No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06	INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.  No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court.  The terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07	ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.  No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.08	ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.  It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.09	BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.  It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.10	DISCHARGING WEAPONS.  
1.	It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by written consent of the Council.
2.	No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.11	THROWING AND SHOOTING.  It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns, or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building, without written consent of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.12	URINATING AND DEFECATING.  It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.13	FIREWORKS.  The sale, use, or exploding of fireworks within the City are subject to the following:
1.	Definitions.  The sale, use or exploding of fireworks within the City is subject to the definitions enumerated in Iowa Code §727.2 and Iowa Code §100.19, which definitions are incorporated herein by reference.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2 and 100.19)
2.	Sale of Fireworks.  The sale of fireworks within the City limits shall be governed by Iowa State Code and applicable regulations.
3.	Use of Fireworks.  The use of fireworks shall be governed by Iowa State Code and applicable regulations and the following additional requirements:
A.	No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall possess or discharge a consumer firework without parental supervision;
B.	A person shall only discharge a consumer fireworks device on real property they own or on property where written consent has been given.  Discharge of consumer fireworks in a public park, or city owned property, or on a public roadway, street, or alley is strictly prohibited.  The possession of consumer fireworks in a public park is strictly prohibited.
C.	Consumer fireworks shall not be possessed or discharged by persons showing visible signs of, or determined to be, intoxicated or under the influence of a drug or narcotic.
D.	Any person discharging a consumer fireworks device assumes all responsibility for its operation and the consequences thereof.  No person shall discharge a consumer fireworks device in a reckless manner or manner likely to cause death, injury, fire, or property damage.  
E.	No person shall discharge a consumer fireworks device outside the dates and times as set by State law.
F.	It shall be unlawful to alter, remove, or discharge components of a consumer fireworks device from its intended method of discharging.
G.	Sky lantern open flame devices are not permitted to be released within the City limits, except if tethered by a retrievable rope so that the person discharging has control over the sky lantern
4.	Commercial Display.  The City may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the display of fireworks on public property by a City agency, fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals approved by City authorities when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator.  No permit shall be granted herein unless the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance as required by Iowa Code §727.2.
5.	Declaration of Emergency and Suspension of the Discharge of Fireworks.
A.	Whenever drought, high winds, or other natural phenomenon create, or are likely to create, hazardous conditions and increased chance of fire danger and the Fire Chief determines that adverse conditions exist for the use and exploding of fireworks, the Fire Chief, Mayor, or their designee, may issue a temporary ban on the use of fireworks within the City of Onawa.  The Fire Chief, Mayor, or their designee, shall have the authority to declare an emergency and temporarily halt the use and exploding of fireworks.
B.	The Fire Chief, Mayor, or their designee, shall inform the area radio and television stations and the local press of the emergency declaration and when the emergency will be in effect and ask that public service announcements be made.
(Ord. 482 – Jul. 17 Supp.)


[The next page is 201]


 
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY 
42.01  Trespassing	42.05  Unauthorized Entry
42.02  Registration of Closed Property	42.06  Fraud
42.03  Criminal Mischief	42.07  Theft
42.04  Defacing Proclamations or Notices	42.08  Other Public Property Offenses
42.01	TRESPASSING.  It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of another.  As used in this section, the term “property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure whether publicly or privately owned.  The term “trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8)
1.	Entering Property without Permission.  Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
2.	Entering or Remaining on Property.  Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
3.	Interfering with Lawful Use of Property.  Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2c])
4.	Using Property without Permission.  Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2d]) 
None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property that has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[3]) 



For violations of this section that are designated by Section 805.8C, subparagraph 11 and Section 716.8, subparagraph 1 of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8C, subparagraph 11 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8[1] and 805.8C[11])
(Ord. 483 – Sep. 17 Supp.)
42.02	REGISTRATION OF CLOSED PROPERTY.  
1.	Authorized.  The owner, occupant, or person in control of eligible property may register the property and declare that only identified persons are invited, licensed, or privileged to be on the property during the registered times.  Registration shall appoint City police officers as agents of the owner, occupant, or person in control of the registered property.  Any person upon registered and posted property during closed hours without identification showing valid permission to be on the property shall be in violation of this section.
2.	Identification of Permitted Persons.  At the time of registration, the person registering the property shall identify any person who is permitted to be on the registered property during closed times.  Any such persons shall, during all times they are on the registered property, have in their physical possession identification showing their permission and the times during which they are permitted to be on the property.
3.	Eligible Property.
A.	Property within the City shall be eligible for registration upon meeting the following criteria:  (i) the property is zoned Arterial Commercial District [AC], Central Business Commercial District [BC], Light Industrial District [LI], or Heavy Industrial District [HI]; (ii) the property is primarily used for vehicle parking, outside storage, or loading and unloading vehicles; and (iii) within 12 months prior to application, the property has been subjected to vandalism, has been the scene of a felony or misdemeanor, or has been the scene of an unauthorized gathering of persons, which contributed to traffic congestion.
B.	Notwithstanding the eligibility criteria of subsection A, property shall be eligible for registration upon certification by the Police Chief that registration will assist orderly law enforcement upon the property or in its immediate area.
4.	Application.  Application for registration may be made to the Police Department.  The Police Chief may grant registration if registration will assist orderly law enforcement upon the property or in its immediate area.  Upon registration of property, the person making application for registration shall be given a copy of this section.  After registration is granted, the Clerk shall assist the police in administering the registration program.
5.	Posted Warning.  Signs reading essentially as follows shall be conspicuously posted upon registered property:




PROPERTY CLOSED
To all persons and vehicles from _____________________ to _______________________ on __________________________.  Violators will be prosecuted under Sections 42.01 and 42.02 of the Onawa Code of Ordinances.  Registration expires _______________, 20____.
The registration’s expiration date shall be shown on all such signs.  Upon the termination or expiration of the registration, the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property shall immediately remove all signs indicating that the property is registered.  It is unlawful to display upon any property not registered with the City any sign indicating the property is registered.
6.	Partial Registration.  Registration may be permitted for a parcel of property in its entirety or any portion of the parcel.  When registration is granted for only a portion of contiguous eligible property, the registered portion shall be marked and posted so as to distinguish it from any unregistered portion of the property.  No portion of property subject to the control of anyone other than the applicant may be registered without the written consent of all persons controlling the property.
7.	Term of Registration.  Registration shall be effective for no longer than 12 months following the date of registration. The owner, occupant or person in control of the registered property shall give the Police Chief written notice of any change of ownership, occupancy or control of the registered property and of expiration or termination of the surety bond or insurance of the registered property.  Registration shall not terminate until the written notice is received by the police.
42.03	CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.  It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally damage, deface, alter, or destroy property. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 
42.04	DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.  It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.05	UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.  No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building, premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public.  When open to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry. 
42.06	FRAUD.  It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)  
42.07	THEFT.  It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)  
42.08	OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.  The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed to be public property offenses:
1.	Chapter 22 – Library 
A.	Section 22.11 – Injury to Books or Property
B.	Section 22.12 – Theft of Library Property
2.	Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
A.	Section 105.07 – Littering Prohibited
B.	Section 105.08 – Open Dumping Prohibited
3.	Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
A.	Section 135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
B.	Section 135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
C.	Section 135.03 – Placing Debris On
D.	Section 135.04 – Playing In
E.	Section 135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
F.	Section 135.08 – Burning Prohibited
G.	Section 135.12 – Dumping of Snow
4.	Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
A.	Section 136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
B.	Section 136.15 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
C.	Section 136.16 – Defacing
D.	Section 136.17 – Debris on Sidewalks
E.	Section 136.18 – Merchandise Display
F.	Section 136.19 – Sales Stands



[The next page is 211]

 
CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
43.01  Purpose	43.04  Determining Factors
43.02  Controlled Substance Defined	43.05  Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
43.03  Drug Paraphernalia Defined	43.06  Manufacture, Delivery, or Offering For Sale
43.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to use, manufacture, and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
43.02	CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.  The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
43.03	DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.  The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.  It includes, but is not limited to:
1.	Growing Kits.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
2.	Processing Kits.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances.
3.	Isomerization Devices.  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
4.	Testing Equipment.  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances.
5.	Scales.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6.	Diluents.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.
7.	Separators; Sifters.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana.
8.	Mixing Devices.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
9.	Containers.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances.
10.	Storage Containers.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11.	Injecting Devices.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body.
12.	Ingesting-Inhaling Device.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
A.	Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
B.	Water pipes;
C.	Carburetion tubes and devices;
D.	Smoking and carburetion masks;
E.	Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
F.	Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
G.	Chamber pipes;
H.	Carburetor pipes;
I.	Electric pipes;
J.	Air driven pipes;
K.	Chillums;
L.	Bongs;
M.	Ice pipes or chillers.
43.04	DETERMINING FACTORS.  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
1.	Statements.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
2.	Prior Convictions.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled substance.
3.	Proximity to Violation.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
4.	Proximity to Substances.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
5.	Residue.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
6.	Evidence of Intent.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
7.	Innocence of an Owner.  The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
8.	Instructions.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
9.	Descriptive Materials.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object explaining or depicting its use.
10.	Advertising.  National and local advertising concerning its use.
11.	Displayed.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
12.	Licensed Distributor or Dealer.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
13.	Sales Ratios.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
14.	Legitimate Uses.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
15.	Expert Testimony.  Expert testimony concerning its use.
43.05	POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
43.06	MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY, OR OFFERING FOR SALE.  It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
 



[The next page is 235]


 
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01  Persons Under Legal Age	45.03  Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02  Public Consumption or Intoxication	
45.01	PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.  As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.
1.	Social Host.  A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over, property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of eighteen, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage.  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
2.	Purchase, Consume, or Possess.  A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[3])
3.	Misrepresentation of Age.  A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from any liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
(Ord. 490 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
45.02	PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1.	As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A.	“Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of Iowa.
B.	“Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
C.	“Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the Code of Iowa.
D.	“School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten through grade twelve.
2.	A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the public streets or highways.  A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license.  A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public school property or while attending any public or private school-related function.  A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.  
3.	A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
4.	When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense.  If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested.  In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper foundation.  The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03	OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.  [See Section 62.01(49) and (50) of this Code of Ordinances.]
 
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01  Curfew	46.03  Contributing to Delinquency
46.02  Cigarettes and Tobacco	
46.01	CURFEW.  The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the City and specifically to reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults responsible for minors; to protect the public from the illegal acts of minors committed after the curfew hour; and to protect minors from improper influences and criminal activity that prevail in public places after the curfew hour.
1.	Definitions.  For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
A.	“Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an errand relating to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury, or loss of life.
B.	“Knowingly” means knowledge that a responsible adult should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that responsible adult’s custody.  It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable standard of adult responsibility through an objective test.  It is therefore no defense that an adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor.
C.	“Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
D.	“Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked multipurpose area, such as a lobby, office or interrogation room that is not designed, set aside, or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a person employed by the facility where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person’s parents or other responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but not for longer than six (6) hours without the oral or written order of a judge or magistrate authorizing the detention.  A judge shall not extend the period of time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.
E.	“Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys, and sidewalks dedicated to public use and also includes such parts of buildings and other premises, whether publicly or privately owned, that are used by the general public or to which the general public is invited commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public has access.  For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is considered to be a public place when in the areas defined above.
F.	“Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other adult specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have custody or control of a minor.
G.	“Unemancipated” means unmarried and still under the custody or control of a responsible adult.
2.	Curfew Established.  A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be enforced as follows:
A.	Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor fourteen (14) years of age or younger shall be in any public place during the following times:
(1)	September 1 through May 31.
a.	Sunday through Thursday – 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. each day
b.	Friday and Saturday – 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. each day
(2)	June 1 through August 31.
a.	Sunday through Thursday – 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. each day
b.	Friday and Saturday – 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. each day
B.	Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor fifteen (15) years of age through seventeen (17) years of age shall be in any public place during the following times:
(1)	September 1 through May 31.
a.	Sunday through Thursday – 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. each day 
b.	Friday and Saturday – 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. each day
(2)	June 1 through August 31.
a.	Sunday through Thursday – 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. each day 
b.	Friday and Saturday – 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. each day
3.	Exceptions.  The following are exceptions to the curfew:
A.	The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
B.	The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or on either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible for the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
C.	The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the following:
(1)	Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade or occupation in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or before the beginning of work;
(2)	Minor’s place of religious activity or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or before the beginning of the religious activity;
(3)	Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity;
(4)	School activity or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity;
(5)	Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in or meeting of an association for the advancement of economic, political, religious or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees of free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity.
D.	The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult;
E.	The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City beginning, ending or passing through the City when such travel is by direct route.
4.	Responsibility of Adults.  It is unlawful for any responsible adult knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City within the time periods prohibited by this section unless the minor’s presence falls within one of the above exceptions.
5.	Enforcement Procedures.
A.	Determination of Age.  In determining the age of the juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s license, a law enforcement officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.
B.	Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody.  Grounds for arrest are that the person refuses to sign the citation without qualification; persists in violating the ordinance; refuses to provide proper identification or to identify himself or herself; or constitutes an immediate threat to the person’s own safety or to the safety of the public.  A law enforcement officer who arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the minor in custody either in a shelter care facility or in any nonsecured setting.  The officer shall not place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor physically resists or threatens physical violence when being taken into custody.  A minor shall not be placed in detention following a curfew violation.
C.	Notification of Responsible Adult.  After a minor is taken into custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as soon as possible.  The minor shall be released to the adult responsible for the minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at such time as the court may direct.
D.	Minor Without Adult Supervision.  If a law enforcement officer determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the law enforcement officer cannot locate the minor’s parent, guardian or other person legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable time, the law enforcement officer shall attempt to place the minor with an adult relative of the minor, an adult person who cares for the child or another adult person who is known to the child.
6.	Penalties.
A.	Responsible Adult’s First Violation.  In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Police Chief shall, by certified mail, send to the adult responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable penalties.
B.	Responsible Adult’s Second Violation.  Any responsible adult as defined in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows the minor to violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.  This section does not preclude the issuing of a municipal infraction citation under Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
C.	Minor’s First Violation.  Violation of this section shall be deemed a municipal infraction under Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
D.	Minor’s Second Violation.  For the minor’s second and subsequent violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.  
7.	Notice.  Notice of the ordinance codified in this section and its contents may be posted in or about such public or quasi-public places as may be designated by the Mayor or the Police Chief in order that the public may be constantly informed of the existence of this section and its regulations.
46.02	CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.  It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.  Possession of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes by a person under eighteen years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if said person possesses the tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.						       (Ord. 456 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03	CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.  It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)


[The next page is 245]

 
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
47.01  Supervision	47.05  Assemblies
47.02  Regulations	47.06  Hours of Operation
47.03  Amusement for Gain	47.07  Remote Control Aircraft
47.04  Alcoholic Beverages	47.08  Penalty
47.01	SUPERVISION.  All parks in the City shall be operated and maintained under the supervision of the Leisure Services Committee.
47.02	REGULATIONS.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any regulation governing conduct, which regulations may be passed and approved by the City Council from time to time, or by the Leisure Services Committee with approval of the City Council.
47.03	AMUSEMENT FOR GAIN.  No amusement for gain or for which a charge is made can be conducted in a park without the consent of the Leisure Services Committee, and such amusement must be conducted in accordance with any ordinances pertaining thereto.
47.04	ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
1.	It is unlawful for any person in any City park to have in his or her possession, custody or control, any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever.
2.	This section does not apply to any person attending an activity for which a permit authorizing the serving of alcoholic beverages has been issued, or within a facility pursuant to State Code and City policy.
47.05	ASSEMBLIES.  
1.	No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or organize any assembly or group of people or make any speeches, or conduct any musical program or festivals, in any park, unless a permit has been obtained from the Leisure Services Committee, and unless such permit is carried by the person heading or leading such activity; provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to students' work when constituting a part of their educational activities and under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; nor to any governmental agency within the scope of its functions.
2.	Applications for a park permit shall be filed with the City Clerk on forms available at the Onawa City Office not less than 14 days or more than 120 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct any such activity.  Such application shall be sworn to and shall state:
A.	The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such activity;
B.	If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization;
C.	The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the chairman of social activity and who will be responsible for its conduct;
D.	The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization to whom the permit is desired to be issued;
E.	The date when such activity is to be conducted;
F.	The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired;
G.	An estimate of the anticipated attendance;
H.	The hour when such activity will start and terminate; and
I.	If alcoholic beverages are proposed to be served at such activity, the application shall state the type or types and the specific area where they would be served if permitted by the Leisure Services Committee.
3.	Upon such an application being filed, the City Clerk shall immediately notify the Leisure Services Committee, which shall act on the application within five (5) days after the filing of the same.
4.	The Leisure Services Committee shall grant and issue such park permit if:
A.	The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
B.	The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public health, welfare, safety and recreation;
C.	The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour requested in the application;
D.	The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic;
E.	The conduct of such activity will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly police such activity and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal police protection to the City; and
F.	The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
5.	If the Leisure Services Committee feels it is necessary, it may require, as a condition for the issuance of the permit, that an indemnity bond in a reasonable amount be posted to protect the City from any liability of any kind or character, to protect City property from damage, or to insure cleanup by a permit holder after the authorized activity.
6.	Each park permit shall state the following:
A.	Date of activity;
B.	Park or portion thereof to be used;
C.	Hour when such activity will start and terminate; and
D.	Whether alcoholic beverages are authorized, the exact location where they may be served, and any restrictions the Leisure Services Committee may desire to place on said authorization to serve alcoholic beverages.
7.	The Leisure Services Committee shall have authority to fix reasonable permit fees to be charged for various uses of different park facilities.
47.06	HOURS OF OPERATION.
1.	Washington Park, Liberty Park, Gaukel Park, and Ropes Park shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m., of each day, except when the Monona County Fair is being held, at which time Gaukel Park only shall be open from 6:00 a.m. of one day until 1:00 a.m. of the following day; or, except when an event has been scheduled by City or Board in a park facility, at which time the parks shall be open from 6:00 a.m. of one day until 1:00 a.m. of the following day; and it shall be unlawful for any person, or persons (other than City personnel conducting City business therein), to occupy or be present in any said park during any hours in which a park, or portion thereof, is not open to the public.
2.	Any section or portion of a park may be declared closed to the public by the Leisure Services Committee at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily, permanently or at regular or stated intervals.
3.	This section shall not apply if a permit has been issued under Section 47.05 above that allows an activity, and those attending it, to remain in the park after closing hours.
47.07	REMOTE CONTROL AIRCRAFT.  No person may fly any remote controlled or self-propelled aircrafts, including, but not limited to, radio controlled or control line model airplanes, helicopters, and gliders, in a park or preserve except where designated by the Leisure Services Committee, subject to any conditions, regulations or restrictions imposed by the City and/or Committee.
47.08	PENALTY.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be in violation of this Code of Ordinances.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.  In addition, the Leisure Services Committee may revoke any permit issued to a violator hereunder.
(Ch. 47 – Ord. 454 – June 14 Supp.)



[The next page is 265]
 
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01  Definition of Nuisance	50.05  Nuisance Abatement
50.02  Nuisances Enumerated	50.06  Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice 
50.03  Other Conditions	50.07  Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04  Nuisances Prohibited	
50.01	DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.  Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02	NUISANCES ENUMERATED.  The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are deemed to be nuisances in the City: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1.	Offensive Smells.  Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the public. 
2.	Filth or Noisome Substance.  Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
3.	Impeding Passage of Navigable River.  Obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
4.	Water Pollution.  Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others. 
5.	Blocking Public and Private Ways.  Obstructing or encumbering, by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds. 
6.	Billboards.  Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof.  (See also Section 62.06) 
7.	Storing of Flammable Junk.  Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof construction.  (See also Chapter 51) 
8.	Air Pollution.  Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
9.	Weeds, Brush.  Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.  (See also Chapter 147)
10.	Dutch Elm Disease.  Trees infected with Dutch elm disease.  (See also Chapter 151)
11.	Airport Air Space.  Any object or structure hereafter erected within one thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
12.	Houses of Ill Fame.  Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
13.	Building Maintenance.  Buildings with excessively peeling paint or other conditions suggestive of deterioration or inadequate maintenance.  Exterior surfaces shall not have any holes or broken glass; loose, cracked or damaged shingles or siding or other defects in the exterior finish which admit rain, cold air, dampness, rodents, insects or vermin.  Basements, cellars and crawl spaces shall be free of standing water and hazards.  All wood, including floorboards, subfloors, joists, bridging, roof rafters and sheathing, and all other wood in any interior or exterior floor, wall, roof or other part of the structure, shall be maintained to be free of cracks affecting structural integrity, termite damage, infestation or rot.  Any and all damaged or deteriorating materials shall be replaced.  If infestation exists in any basement, cellar or crawl space, such infestation shall be remedied in accordance with industry standards.
14.	Household Goods and Machinery.  Furniture, household furnishings, appliances or other such items not designed for outside use, or machinery, implements or other such equipment that is in an inoperable condition, including component parts thereof, stored or kept outside for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours on any premises in a residential area, excluding the week prior to any City wide cleanup program.
15.	Construction Equipment And Materials.  Operable machinery, equipment and materials being used for construction purposes, including pipes, lumber, forms, dirt, sand and sod, stored or kept in the open, except:
A.	For use in the ordinary course of business as the inventory or asset of a contractor, supplier or government subdivision; or
B.	On the job site of a project in progress for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days after construction has been completed or a separate certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever occurs first.
50.03	OTHER CONDITIONS.  The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
1.	Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
2.	Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
3.	Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
4.	Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.04	NUISANCES PROHIBITED.  The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05	NUISANCE ABATEMENT.  Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section 50.06 of this chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in Section 50.07. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06	ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.  Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1.	Contents of Notice to Property Owner.  The notice to abate shall contain: †  
A.	Description of Nuisance.  A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
B.	Location of Nuisance.  The location of the nuisance. 
C.	Acts Necessary to Abate.  A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
D.	Reasonable Time.  A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement. 
E.	Assessment of City Costs.  A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the property owner.
2.	Method of Service.  The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent by certified mail to the property owner or personally served upon property owner.
(Ord. 478 – Sep. 16 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
3.	Request for Hearing.  Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists.  A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered.  The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council.  The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
4.	Abatement in Emergency.  If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior notice.  The City shall assess the costs as provided in subsection 6 of this section after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of subsection 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5.	Abatement by City.  If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.  The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
6.	Collection of Costs.  The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general property taxes, or by any other means available to the City.			      (Ord. 491 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
7.	Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement.  If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property under State law. 				      (Ord. 435 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
8.	Failure to Abate.  Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances. 
50.07	MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.  In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section 50.06, the requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.



[The next page is 275]
 
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
51.01  Definitions	51.04  Exceptions
51.02  Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited	51.05  Notice to Abate
51.03  Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance	51.06  Municipal Infraction
51.01	DEFINITIONS.  For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.	“Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware.  Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
2.	“Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the County Treasurer or unlicensed, or uninsured, and having any of the following characteristics:
A.	Broken Glass.  Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
B.	Broken, Loose, or Missing Part.  Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk lid.
C.	Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects.  Any vehicle that has become the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
D.	Flammable Fuel.  Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other flammable fuel. 
E.	Inoperable.  Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as an operating vehicle for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
F.	Defective or Obsolete Condition.  Any other vehicle that, because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.
G.	Gears.  Any vehicle that is not capable of moving in both forward and reverse gears.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
3.	 “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, trailers, Recreational Vehicles (RVs), All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs), boats, and construction equipment, or any combination thereof.	      
(Subsections 2 and 3 – Ord. 492 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
51.02	JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.  It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk vehicle.
51.03	JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.  It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa.  If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said violation. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04	EXCEPTIONS.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the following:
1.	A vehicle in an enclosed building;
2.	Vehicles stored or located on the premises of a business enterprise, operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, for a period of time not to exceed 90 days.  Such business enterprise shall include junk yards, auto or truck repair shops or body shops, and licensed or franchised motor vehicle dealers, but shall not include auto or truck service stations or tire, battery and accessory sales stores.
51.05	NOTICE TO ABATE.  Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a]) 
51.06	MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.  This chapter does not preclude the issuance of a municipal infraction citation as contained in Section 4.04 of this Code of Ordinances.


[The next page is 301]
 
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01  Definitions	55.12  Confinement
55.02  Animal Neglect	55.13  At Large: Impoundment 
55.03  Livestock Neglect	55.14  Disposition of Animals 
55.04  Abandonment of Cats and Dogs	55.15  Impounding Costs
55.05  Livestock	55.16  Pet Awards Prohibited
55.06  At Large Prohibited	55.17  Unhealthful or Unsanitary Conditions Prohibited
55.07  Bothersome Animals	55.18  Domestic Animal Limits
55.08  Damage or Interference	55.19  Dangerous Animals Prohibited
55.09  Annoyance or Disturbance	55.20  Vicious Animals Prohibited
55.10  Rabies Vaccination	55.21  Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition of
55.11  Owner’s Duty 	Dangerous or Vicious Animals
55.01	DEFINITIONS.  The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1.	“Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium including but not limited to print, radio, television, sign, display, label, tag or articulation.
2.	“Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
3.	“At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel.  The premises of the animal’s owner shall not include any public property.  The premises shall only include private property.
4.	“Bothersome animals” means barking dogs, howling dogs, yelping dogs, howling cats, yelping cats, and other noisy animals, goats, bees, cattle, horses, swine, sheep, and any other animals that tend to disrupt the peace and good order of the community, unless specifically allowed by another section of this Code of Ordinances.
5.	“Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
A.	The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
B.	A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
C.	A solicitation to make an investment.
D.	An amusement or entertainment activity.
6.	“Dangerous animal” means the following animals: †
A.	Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunk and mink;
B.	Raccoons;
C.	Bats;
D.	Scorpions.
7.	“Domestic animal” means a typical and customary house pet, which is not a livestock species or dangerous animal or vicious animal as defined herein.  This includes dogs, cats, domesticated birds, hamsters or gerbils.
8.	“Fair” means any of the following:
A.	The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
B.	An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
C.	An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession booths.
9.	“Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
10.	“Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm deer as defined in Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa; or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
11.	“Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal.
12.	“Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish, goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
13.	“Vicious animal” means and includes any animal that, without provocation, attacks, bites or attempts to bite a person or persons or a domestic animal or fowl, or worries, chases, maims or kills a domestic animal or fowl.
55.02	ANIMAL NEGLECT.  It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means that causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
55.03	LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.  It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04	ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.  A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
55.05	LIVESTOCK.  It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning regulations.
55.06	AT LARGE PROHIBITED.  It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the City.
55.07	BOTHERSOME ANIMALS.  It is unlawful for a person to keep within the City bothersome animals, unless specifically allowed by another section of this Code of Ordinances.
55.08	DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.  It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference with, the premises. 
55.09	ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.  It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles. 
55.10	RABIES VACCINATION.  Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal.  It is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession, six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies.  Dogs kept in State or Federally licensed kennels and not allowed to run at large are not subject to these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.11	OWNER’S DUTY.  It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official.  It is the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.12	CONFINEMENT.  If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs.  If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such board, and after ten (10) days the board may humanely destroy the animal.  If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment.  This section does not apply if a police service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.13	AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.  Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and impounded, or at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder. 
55.14	DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.  When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be provided to the owner within two (2) days after impoundment, if the owner’s name and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other device that is on or part of the animal.  Impounded animals may be recovered by the owner upon payment of impounding costs, and if an unvaccinated dog, by having it immediately vaccinated.  If the owner fails to redeem the animal within seven (7) days from the date that the notice is mailed, or if the owner cannot be located within seven days, the animal shall be disposed of in accordance with law or destroyed by euthanasia. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.15	IMPOUNDING COSTS.  Impounding costs are set by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37)
55.16	PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
1.	Prohibition.  It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
A.	A prize for participating in a game.
B.	A prize for participating in a fair.
C.	An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or attending an event sponsored by a business.
D.	An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes provisions unrelated to the ownership, care or disposition of the pet.
2.	Exceptions.  This section does not apply to any of the following:
A.	A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the premises of the pet shop.
B.	Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America; the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor recreation, hunting or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa Sportsmen’s Federation.
55.17	UNHEALTHFUL OR UNSANITARY CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
1.	An owner or custodian of any animal shall not permit the animal to discharge feces upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner of the animal.  The owner or custodian of the animal shall be deemed to have permitted the animal’s discharge of feces if the owner or custodian does not immediately thereafter completely remove and clean up the animal feces from the property where discharged.
2.	All animal feces removed as required above shall be placed in an airtight container and shall be stored in a sanitary manner until it can be properly disposed of in a sanitary manner.  No animal feces shall be deposited in any trash receptacle or mixed with general or household refuse.
3.	Animals feces may be disposed of by turning it under the soil of the owner in any manner that prevents odor or the attraction of vermin or insects.
4.	An owner or custodian of animals shall keep all structures, pens, coops, yards or areas where animals are confined clean, devoid of vermin and free of odors arising from animal feces.
55.18	DOMESTIC ANIMAL LIMITS.  The total number of domestic animals older than six months shall not exceed six per residence or place of business (excluding bona fide pet stores), with a maximum of four animals of any one species.
55.19	DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.  No person shall keep, shelter or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter or harbor such animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the City.
55.20	VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.  No person shall keep, shelter or harbor for any reason within the City a vicious animal except as provided herein.  The prohibition contained herein shall not apply to the keeping of vicious animals in the following circumstances:
1.	Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
2.	The keeping of guard dogs.  However, guard dogs must be kept within a structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a sign containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog” or words of similar import, and the owner of such premises shall inform the Police Chief that a guard dog is on duty at the premises.
55.21	SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS. 
1.	In the event that a dangerous or vicious animal is found at large and unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way or the property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the Mayor or Police Chief, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured.  The City shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal or vicious animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
2.	Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal or vicious animal on premises within the City, the Mayor and Police Chief shall cause the matter to be investigated and if after investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or vicious animal in the City, the officer shall order the person named in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the City or destroy the animal, within three (3) days of the receipt of such an order.  Such order shall be contained in a notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal, which notice shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous or vicious animal, and shall be served personally or by certified mail.  Such order and notice to remove the animal shall not be required where such animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which case the officer shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and impounded or destroyed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.
3.	The order to remove a dangerous or vicious animal issued by the officer may be appealed to the Council.  In order to appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal.  Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the order of the officer.
4.	The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk.  The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled within seven (7) days of the receipt of notice of appeal.  The hearing may be continued for good cause.  After such hearing, the Council may affirm or reverse the order of the officer.  Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after the hearing or any continued session thereof.
5.	If the Council affirms the action of the officer, the Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping such dangerous or vicious animal remove such animal from the City or destroy it.  The decision and order shall immediately be served upon the person against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal.  If the original order of the officer is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3) days or the order of the Council after appeal is not complied with within three (3) days of its issuance, the officer is authorized to seize and impound or destroy such dangerous or vicious animal. 



[The next page is 311]
 
CHAPTER 56
KEEPING AND USE OF HORSES
56.01  Definition	56.03  Unlawful Riding of Horses
56.02  Illegal Acts	
56.01	DEFINITION.  The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1.	“Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering, harboring or controlling a horse.
2.	“Pasture” means:  (i) the entire area available to a horse for grazing and being at large within a confined, fenced-in area; or (ii) to place a horse in a pasture.
3.	“Stable” means:  (i) a building where a horse is tethered or tied or confined on a regular basis; or (ii) to place a horse in a stable.
4.	“Stall” means the specially constructed pen or division within a stable where a single horse is confined or tied. 
56.02	ILLEGAL ACTS. 
1.	It is unlawful to harbor, shelter, or keep a horse within the City limits, unless the entire area in which the horse is harbored, sheltered, or kept is zoned Agricultural.  In order to harbor, shelter, or keep a horse within the City limits within an area zoned Agricultural, all of the following conditions of this section must be met.
2.	It is unlawful for the owner of a horse to harbor, shelter, or keep a horse within the City limits on an area of less than 10,000 square feet of pasture.  An additional horse may be harbored, sheltered, or kept on each additional 5,000 square feet of pasture per horse available as a unit contiguous with the first 10,000 square feet of pasture for the first horse.
3.	It is unlawful for the owner of a horse to place a horse in a free stall with less than 100 square feet of floor area per horse, or to place a horse in a tie stall with less than 30 square feet of floor area per horse.
4.	It is unlawful for the owner of a horse to tie or tether a horse within 50 feet of another’s residential building.  The 50-foot distance is measured from the nearest point on the pole or other structure to which the horse is tied or tethered, to the nearest portion of the actual residential building, not counting any garage or related outbuildings, or projections thereof such as bay, bow, or oriel windows, exterior chimneys, covered porches, porticos, loggias, and the like, or the eaves of such structures, open pergolas, uncovered porches, open terraces, stoops, steps, or balustrades.  This section shall not apply if acknowledged written permission is obtained by the owner of a horse from all persons holding title to a residential building within the 50-foot distance.  This permission is not required from tenants or contract sellers of a residential building, but is required from each record titleholder, including life tenants and remaindermen, of the residential building.  Once such permission is obtained from a titleholder or the titleholders of the residential building, the permission shall run with the land and shall be binding upon the successor and assigns of the owner or owners.
5.	It is unlawful for the owner of a horse to stable a horse within 350 feet of another’s residential building.  The 350-foot distance is measured from the nearest point on the stable structure, to the nearest portion of the actual residential building, not counting any garage or related outbuildings, or projections thereof such as bay, bow, or oriel windows, exterior chimneys, covered porches, porticos, loggias, and the like, or the eaves of such structures, open pergolas, uncovered porches, open terraces, stoops, steps or balustrades.  This section shall not apply if acknowledged written permission is obtained by the owner of a horse from all persons holding title to a residential building within the 350-foot distance.  This permission is not required from tenants or contract sellers of a residential building, but is required from each record titleholder, including life tenants and remaindermen, of the residential building.  Once such permission is obtained from a titleholder or the titleholders of the residential building, the permission shall run with the land and shall be binding upon the successor and assigns of the owner or owners.
6.	It is unlawful for the owner of a horse to tie or tether a horse on public property within the City limits, except when taking part in an authorized, bona fide exhibition or show taking place on public property.
56.03	UNLAWFUL RIDING OF HORSES.  Commission of any of the following acts in the City will constitute a violation of this chapter:
1.	Riding of horses on public streets in any manner other than single file.
2.	Permitting or allowing a child under the age of 12 years to ride the owner’s horse on a public street without adult supervision.
3.	Riding in the ditches or on improved areas along the side of roadways.
4.	Riding of two or more persons on a single horse on a public street.
5.	Permitting or allowing a horse or pony with calk shoes to travel on an asphalted blacktop street.
6.	Riding of horses on a public street after sundown.




[The next page is 351]
 
CHAPTER 60 
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE 
60.01  Title	60.05  Traffic Accidents:  Reports  
60.02  Definitions 	60.06  Peace Officer’s Authority 
60.03  Administration and Enforcement 	60.07  Obedience to Peace Officers 
60.04  Power to Direct Traffic 	60.08  Parades Regulated  
60.01	TITLE.  Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the “Onawa Traffic Code.”
60.02	DEFINITIONS.  Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by reference.  Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1.	“Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including the following designated streets:
A.	Iowa Avenue from Eighth Street to Eleventh Street.
B.	Eighth Street from Diamond Street to Pearl Street.
C.	Ninth Street from Diamond Street to Pearl Street.
D.	Tenth Street from Diamond Street to Pearl Street.
E.	Eleventh Street from Diamond Street to Pearl Street.
2.	“Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
3.	“Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4.	“Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.  
5.	“School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.  
6.	“Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
7.	“Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
8.	“Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal.
9.	“Suburban district” means all other parts of the city not included in the business, school, or residence districts.
10.	“Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.   
11.	“Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
60.03	ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.  Provisions of this chapter and State law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04	POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.  A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws.  In the event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05	TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS:  REPORTS.  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of Transportation.  A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06	PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.  A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such vehicle.  A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07	OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08	PARADES REGULATED.  No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided herein:
1.	Definition.  “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public as a parade.
2.	Permit Required.  No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a written permit from the Police Chief.  Such permit shall state the time and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general route therefor. Such written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to parade when such participants have been invited by the permittee to participate therein.  No fee shall be required for such permit.
3.	Parade Not A Street Obstruction.  Any parade for which a permit has been issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein, shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
4.	Control by Police and Firefighters.  Persons participating in any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the Fire Department.  



[The next page is 361]


 
CHAPTER 61 
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
61.01  Traffic Control Devices 	61.05  Traffic Lanes 
61.02  Installation	61.06  Necessity of Signs 
61.03  Compliance  	61.07  Standards 
61.04  Crosswalks  	
61.01	TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.  The Council shall establish by resolution, and cause to be placed and maintained, appropriate traffic control devices to indicate parking spaces and zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, loading zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones other than the above, truck routes, school stops, stop intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way streets, streets to be laned for traffic and play streets.  The Council shall also have the power to designate and indicate by resolution intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic signals; intersections at which left turns, right turns and U-turns shall be prohibited; and intersections at which markers, buttons or other indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at such intersections. 
61.02	INSTALLATION.  The Council shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control devices to carry out the provisions of the Traffic Code of the City under State law or to regulate, guide or warn traffic.  The City shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.254 & 321.255)
61.03	COMPLIANCE.  No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
61.04	CROSSWALKS.  The Council is hereby authorized to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or road-way, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.05	TRAFFIC LANES.  Where traffic lanes have been marked on street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.06	NECESSITY OF SIGNS.  No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in a viewable position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person.
61.07	STANDARDS.  Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
 
CHAPTER 62 
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
62.01  Violation of Regulations	62.06  Obstructing View at Intersections
62.02  Play Streets Designated	62.07  Excessive Acceleration
62.03  Vehicles on Sidewalks	62.08  Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes
62.04  Clinging to Vehicle	62.09  Traffic Enforcement on School Grounds
62.05  Quiet Zones	
62.01	VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.  Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this section.  These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are designated beginning with the number 62 followed by the Iowa Code number: 		       (Ord. 440 –Mar. 13 Supp.)
1.	Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2.	Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
3.	Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
4.	Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
5.	Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
6.	Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
7.	Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
8.	Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
9.	Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.
10.	Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
11.	Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
12.	Section 321.104 – Penal offenses again title law.
13.	Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
14.	Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.
15.	Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
16.	Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.
17.	Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen through seventeen.
18.	Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.
19.	Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.
20.	Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order.
21.	Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s identification card.
22.	Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
23.	Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco products.
24.	Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when disqualified.
25.	Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
26.	Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
27.	Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
28.	Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
29.	Section 321.223 – License inspected.
30.	Section 321.224 – Record kept.
31.	Section 321.232 – Radar jamming devices; penalty.
32.	Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.
33.	Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
34.	Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
35.	Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
36.	Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
37.	Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or signals; unlawful possession.
38.	Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.
39.	Section 321.263 – Information and aid.
40.	Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
41.	Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
42.	Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
43.	Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
44.	Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while driving; text-messaging.
45.	Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
46.	Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
47.	Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
48.	Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
49.	Section 321.284 – Open container; drivers.
50.	Section 321.284A – Open container; passengers.
51.	Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
52.	Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
53.	Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
54.	Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
55.	Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
56.	Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
57.	Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
58.	Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
59.	Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
60.	Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
61.	Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance requirements.
62.	Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.
63.	Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
64.	Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
65.	Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
66.	Section 321.314 – When signal required.
67.	Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
68.	Section 321.316 – Stopping.
69.	Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
70.	Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
71.	Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
72.	Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
73.	Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
74.	Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
75.	Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
76.	Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
77.	Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
78.	Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
79.	Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on highways.
80.	Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
81.	Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
82.	Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers approaching blind persons.
83.	Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
84.	Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal of train.
85.	Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
86.	Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
87.	Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
88.	Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
89.	Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
90.	Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
91.	Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
92.	Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
93.	Section 321.364 – Vehicles shipping food; preventing contamination by hazardous material.
94.	Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
95.	Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
96.	Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
97.	Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
98.	Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
99.	Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
100.	Section 321.372 – School buses.
101.	Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
102.	Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
103.	Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
104.	Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
105.	Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
106.	Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
107.	Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
108.	Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
109.	Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
110.	Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
111.	Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
112.	Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
113.	Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
114.	Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
115.	Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
116.	Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
117.	Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
118.	Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
119.	Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
120.	Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
121.	Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
122.	Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
123.	Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
124.	Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
125.	Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
126.	Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
127.	Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
128.	Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
129.	Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
130.	Section 321.422 – Red light in front.
131.	Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
132.	Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
133.	Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
134.	Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
135.	Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited.
136.	Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
137.	Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
138.	Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
139.	Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
140.	Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
141.	Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
142.	Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
143.	Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
144.	Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
145.	Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
146.	Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
147.	Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.†
148.	Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.
149.	Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
150.	Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
151.	Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.
152.	Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
153.	Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
154.	Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
155.	Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
156.	Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
157.	Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.
158.	Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
159.	Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
160.	Section 321.484 – Offenses by owners.
161.	321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while operating a commercial motor vehicle.				      (Ord. 488 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
62.02	PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.  The Police Chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03	VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.  The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway.
62.04	CLINGING TO VEHICLE.  No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for their accommodation.  No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05	QUIET ZONES.  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06	OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.  It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets.  Any such obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07	EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION.  It is unlawful for any person in the operation of a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, to so accelerate such vehicle as to cause audible noise by the friction of the tires on the pavement or to cause the tires of the vehicle to leave a rubber mark on the pavement, or to cause the wheel of a motorcycle to leave the ground more than two (2) inches, except when such acceleration is reasonably necessary to avoid a collision.  Violation of this section is hereby deemed a scheduled violation with the fine fixed at $20.00, unless the arresting officer designates the violation as a serious violation, in which case the fine or punishment shall be fixed by the court.

62.08	ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.  
1.	It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated within the City limits any engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise from such vehicle.
2.	The usage of an engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in such a manner so as to be audible at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the motor vehicle shall constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this section.
62.09	TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT ON SCHOOL GROUNDS.  The City of Onawa, by and through the Onawa Police Department, pursuant to Code of Iowa Section 279.8A, is hereby authorized to enforce rules and regulations as to traffic and parking on school grounds and property so long as the necessary contract between the City and School is in force and in effect and on file with the City Clerk.  A copy of said contract is incorporated by reference herein and is available for inspection by the public upon request. 





[The next page is 375]

 
CHAPTER 63 
SPEED REGULATIONS 
63.01  General	63.04  Special Speed Zones
63.02  State Code Speed Limits	63.05  Minimum Speed
63.03  Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots	63.06  Violation of Speed Limit
63.01	GENERAL.  Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02	STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.  The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone or except as posted pursuant to Sections 262.68, 321.236, Subsection 5, Section 321.288, Subsection 2, Paragraph “f,” Sections 321.289, 321.290, 321.293, 321.295, and 461A.36 of the Code of Iowa.
1.	Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour.
2.	Residence or School District – twenty-five (25) miles per hour.†
3.	Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(Section 63.02 – Ord. 484 – Feb. 18 Supp.)
63.03	PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS.  A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park, cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04	SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.  In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location.  The following special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1.	Special 15 MPH Speed Zone.  A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A.	On 12th Street starting in the 400 block and continuing north onto Gaukel Drive, then west to 15th Street.  This area encompasses the Gaukel Park Area.
2.	Special 15 MPH Speed Zone in the Lark School Area.  A speed in excess of 15 miles per hour is unlawful in the following areas when school children are present:
A.	3rd Street and 4th Street, starting in the 700 blocks and then going north to the 500 block.  This area is from Ruby Street to Emerald Street on both 3rd and 4th Streets.  
B.	Jasper Street and Cameo Street in the 200 blocks.  This area is between 2nd Street and 3rd Street on both Jasper and Cameo.  
C.	Jasper Street and Cameo Street in the 400 blocks.  This area is between 4th Street and 5th Street on both Jasper and Cameo.  
3.	Special 35 MPH Speed Zone.  A speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A.	On 28th Street between Iowa Avenue and Granite Street.
(Ord. 432 – Aug. 12 Supp.)
63.05	MINIMUM SPEED.  A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
63.06	VIOLATION OF SPEED LIMIT.  It is unlawful for a person to use excessive speed in violation of a posted speed limit or as otherwise contained in this chapter.
(Section 63.06 – Ord. 484 – Feb. 18 Supp.)


[The next page is 381]
 
CHAPTER 64 
TURNING REGULATIONS 
64.01  Turning at Intersections	64.02  U-Turns 
64.01	TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
1.	Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2.	Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
3.	Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection.  A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
64.02	U-TURNS.  It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection; however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District, at any intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code and at intersections where there are automatic traffic signals.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to turns into or out of the extreme north or south lanes of Iowa Avenue in the two-block Central Business District having six lanes of traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])



? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 65 
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED 
65.01  Stop or Yield 	65.04  Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed 
65.02  School Stops  	65.05  Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks 
65.03  Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk	
65.01	STOP OR YIELD.  Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by traffic control devices posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
65.02	SCHOOL STOPS.  At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03	STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.  The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04	STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.  Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle.
65.05	YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.  Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)



? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 66 
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS 
66.01  Temporary Embargo	66.04  Load Limits on Bridges 
66.02  Permits for Excess Size and Weight 	66.05  Truck Route 
66.03  Load Limits Upon Certain Streets  	
66.01	TEMPORARY EMBARGO.  If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such signs erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02	PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.  The Council may, upon application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03	LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets for which said signs are erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
66.04	LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.  Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the bridge, the Council may cause to be posted and maintained signs, in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05	TRUCK ROUTE.  When truck routes have been designated in accordance with Chapter 61, any motor vehicle exceeding established weight limits shall comply with the following:
1.	Use of Established Routes.  Every such motor vehicle having no fixed terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon those streets within the City designated as truck routes and none other. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
2.	Deliveries Off Truck Route.  Any such motor vehicle, when loaded or empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the designated routes to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to its point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3.	Employer’s Responsibility.  The owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
 
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
67.01  Walking in Street	67.03  Pedestrian Crossing 
67.02  Hitchhiking 	67.04  Use of Sidewalks
67.01	WALKING IN STREET.  Pedestrians shall at all times, when walking on or along a street, walk on the left side of the street.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02	HITCHHIKING.  No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03	PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04	USE OF SIDEWALKS.  Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent street.




? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 68 
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC 
68.01	ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.  When appropriate signs are in place, as provided for in Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the direction indicated on such signs. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [4])



? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 69 
PARKING REGULATIONS 
69.01  Parking Limited or Controlled  	69.07  Parking Prohibited 
69.02  Park Adjacent to Curb	69.08  Persons With Disabilities Parking
69.03  Park Adjacent to Curb – One-Way Street 	69.09  Truck Parking Limited 
69.04  Angle Parking	69.10  Snow Removal 
69.05  Angle Parking – Manner  	69.11  Controlled Access Facilities
69.06  Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal	
69.01	PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED.  Parking of vehicles shall be controlled or limited where so indicated by designated traffic control devices in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.  No person shall stop, park or stand a vehicle in violation of any such posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions of a peace officer. 
69.02	PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03	PARK ADJACENT TO CURB – ONE-WAY STREET.  No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04	ANGLE PARKING.  Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1.	Pearl Street from 8th Street to 9th Street – both north and south sides.
2.	Pearl Street from 9th Street to 10th Street – south side of street only from the alley east back to 9th Street.
3.	Pearl Street from 10th Street to 11th Street – both north and south sides.
4.	Iowa Avenue – eastbound frontage road in front of the Courthouse (600 block of Iowa Avenue).
5.	Iowa Avenue from 8th Street to 10th Street – both frontage roads on the north and south sides of Iowa Avenue, adjacent to the Iowa Avenue side.
6.	Diamond Street from 8th Street o 10th Street – both north and south sides.
7.	Diamond Street from 11th Street to 12th Street – north side of the street adjacent to Diamond Heights – between 11th Street and the Fiesta Foods Alley.
8.	8th Street – 900 block the first ½ block on the west side of the street coming from Iowa Avenue.
9.	9th Street – 900 block – both the east and west sides of the street.
10.	9th Street – 1000 block – both the east and west sides of the street.
11.	10th Street – 900 block – the west side of the street and the first ½ block north of Iowa Avenue on the east side of the street.
12.	10th Street – 1000 block west side of the street between business drives – east side of the street in the first ½ block north of Diamond Street.
13.	11th Street – 1000 block west side of the street.
14.	Diamond Street from 12th Street to 13th Street – south side of street only.
(Ord. 476 – May 16 Supp.)
69.05	ANGLE PARKING – MANNER.  Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated by such signs and markings.  No part of any vehicle or the load thereon, when said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.06	PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.  No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 72 hours, unless otherwise limited under the provisions of Section 69.01 of this chapter, or for any of the following principal purposes:   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1.	Sale.  Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2.	Repairing.  For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3.	Advertising.  Displaying advertising.
4.	Merchandise Sales.  Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under the Code of Ordinances.
69.07	PARKING PROHIBITED.  No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1.	Crosswalk.  On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5])
2.	Center Parkway.  On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3.	Mailboxes.  Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
4.	Sidewalks.  On or across a sidewalk. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1])
5.	Driveway.  In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2])
6.	Intersection.  Within an intersection or within ten (10) feet of an intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
7.	Fire Hydrant.  Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4])
8.	Stop Sign or Signal.  Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6])
9.	Railroad Crossing.  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8])
10.	Fire Station.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9])
11.	Excavations.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10])
12.	Double Parking.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11])
13.	Hazardous Locations.  When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13])
14.	Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings.  A space of fifty (50) feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15.	Alleys.  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley or the traveled portion of an alley.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property, unless it is the resident of the property.  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley which is twenty (20) feet wide or less; provided said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services and for no more than thirty (30) minutes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
(Ord. 467 –Aug. 15 Supp.)
16.	Ramps.  In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17.	Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line.  That area of the public way not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where curbing has been installed.
18.	In More Than One Space.  In any designated parking space so that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the markings designating such space.
19.	All Streets Between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.  On any City street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day.
69.08	PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.  The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities parking spaces:
1.	Establishment.  Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18.  No unauthorized person shall establish any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining Council approval.
2.	Improper Use.  The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
A.	Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit;
B.	Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
C.	Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
3.	Wheelchair Parking Cones.  No person shall use or interfere with a wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
A.	A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A (1) of the Code of Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
B.	A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone which is properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A (1) of the Code of Iowa.
69.09	TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.  No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle with trailer attached in violation of the following regulations.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to pickup, light delivery or panel delivery trucks.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1.	Business District.  Excepting only when such vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo, no person shall park or leave unattended such vehicle on any streets within the Business District.  When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with other traffic.
2.	Noise.  No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any street, alley, public or private parking lot, or drive of any service station between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. with the engine, auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating equipment or other device in operation giving off audible sounds excepting only the drive of a service station when actually being serviced, and then in no event for more than thirty (30) minutes. 
3.	Livestock.  No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked on any street, alley, or highway for a period of time of more than thirty (30) minutes.
69.10	SNOW REMOVAL.  No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area during snow removal operations unless the snow has been removed or plowed from said street, alley or parking area and the snow has ceased to fall.   
(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])
69.11	CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES.  Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified in Chapter 140 of this Code of Ordinances.




[The next page is 405]

 
CHAPTER 70 
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01  Arrest or Citation	70.05  Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.02  Scheduled Violations	70.06  Impounding Vehicles
70.03  Parking Violations:  Alternate	70.07  Parking Violations:  Vehicle Registration
70.04  Parking Violations:  Vehicle Unattended	
70.01	ARREST OR CITATION.  Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1.	Immediate Arrest.  Immediately arrest such person and take such person before a local magistrate, or
2.	Issue Citation.  Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-approved computerized device. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)
70.02	SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.  For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
70.03	PARKING VIOLATIONS:  ALTERNATE.  Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the office of the City Clerk.  The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for all violations except improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit.  If such fine is not paid within thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by five dollars ($5.00).  The simple notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is one hundred dollars ($100.00).  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] & 321L.4[2])
(Ord. 477 – Jun. 16 Supp.)
70.04	PARKING VIOLATIONS:  VEHICLE UNATTENDED.  When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05	PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.  In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred shall be raised by proof that:
1.	Described Vehicle.  The particular vehicle described in the information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and 
2.	Registered Owner.  The defendant named in the information was the registered owner at the time in question.
70.06	IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.  A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1.	Disabled Vehicle.  When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
2.	Illegally Parked Vehicle.  When any vehicle is left unattended and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3.	Snow Removal.  When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking during snow removal operations.
4.	Parked Over Limited Time Period.  When any vehicle is left parked for a continuous period in violation of any limited parking time.  If the owner can be located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
5.	Costs.  In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
70.07	PARKING VIOLATIONS:  VEHICLE REGISTRATION.  In addition to any other remedies provided by State Code or City ordinance, the City of Onawa is hereby authorized to enter into a 28E Agreement pursuant to Sec. 364.2(5) of the Code of Iowa with the Monona County Treasurer which requires payment of any unpaid restitution for parking violations before renewal of registration of the offender’s vehicle registration.  Any notice of fine for a parking violation shall contain the following statement:
“FAILURE TO PAY RESTITUTION OWED BY YOU CAN BE GROUNDS FOR REFUSING TO RENEW YOUR MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION.”



[The next page is 411] 
CHAPTER 74 
GOLF CARTS
74.01  Purpose	74.04  Equipment
74.02  Operation of Golf Carts Permitted	74.05  Hours
74.03  Prohibited Streets	
74.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to approve the operation of golf carts on the streets of the City.
74.02	OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS PERMITTED.  Golf carts may be operated upon the streets of the City by persons 18 years or older possessing a valid driver’s license.
74.03	PROHIBITED STREETS.  Golf carts shall not be operated upon any City street which is a primary road extension through the City but shall be allowed to cross a City street which is a primary road extension through the City.  Primary road extensions are those streets that are also a State highway.  Golf carts are also prohibited from traveling on any sidewalk.
74.04	EQUIPMENT.  Golf carts operated on City streets shall be equipped with adequate brakes, a slow moving vehicle sign, bicycle safety flag and such other safety equipment required by Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa.
74.05	HOURS.  Golf carts may be operated on City streets only between sunrise and sunset.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247)
(Ch. 74 – Ord. 470 – Oct. 15 Supp.)
 




[The next page is 435]
 
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01  Purpose	75.05  Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles 
75.02  Definitions	75.06  Negligence
75.03  General Regulations	75.07  Accident Reports
75.04  Operation of Snowmobiles	
75.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02	DEFINITIONS.  For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.	“All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand (1,000) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control. (Ord. 436 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2.	“Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.  “Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but that contains design features that enable operation over natural terrain.  An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3.	“Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks, that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control.  “Off-road utility vehicle” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
A.	“Off-road utility vehicle – type 1” includes vehicles with a total dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
B.	“Off-road utility vehicle – type 2” includes vehicles, other than type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of 65 inches or less.
C.	“Off-road utility vehicle – type 3” includes vehicles with a total dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or both.
An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Ord. 457 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
4.	“Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than one thousand (1,000) pounds, that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of forty-eight (48) inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice.  “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03	GENERAL REGULATIONS.  No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle or off-road utility vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration, equipment and manner of operation. 
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)
75.04	OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.  The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
1.	Streets.  Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets that have not been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
2.	Exceptions.  Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under the following circumstances:
A.	Emergencies.  Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B.	Direct Crossing.  Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
(1)	The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(2)	The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the street;
(3)	The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that constitutes an immediate hazard; and
(4)	In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3.	Railroad Right-of-Way.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way.  A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
4.	Trails.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
5.	Parks and Other City Land.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City.  A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
6.	Sidewalk or Parking.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is authorized by this chapter.
75.05	OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.  The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs may be operated within the City:
1.	Streets.  ATVs and off-road utility vehicles may be operated on streets only in accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council for the operation of registered ATVs or registered off-road utility vehicles.  In designating such streets, the Council may authorize ATVs and off-road utility vehicles to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3]
2.	Trails.  ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
3.	Railroad Right-of-way.  ATVs shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way.  An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
4.	Parks and Other City Land.  ATVs shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City.  
5.	Sidewalk or Parking.  ATVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
75.06	NEGLIGENCE.  The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile.  The owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)
75.07	ACCIDENT REPORTS.  Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)

 
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS 
76.01  Scope of Regulations	76.08  Carrying Articles
76.02  Traffic Code Applies	76.09  Riding on Sidewalks
76.03  Double Riding Restricted	76.10  Towing
76.04  Two Abreast Limit	76.11  Improper Riding
76.05  Bicycle Paths	76.12  Parking
76.06  Speed	76.13  Equipment Requirements
76.07  Emerging from Alley or Driveway	76.14  Special Penalty
76.01	SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.  These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02	TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.  Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the Traffic Code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions that by their nature can have no application.  Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle, the person shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03	DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.04	TWO ABREAST LIMIT.  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.  All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.05	BICYCLE PATHS.  Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06	SPEED.  No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07	EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.  The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08	CARRYING ARTICLES.  No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article that prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09	RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.  The following provisions apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:
1.	Business District.  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
2.	Other Locations.  When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
3.	Yield Right-of-Way.  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.10	TOWING.  It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured for such use.
76.11	IMPROPER RIDING.  No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of the operator or others.
76.12	PARKING.  No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.13	EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using equipment as provided herein:
1.	Lamps Required.  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear, except that a red reflector on the rear, of a type that is visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2.	Brakes Required.  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
 
76.14	SPECIAL PENALTY.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of this Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a second offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense.




[The next page is 455]

 
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES 
80.01  Definitions	80.06  Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02  Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles	80.07  Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
80.03  Notice by Mail	80.08  Proceeds from Sales
80.04  Notification in Newspaper	80.09  Duties of Demolisher
80.05  Fees for Impoundment	
80.01	DEFINITIONS.  For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] & Sec. 321.90)
1.	“Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
A.	A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
B.	A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than 24 hours.
C.	A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 24 hours.
D.	A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days.  However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day period by commencing the notification process.
E.	Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F.	A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.
2.	“Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
3.	“Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles.
4.	“Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law enforcement agency of a county or city.
80.02	AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.  A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property.  The police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles.  A property owner or other person in control of private property may employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative.  If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03	NOTICE BY MAIL.  The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody.  Notice shall be deemed given when mailed.  The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice.  The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction.  If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle.  If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters.  If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property.  A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.04	NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER.  If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice under Section 80.03.  The published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in Section 80.03. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
80.05	FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.  The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay all towing and storage fees as established by the storage facility, whereupon the vehicle shall be released.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06	DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.  If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07	DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.  The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.  The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority.  The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08	PROCEEDS FROM SALES.  Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification required, in accordance with State law.  Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund.  Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09	DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.  Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish such motor vehicle.  A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])




[The next page is 475]

 
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01  Definitions	90.12  Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.02  Superintendent’s Duties	90.13  Failure to Maintain
90.03  Mandatory Connections	90.14  Curb Valve
90.04  Abandoned Connections	90.15  Interior Valve
90.05  Permit	90.16  Inspection and Approval
90.06  Tapping Fee	90.17  Completion by the City
90.07  Compliance with Plumbing Code	90.18  Shutting off Water Supply
90.08  Plumber Required	90.19  Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.09  Excavations	90.20  No Guarantee of Constant Water Supply
90.10  Tapping Mains	90.30  Installation of Non-Public Water Wells Prohibited
90.11  Installation of Water Service Pipe	
90.01	DEFINITIONS.  The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
1.	“Combined service account” means a customer service account for the provision of two or more utility services.
2.	“Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
3.	“Superintendent” means the Superintendent of the City water system or any duly authorized assistant, agent or representative.
4.	“Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community use.
5.	“Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building served.
6.	“Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02	SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.  The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter.  This chapter shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to new ones.  The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the water system, subject to the approval of the Council.  In the event of an emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the system until due consideration by the Council may be had. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03	MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.  All residences and business establishments within the City limits intended or used for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be connected to the public water system, if it is reasonably available and if the building is not furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source. 
90.04	ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.  When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned off at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight. 
90.05	PERMIT.  Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written permit must be obtained from the City.  The application for the permit shall include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner, the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses of the water.  If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be issued.  Work under any permit must be completed within sixty (60) days after the permit is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to conditions beyond the control of the person making the application, an extension of time within which to complete the work may be granted.  The permit may be revoked at any time for any violation of these chapters.
90.06	TAPPING FEE.  The person who makes the application shall pay to the Clerk a $350.00 fee for each ¾-inch connection.  The tapping fee for all connections larger than a 
¾-inch tap shall be determined on a time and materials basis.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07	COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.  The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.
90.08	PLUMBER REQUIRED.  All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.  
90.09	EXCAVATIONS.  All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.10	TAPPING MAINS.  All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision of the Superintendent and in accord with the following: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.	Independent Services.  No more than one house, building, or premises shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained from the Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house, building, or premises may be shut off independently of the other. 
2.	Sizes and Location of Taps.  All mains six (6) inches or less in diameter shall receive no larger than a ¾-inch tap.  All mains of over six inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap.  Where a larger connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two or more small taps or saddles shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order.  All taps in the mains shall be made in the top half of the pipe, at least eighteen (18) inches apart.  No main shall be tapped nearer than two (2) feet of the joint in the main.
3.	Corporation Stop.  A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main.  The corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the service pipe.
4.	Location Record.  An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the Superintendent shall require.
90.11	INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.  Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting shall be Type K copper.  The use of any other pipe material for the service line shall first be approved by the Superintendent.  Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving, and to such depth, as to prevent rupture from settlement or freezing. 
90.12	RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.  The City shall install and maintain the water service pipe from the main to an existing curb valve.  In the event of no existing curb valve, the City shall install and maintain the service pipe from the main to a point 40 feet from the main or to such point beyond 40 feet as required to place the curb valve out of the roadway.  The property owner shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the water service pipe from the curb valve, said point 40 feet from the main, or from said extended point to the building served.  The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.13	FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.  When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails to correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the property. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.14	CURB VALVE.  There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off valve on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent.  The shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the pavement or ground. 
90.15	INTERIOR VALVE.  There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently.  Where one service pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one without interfering with service to the others. 
90.16	INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.  All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals.  If the Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must proceed immediately to correct the work.  Every person who uses or intends to use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable hours and on proof of authority. 
90.17	COMPLETION BY THE CITY.  Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for twenty-four (24) hours after the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system, or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner or the plumber.  If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs before receiving another permit.  If the property owner is assessed, such assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.18	SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.  The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System chapters that is not being contested in good faith.  The supply shall not be turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent has ordered the water to be turned on. 
90.19	OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS.  It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to turn water on at the curb valve, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
90.20	NO GUARANTEE OF CONSTANT WATER SUPPLY.  The City does not guarantee a constant water supply to any customer and shall not be liable for any claim or damage for any failure to supply the same, nor shall the City be liable for any claim or damage by reason of breaking of any service pipe or other equipment, or if for any reason the supply of water shall be shut off to make connections, repairs, extensions or for any other purpose that may be found necessary.  The right is reserved to cut off the supply of water at any time.
90.30	INSTALLATION OF NON-PUBLIC WATER WELLS PROHIBITED.  No Private or non-public water well or water supply system shall be installed or constructed where a public water supply system is reasonably accessible to the landowner.  The determination of reasonable accessibility shall be made by the City Engineer or other designated official.  In the event the City Engineer or other designated official determines the property is not reasonably accessible to a public water supply system, then a variance from this chapter may be obtained from the City Council if a well construction permit is obtained pursuant to State law regulations or County ordinance.
The City Council may grant a permit to a landowner to construct a private water well, providing the conditions of this section are met.  Each of the following conditions must be met for issuance of a permit for construction and operation of a private water well:
1.	The well and pump installation meet the requirements of applicable State law and County ordinances.
2.	The landowner or the landowner’s agent shall first obtain a well construction permit issued by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, or by the County Board of Supervisors or the Board’s designee authorized to issue permits, pursuant to State law or administrative rules.
3.	Adequate showing that the well construction and pump installation will produce bacteriologically safe water.
4.	Adequate showing that the well construction and pump installation will produce water that will not be contaminated by hazardous substances.
5.	There are no cross-connections between the well and pump installation and the public water supply systems.  No fixture shall be served both by the well and by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources as required by departmental rules.
6.	The contractor engaged by the landowner to construct the well and install the pump shall first register with the Iowa Department of Natural Resources as required by departmental rules.
7.	The proposed use of the well and pump installation can be justified as being necessary in addition to water provided by the municipal public water supply system or as useful in conserving water.
(Ord. 465 – Apr. 15 Supp.)
 



[The next page is 485]

 
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS 
91.01  Purpose	91.07  Right of Entry
91.02  Water Use Metered	91.08  Separate Metering of Water Not Entering the Sewer 
91.03  Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception	System
91.04  Location of Meters	91.09  Meter Testing
91.05  Meter Setting	91.10  Meter Reading Unobtainable
91.06  Meter Repairs	91.11  Water for Building or Construction Purposes
91.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among customers. 
91.02	WATER USE METERED.  All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished, installed, and kept in good repair by the City, with the exception of those meters used for separate metering purposes as described in Section 91.08 of this chapter. 
91.03	FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.  Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent.  No open connection shall be incorporated in the system, and there shall be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which must be sealed open. 
91.04	LOCATION OF METERS.  All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter readers and repairmen and protected from freezing. 
91.05	METER SETTING.  The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for proper setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the meter.  Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and shall be of a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
91.06	METER REPAIRS.  Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out of order, the Superintendent shall have it repaired.  If it is found that damage to the meter has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be liable for the cost of repairs. 
91.07	RIGHT OF ENTRY.  The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter. 
91.08	SEPARATE METERING OF WATER NOT ENTERING THE SEWER SYSTEM. 
1.	Any water customer who desires to use City water for a purpose that prevents the used water from entering the City sewer system may purchase and install an additional water meter to measure the water used for such a purpose.
2.	Such a customer shall furnish and install an approved additional water meter to City specifications in such a way that only water that cannot enter the sewer system will be measured through such additional meter.
3.	The amount of water thus used and measured by such an additional water meter shall be added to the water used and measured by the primary water meter and the total water thus consumed shall be paid for at the regular water usage rate established from time to time.  No charge for sewer usage shall be made for water measured through such additional meter.
4.	There shall be no additional minimum charge for the additional meter.  All costs of purchase, installation, and maintenance of the additional water meter system shall be borne by the customer installing the additional meter.
91.09	METER TESTING.  Upon the written request of any customer, the meter serving said customer shall be tested by the City.  Such test will be made without charge to the customer if the meter has not been tested within twelve (12) months preceding the requested test; otherwise, a charge of $2.00 will be made and then only if the test indicates meter accuracy within the limits of two percent (2%).
91.10	METER READING UNOBTAINABLE.  Where a meter has ceased to register, or meter reading could not be obtained, the quantity of water consumed for billing purposes will be based upon an average of the prior six months consumption and the conditions of water service prevailing during the period in which the meter failed to register.
91.11	WATER FOR BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES.  Water for building or construction purposes will be furnished by meter measurement, only after suitable deposit has been made, the minimum deposit being ten dollars ($10.00), and the amount to be determined by the City, depending upon the size of the construction work contemplated; and all water for building or construction purposes, as set forth in the permit, must pass through one and the same meter.  Water so supplied shall be discharged through a hose or pipe directly upon material to be wet, or into a barrel or other container, and in no case upon the ground or into or through a ditch or trench and all use of water by other than applicant or use of water for any purpose or upon any premi¬ses not so stated or described in the application must be prevented by the applicant or water service may be discontinued without notice.



 
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES 
92.01  Service Charges	92.06  Lien for Nonpayment
92.02  Rates For Service	92.07  Lien Exemption
92.03  Rates Outside the City	92.08  Lien Notice
92.04  Billing for Water Service	92.09  Customer Deposits
92.05  Service Discontinued	92.10  Water Leak Payment Adjustment Policy
92.01    	SERVICE CHARGES.  Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91. Each location, building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not. All customers shall pay a monthly service fee of $10.00 for each service which will be included on the monthly bill.  	(Ord. 479 – Nov. 16 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84) 
92.02	RATES FOR SERVICE.  Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[1])
1.	First 10,000 gallons used per month at $7.25 per 1,000 gallons.
2.	Next 90,000 gallons used per month at $5.20 per 1,000 gallons.
3.	All over 100,000 gallons used per month at $3.55 per 1,000 gallons.
In no event shall the bill for water service be less than the following minimum charge per month, which is based on meter size:
3/8" and 3/4" meter	$	14.50
1" meter	$	22.40
1 1/4" meter	$	32.00
1 1/2" meter	$	41.60
2" meter	$	54.40
3" meter	$	63.95
4" meter	$	95.95
5" meter	$	115.15
6" meter	$	134.35
Standby Service:  Any location desiring standby water service for a fire protection system shall be responsible for installing and maintaining, at no cost to the City, the service line required for such fire protection system.  The extra cost of any increase in size to service lines shall be borne by the standby customer, unless otherwise negotiated with the City Council. Rates to be implemented on the April 10, 2016 utility bill.
(Ord. 474 – Mar. 16 Supp.)
92.03	RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY.  Water service shall be provided any customer located outside the corporate limits of the City which the City has agreed to serve, at 120 percent of the rates provided in Section 92.02.  No such customer, however, will be served unless the customer shall have signed a service contract agreeing to be bound by the ordinances, rules and regulations applying to water service established by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 & 384.84)
92.04	BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.  Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable in accordance with the following: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.	Bills Issued.  The Clerk shall prepare, date, and issue bills for combined service accounts.  Bills shall be deemed issued as of the date indicated on the bills.
2.	Bills Payable.  Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and payable at the office of the Clerk within 20 days of the date of issue.
3.	Late Payment Penalty.  Bills not paid when due shall be considered delinquent.  A one-time late payment penalty of 1½ percent of the amount due (per month) shall be added to each delinquent bill.
92.05	SERVICE DISCONTINUED.  Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued in accordance with the following: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.	Notice.  The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that service will be discontinued if payment of the combined service account, including late payment charges, is not received within 12 days of the delinquent notice.  Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred within one day of a bill becoming delinquent and shall inform the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance.  If the bill, including late payment charges, is not paid by the end of the 12-day period, a 24-hour shutoff notice will be posted on the customer’s property.
2.	Notice to Landlords.  If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord.  If the customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for service under the account, such request shall be sent to the owner or landlord of the property if the owner or landlord has made a written request for notice of any change of name for service under the account to the rental property.						      (Ord. 438 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
3.	Hearing.  If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the shut off, the Clerk or Deputy Clerk shall conduct an informal hearing and shall make a determination as to whether the disconnection is justified.  The customer has the right to appeal the Clerk’s or Deputy Clerk’s decision to the Council, and if the Council finds that disconnection is justified, then such disconnection shall be made, unless payment has been received.
4.	Fees.  A fee of $10.00 shall be charged before service is restored to a delinquent customer.  No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary trips in the regular changes in occupancies of property.
92.06	LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.  The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises.  Water service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84) 
92.07	LIEN EXEMPTION.  The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to a residential rental property where water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges.  In addition, a lien for nonpayment shall also not apply to the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, storm water drainage systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal where the charge is paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges for such service.  The City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of ninety (90) days of such services to be paid to the City.  The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the occupancy begins.  Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and deposit.  A change in tenant shall require a new written notice to be given to the City within thirty (30) business days of the change in tenant.  When the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in full.  A change in the ownership of the residential rental property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City within thirty (30) business days of the completion of the change of ownership.  The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.  (Ord. 438 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84) 
92.08	LIEN NOTICE.  A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred.  If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord.  The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84) 
92.09	CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.  There shall be required from every customer a deposit in an amount equal to the highest utility bill of the previous 12 months for the premises, intended to guarantee the payment of bills for service.  The deposit may be waived upon presentation of a credit reference letter from a previous utility attesting to the customer’s timely paying of utility bills.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.10	WATER LEAK PAYMENT ADJUSTMENT POLICY.
1.	When a water leak occurs between a pit set water meter and the customer’s improvement being served by water and sewer, the customer shall pay a charge for that month for sewer and water that is determined by using the average of the preceding 12 months’ charges for sewer and water.
2.	Except for properties metered by a pit set meter, when a water leak occurs in or under a customer’s improvement being served by water and sewer, the customer shall pay for all water registered on the meter and shall pay a charge for sewer for that month which is determined by using the average of the preceding 12 months’ charges for sewer.
3.	The forgoing adjustments will only be allowed if a customer corrects a leak within ten (10) days after being advised by the City either through a water and sewer bill, or directly if the City notices that a particular customer has an unusually high reading for that month.  The City shall not be liable for any failure to advise any customer of a suspected high reading prior to the issuance of a water and sewer bill.  No extension of the above 10-day grace period shall be given unless approved in writing by a City water official or the Superintendent.



[The next page is 495]
 
CHAPTER 93
WATER CONSERVATION
93.01  Water Shortages	93.05  Yellow and System Emergency Alert Penalties
93.02  Alert Conditions	93.06  Red Alert Restrictions
93.03  Notification of Customers	93.07  Rates for Red Alert Water Consumption
93.04  Conservation Measures and Restrictions	93.08  Adjustment and Appeal During a Red Alert
93.01	WATER SHORTAGES.  It is possible, due to equipment failure or drought conditions, that the City’s water supply could become depleted to the point that there would not be a sufficient supply of water to meet all customary and usual demands.  Under these conditions, the Superintendent or, in the Superintendent’s absence, other water department personnel may request the Council to declare by resolution a White, Yellow or Red Alert condition.  An additional alert condition, the System Emergency Alert, may be declared by the Superintendent immediately and without resolution in the event that the water system suffers mechanical failure or other emergency which threatens the ability of the water system to meet its customers’ needs.  When an alert is issued, the following measures and provisions shall be in effect to produce an orderly and equitable reduction of water consumption until the alert condition is declared to be over.
93.02	ALERT CONDITIONS.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following conditions are explained:
1.	White Alert.  A White Alert may be declared when a water shortage or equipment failure poses a potential threat to the ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers currently or in the foreseeable future.  Indicators of the need to declare a White Alert may include:  system operating at 80% of its design filtering capacity; equipment malfunction, failure, or out-of-service, which may have a moderate effect on the ability to supply enough water; moderate decrease in pumping water level of wells or moderate decrease in recovery rate of water level of wells; moderate decrease in reservoir levels.
2.	Yellow Alert.  A Yellow Alert may be declared when a water shortage or equipment failure poses a serious threat to the ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers currently and in the foreseeable future.  Indicators of the need to declare a Yellow Alert may include:  system operating at 90% of design filtering capacity; equipment malfunction, failure, or out-of-service, which has a definite effect on the ability to supply enough water; significant decrease in pumping water level of wells or significant decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells; significant decrease in reservoir levels.
3.	Red Alert.  A Red Alert may be declared when a water shortage or equipment failure poses a severe and immediate threat to the ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers. Indicators of the need to declare a Red Alert may include:  system operating at 100% of design filtering capacity; equipment malfunction, failure, or out-of-service, which has an immediate and serious effect on the ability to supply enough water; serious decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells; serious decrease in reservoir levels.
4.	System Emergency Alert.  The Superintendent or authorized water department personnel, in the Superintendent’s absence, may declare a System Emergency Alert immediately and on the spot in extreme situations such as major system failure or chemical spill that threatens the immediate availability of sufficient water.
93.03	NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMERS.  When an alert condition has been declared, notification of the alert will be made to the customers in any number of ways, including: Cable TV cut-in; publication in local newspapers; posting of notifications in businesses and other areas; and in the more serious situations, door-to-door and telephone notification may be used.  Every effort will also be made to notify customers of the cancellation of an alert condition.
93.04	CONSERVATION MEASURES AND RESTRICTIONS.  The following conservation measures and restrictions shall apply during a White Alert, Yellow Alert, or System Alert:
1.	White Alert.  Under a White Alert all customers of the municipal water service are encouraged to limit or curtail all nonessential uses of water in order to conserve water resources during the time of shortage.  This voluntary conservation will request that customers comply with the following standards:
A.	No watering of lawns shrubs or gardens between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
B.	No water should be used to fill private swimming pools, reflecting pools or any other pool or pond.
C.	No water should be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks or building exteriors.
D.	No water should be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
E.	Water should be served at restaurants only upon request.
F.	Car washing should be done only at commercial establishments providing that service.
2.	Yellow Alert.  Under a Yellow Alert the following restrictions in the use of potable processed municipal water shall be imposed and enforced:
A.	Outdoor watering of lawns, gardens, trees, shrubs, etc. may be done only every other day between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.  Even-numbered street addresses may water during these hours on even-numbered dates, and odd-numbered street addresses may water on odd-numbered dates.
B.	No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, reflecting pools, or any other pool or pond.
C.	No water shall be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks, or building exteriors.
D.	No water shall be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and industrial equipment, machinery, or interior spaces.
E.	Water shall be served at restaurants only upon request by the customer.
F.	Car washing is prohibited except in commercial establishments providing that service.
G.	Tank-load water sales may be limited or eliminated.
3.	System Emergency Alert.  Under a System Emergency Alert the following restrictions in the use of potable processed municipal water shall be imposed and enforced.
A.	All outside water use, except for sanitation and fire, is prohibited.
B.	All commercial and industrial uses of water not essential in providing products and services is prohibited.
C.	Irrigation of agricultural crops is prohibited.
D.	Recreational and leisure water use is prohibited.
E.	Water not necessary for the preservation of life or the general welfare of the community is prohibited.
93.05	YELLOW AND SYSTEM EMERGENCY ALERT PENALTIES.  The following penalties shall apply for violations of Yellow and System Emergency Alert water use restrictions imposed under this chapter.
1.	First Violation.  A written notice of violation will be issued to the water user violating water use restrictions.
2.	Subsequent Violations.  A written notice of the violation will be issued and a surcharge in the amount of 50% of the user’s previous water bill will be added to the user’s next utility bill for each violation.
3.	Repeated Disregard of Water Use Restrictions.  Repeated violations or disregard of the water use restrictions imposed may result in the interruption of service or reduction of flow, if so ordered by the Superintendent or authorized water department personnel.  Normal service will be restored only after the user provides satisfactory assurance that restrictions will be complied with.
4.	Penalty Appeal.  Any customer charged with a water use restriction violation may request an appeal hearing before the Council.  It is possible that certain circumstances may cause the Council to issue a complete or partial mitigation of the penalty.
93.06	RED ALERT RESTRICTIONS.  Under a Red Alert the water use restrictions listed under the Yellow Alert will apply.  In addition water will be rationed to customers in the following manner:
1.	Residential Use.  A monthly allocation of 3,000 gallons of water per household per billing period.
2.	Commercial Use.  In certain businesses where water is part of the service provided, such as car wash facilities or laundering businesses, no monthly allocation will be issued.  However, the water use restrictions will still apply as stated under the Yellow Alert.  Other commercial, industrial, and institutional users will have their monthly water allocation determined on an individual basis by conditions including past usage, service provided and occupancy data.  These determinations will be made by water department personnel and the Clerk’s office.
93.07	RATES FOR RED ALERT WATER CONSUMPTION.  Rates for billing water usage to customers during a Red Alert will be as follows:
1.	Normal Rate.  For water used within and not exceeding the monthly allocation, the normal water rate schedule in use at that time will be used.
2.	Premium Rate.  For water usage in excess of a customer’s monthly allocation, a premium rate of $1.00 per 100 gallons of water consumed in excess of the allocation will be charged.  Sewer rates will not be affected.
93.08	ADJUSTMENT AND APPEAL DURING A RED ALERT.  An adjustment to the monthly allocation and premium rate charges during a Red Alert may be made in accordance with the following:
1.	Adjustment of the Monthly Water Allocation.
A.	For residences with more than three family members who are presently residing at the residence, the monthly water allocation may be increased to 1,000 gallons of water per household member per billing period.  This increase may be obtained by filling out and signing an allocation increase application at the City Office.
B.	For commercial, industrial, institutional, and residential customers, an adjustment may be applied for by appearing before the Council.  The monthly water allocation may be increased based on factors appropriate to the individual customer, such as usage, production, service, and occupancy data provided at that time by the customer.
2.	Adjustment of Premium Rate Charges.  Any person may file for adjustment of the premium rate charges imposed for water used in excess of their monthly allocation.  Requests for adjustments must be made to the Council, which may grant an adjustment based on the following criteria:
A.	Adjustments may be granted for overconsumption due to mechanical failures, such as broken or leaky pipes or fixtures, but not for overconsumption due to human carelessness.
B.	The applicant shall furnish proof that the mechanical failure was repaired promptly.  This should be in the form of a professional plumber’s invoice or statement or materials receipt.
C.	The adjustments shall be granted only for the billing period prior to the correction of the failure.
D.	For those accounts granted an adjustment of the premium rate charges, the amount of adjustment shall be determined by the Council.



[The next page is 515]
 
CHAPTER 95 
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01  Purpose	95.06  Service Outside the City
95.02  Definitions	95.07  Right of Entry
95.03  Superintendent	95.08  Use of Easements
95.04  Prohibited Acts	95.09  Special Penalties 
95.05  Sewer Connection Required	
95.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
95.02	DEFINITIONS.  For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined: 
1.	“B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20º) C, expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million. 
2.	“Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
3.	“Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the drainage of one building site. 
4.	“Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
5.	“Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic, commercial, or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into the public sewer system.
6.	“Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
7.	“Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.  
8.	“Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.  
9.	“Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.  
10.	“On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment, and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other facilities serving the equivalent of fifteen persons (1500 gpd) or less.
11.	“pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.   
12.	“Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
13.	“Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial waste.
14.	“Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.   
15.	“Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.   
16.	“Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.   
17.	“Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.  
18.	“Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.  
19.	“Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said customers by said sewer system.
20.	“Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.  
21.	“Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
22.	“Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works and/or of water pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or representative.  
23.	“Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable by laboratory filtering.  
24.	“Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
95.03	SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
1.	Operation and Maintenance.  Operate and maintain the City sewage system. 
2.	Inspection and Tests.  Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.  
3.	Records.  Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04	PROHIBITED ACTS.  No person shall do, or allow, any of the following: 
1.	Damage Sewer System.  Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2.	Surface Run-Off or Groundwater.  Connect a roof downspout, sump pump, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.  
3.	Manholes.  Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by authority of the Superintendent.  
4.	Objectionable Wastes.  Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
5.	Septic Tanks.  Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as provided in these chapters.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
6.	Untreated Discharge.  Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05	SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.  The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within sixty (60) days after date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer is located within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to it.  Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice to connect to the public sewer. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f]) 
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
95.06	SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.  The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions stipulated by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
95.07	RIGHT OF ENTRY.  The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.  The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
95.08	USE OF EASEMENTS.  The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
95.09	SPECIAL PENALTIES.  The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these Sanitary Sewer chapters:  
1.	Notice of Violation.  Any person found to be violating any provision of these chapters except subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.  
2.	Continuing Violations.  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of this Code of Ordinances.  Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
3.	Liability Imposed.  Any person violating any of the provisions of these chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation.  
 
CHAPTER 96 
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
96.01  Permit	96.06  Interceptors Required
96.02  Connection Charge	96.07  Sewer Tap
96.03  Plumber Required	96.08  Inspection Required
96.04  Excavations	96.09  Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.05  Connection Requirements	96.10  Abatement of Violations
96.01	PERMIT.  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City.  The application for the permit shall set forth the location and description of the property to be connected with the sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent.  The permit shall require the owner to complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions herein may be granted.  Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a violation of these chapters.
96.02	CONNECTION CHARGE.  All applications shall be accompanied by a fee of $225.00, payable to the City, for the connection charge.
96.03	PLUMBER REQUIRED.  All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04	EXCAVATIONS.  All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation of a building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the State Plumbing Code and the provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
96.05	CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.  Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following: 
1.	Old Building Sewers.  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by the owner and observed by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
2.	Separate Building Sewers.  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway.  In such cases the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
3.	Installation.  The installation and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code and applicable rules and regulations of the City.  All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.  Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.  
4.	Water Lines.  When possible, building sewers should be laid at least ten (10) feet horizontally from a water service.  The horizontal separation may be less, provided the water service line is located at one side and at least twelve (12) inches above the top of the building sewer.   
5.	Size.  Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four (4) inches.
6.	Alignment and Grade.  All building sewers shall be laid to a straight line to meet the following:  
A.	Recommended grade at one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot.  
B.	Minimum grade of one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot.  
C.	Minimum velocity of 2.00 feet per second with the sewer half full. 
D.	Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the written approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved fittings.  
7.	Depth.  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor.  The depth of cover above the sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. 
8.	Sewage Lifts.  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
9.	Pipe Specifications.  Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws, splits, or breaks.  Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code except that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public sewer, shall comply with the current edition of one of the following:
A.	Clay sewer pipe – A.S.T.M. C-700 (extra strength).
B.	Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe – A.S.T.M. A-74.  
C.	Ductile iron water pipe – A.W.W.A. C-151.
D.	P.V.C. – SDR26 – A.S.T.M. D-3034.
10.	Bearing Walls.  No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened.  
11.	Jointing.  Fittings, type of joint and jointing material shall be compatible with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the Superintendent.  Solvent-welded joints are not permitted.
12.	Unstable Soil.  No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed when crossing any watercourse.  Where an old watercourse must of necessity be crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be required for such crossings.  Such encasement shall extend at least six (6) inches on all sides of the pipe.  The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on firm, solid material at either end.   
13.	Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space.  No connection for any residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled.  The backfill shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the foundation.  Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent.  Any accumulation of water in any excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary sewer.   
96.06	INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.  Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and service stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients.  Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  When required, such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
1.	Design and Location.  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity as specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
2.	Construction Standards.  The interceptors shall be constructed of impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.  They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.  
3.	Maintenance.  All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at all times.
96.07	SEWER TAP.  Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the sewer lateral.  If no lateral is accessible, then the City shall provide one for the property owner.  The expense of a lateral line shall be $100.00 more than the connection fee contained in Section 96.02.  If there is not a “Y” for the lateral, then the expense shall be $200.00 more than the connection fee contained in Section 96.02.  The public sewer shall be tapped and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be glued and attached with stainless steel clamps to the sewer.  At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless special permission to do so is received from the Superintendent.
96.08	INSPECTION REQUIRED.  All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent.  As soon as all pipe work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material; no sewer pipe laid under ground shall be covered or trenches filled until after the sewer has been so inspected and approved.  If the Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work. 
96.09	PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.  All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
96.10	ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.  Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon the private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within thirty (30) days after date of official notice from the Council of such violation.  If not made within such time, the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to the property owner.  Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])



[The next page is 525]
 
CHAPTER 97 
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 
97.01  Storm Water	97.05  Restricted Discharges; Powers
97.02  Surface Waters Exception	97.06  Special Facilities
97.03  Prohibited Discharges	97.07  Control Manholes 
97.04  Restricted Discharges	97.08  Testing of Wastes
97.01	STORM WATER.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.  Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers that are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.  Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
97.02	SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.  Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent where such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to the best interests of the sewer system. 
97.03	PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
1.	Flammable or Explosive Material.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.  
2.	Toxic or Poisonous Materials.  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.  
3.	Corrosive Wastes.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.  
4.	Solid or Viscous Substances.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.   
5.	Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.  Any waters or wastes having (a) a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or (b) containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (c) having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.  Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (a) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or (c) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.  Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.  
97.04	RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.  In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.  The substances restricted are: 
1.	High Temperature.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees (150º) F (65º C).
2.	Fat, Oil, Grease.  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600 milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.  
3.	Viscous Substances.  Water or wastes containing substances that may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F and 150º F (0º to 65º C).
4.	Garbage.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension.
5.	Acids.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.  
6.	Toxic or Objectionable Wastes.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.  
7.	Odor or Taste.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, Federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
8.	Radioactive Wastes.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.  
9.	Excess Alkalinity.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.  
10.	Unusual Wastes.  Materials that exert or cause:
A.	Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
B.	Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
C.	Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
D.	Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein.  
11.	Noxious or Malodorous Gases.  Any noxious or malodorous gas or other substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.   
12.	Damaging Substances.  Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.  
13.	Untreatable Wastes.  Waters or wastes containing substances that are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.05	RESTRICTED DISCHARGES – POWERS.  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 97.04 and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may: 
1.	Rejection.  Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public sewage system;
2.	Pretreatment.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;  
3.	Controls Imposed.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or  
4.	Special Charges.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Chapter 99.
97.06	SPECIAL FACILITIES.  If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense. 
97.07	CONTROL MANHOLES.  When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.  Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent.  The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
97.08	TESTING OF WASTES.  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole.  In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.  (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.  Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples). 
 
CHAPTER 98 
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS 
98.01  When Prohibited	98.05  Discharge Restrictions
98.02  When Required	98.06  Maintenance of System
98.03  Compliance with Regulations	98.07  Systems Abandoned
98.04  Permit Required	98.08  Disposal of Septage
98.01	WHEN PROHIBITED.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02	WHEN REQUIRED.  When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03	COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.  The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the County Board of Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04	PERMIT REQUIRED.  No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.
98.05	DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.  It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch, stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])  
98.06	MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.  The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the City. 
98.07	SYSTEMS ABANDONED.  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section 95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f]) 
98.08	DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.  No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site.


 
CHAPTER 99 
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
99.01  Sewer Service Charges Required	99.05  Payment of Bills
99.02  Rental Rate	99.06  Lien for Nonpayment
99.03  Special Rates	99.07  Special Agreements Permitted
99.04  Private Water Systems	
99.01	SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.  Every customer shall pay to the City sewer service fees as hereinafter provided. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.02	RENTAL RATE.  Each customer shall pay a sewer service charge for the use of and for the service supplied by the municipal sanitary sewer system based upon the amount and rate of water consumed as follows:
1.	First 2,000 gallons or lesser amount per month @ $13.00.
2.	All over 2,000 gallons used per month @ $5.53 per 1,000 gallons.
In no case shall the minimum service charge be less than $13.00 per month, which is necessary to retire the indebtedness, operating and maintenance, and reserve necessary for maintaining the sanitary sewer facility.†
(Ord. 495 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
99.03	SPECIAL RATES.  Where, in the judgment of the Superintendent and the Council, special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer charges provided in Section 99.02 would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the customer, a special rate shall be proposed by the Superintendent and submitted to the Council for approval by resolution. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.04	PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.  Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay sewer charges based upon the water used as determined by the City either by an estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the customer’s expense.  Any negotiated or agreed-upon sales or charges shall be subject to approval of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.05	PAYMENT OF BILLS.  All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in Section 92.04 of this Code of Ordinances.  Sewer service may be discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account. 
99.06	LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.  Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises.  Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. 		(Ord. 438 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.07	SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.  No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special agreement, arrangement, or contract between the Council, and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted subject to special conditions, rate, and cost as established by the Council. 

 
CHAPTER 100
CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWER PRESSURE SYSTEMS
100.01  Application for Connection	100.07  Pump Specifications
100.02  Water System Connection Required	100.08  Pump Mounting
100.03  Property Owner’s Responsibility	100.09  Below Grade Sewers
100.04  Sewer Tap for Pressure Systems	100.10  Prohibited Discharges
100.05  Piping	100.11  Inspection Required
100.06  Storage Tank	100.12  Sewer Rates for Outside City
100.01	APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION.  Any person desiring to make a connection with the pressure system shall first file with the Clerk an application, on forms furnished by the City, setting forth the location, description, and other pertinent information.  The application will also contain a service contract which shall be signed by the customer in agreement to be bound by the ordinances, rules, and regulations applying to sanitary sewer connection established by the Council. 
100.02	WATER SYSTEM CONNECTION REQUIRED.  Since all sewer billing is determined by water usage, no connection to a sanitary sewer pressure system shall be allowed unless the property served is also connected to the City's water system. 
100.03	PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY.  The property owner shall bear the responsibility for the installation of all equipment and piping necessary to make the connection.  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and maintenance of the connection, including tapping, materials, and equipment purchase, shall be borne by the property owner.  Maintenance and repair of the connection and related facilities shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
100.04	SEWER TAP FOR PRESSURE SYSTEMS.  Connection to the sanitary sewer pressure system shall be made at the sewer main utilizing a 1½" or 2" water service tapping saddle and corporation.  The tap shall be a through-the-corporation tap with proper equipment to capture and retrieve the coupon.  A curb stop shall be installed at the right-of-way or property line. 
100.05	PIPING.  All piping shall be of a minimum standard of Schedule 40 pressure pipe.  All pipe joints shall be either glue or mechanical joint pressure rated.  Femco and similar fittings are not acceptable. 
100.06	STORAGE TANK  The storage tank shall be a sealed tank which will not allow rain, surface water, or ground water to infiltrate the system.  It shall have an access area on the top for cleaning, maintenance, and repair work to be done as necessary. 
100.07	PUMP SPECIFICATIONS.  The pump shall be a Bams model SGV or the equivalent.  It shall have a maximum pumping rate of 20 gallons per minute and shall have a progressive cavity design with a minimum pressure rating of 80 psi. 
100.08	PUMP MOUNTING.  The pump shall be mounted within the storage tank in such a mariner that it may be removed for maintenance and repair without having any person physically enter the tank.  The discharge side of the pump shall be equipped with a ball type check valve. 
100.09	BELOW GRADE SEWERS.  Any below grade sewer lines shall be pumped into the storage tank for discharge into the system.  Below grade sewers shall not contain rain, run-off, or surface water. 
100.10	PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.  In addition to rainwater, surface water, and groundwater the property owner is subject to the prohibited and restricted discharges and related rules and regulations as set forth in Chapter 97 of this Code of Ordinances under Sections 97.03, 97.04, and 97.05. 
100.11	INSPECTION REQUIRED.  Prior to the inspection required by this section, an inspection fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the City.  All pressure system connections and related equipment and pipe installations shall be inspected and approved by the Superintendent or agent prior to being allowed into service.  This shall include all pipe work from the building to the storage tank and continuing to the sewer main.  No sewer pipe shall be covered or trenches filled until after the material and workmanship has been inspected and approved.  If the Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the property owner must proceed immediately to correct the work. 
100.12	SEWER RATES FOR OUTSIDE CITY.  Sewer service shall be provided any customer located outside the corporate limits of the City which the City has agreed to serve, at 120 percent of the rates provided in Section 99.02.  No such customer, however, will be served unless the customer shall have signed a service contract agreeing to be bound by the ordinances, rules and regulations applying to sewer service established by the Council. 



[The next page is 545]


 
CHAPTER 105 
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01  Purpose	105.08  Open Dumping Prohibited
105.02  Definitions	105.09  Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.03  Sanitary Disposal Required	105.10  Waste Storage Containers
105.04  Health and Fire Hazard	105.11  Prohibited Practices
105.05  Open Burning Restricted	105.12  Sanitary Disposal Project Designated
105.06  Separation of Yard Waste Required	105.13  Ownership of Solid Waste
105.07  Littering Prohibited	
105.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste. 
105.02	DEFINITIONS.  For use in these chapters the following terms are defined: 
1.	“Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public and private places.
2.	“Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
3.	“Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
4.	“Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences.  
(IAC, 567-100.2)
5.	“Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage.  The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.  
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
6.	“Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or debris. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1]) 
7.	“Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
8.	“Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings, market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or semisolid form.  
(IAC, 567-100.2)
9.	“Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple-family dwelling.
10.	“Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a result of residential activities.  The term includes landscape waste grown on the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires, trade wastes and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
11.	“Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
12.	“Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
13.	“Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances (including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)  
14.	“Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities.  Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa.  Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
A.	Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
B.	Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa, except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
C.	Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
D.	Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable State or Federal standards.
E.	Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a discarded material.				       (Ord. 458 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
105.03	SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.  It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance.  Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than thirty (30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court. 
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)   
105.04	HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.  It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05	OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.  No person shall allow, cause or permit open burning of combustible materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the following circumstances: 
(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2)
1.	Disaster Rubbish.  The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially declared emergency condition exists, provided that the burning of any structures or demolished structures is conducted in accordance with 40 CFR Section 61.145.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3a])
2.	Trees and Tree Trimmings.  The open burning of trees and tree trimmings at a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in compliance with the rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.  
(IAC, 567-23.2[3b])
3.	Flare Stacks.  The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
(IAC, 567-23.2[3c])
4.	Landscape Waste.  The disposal by open burning of landscape waste originating on the premises.  However, the burning of landscape waste produced in clearing, grubbing and construction operations shall be limited to areas located at least one-fourth (¼) mile from any building inhabited by other than the landowner or tenant conducting the open burning.  Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite landscape waste.  
(IAC, 567-23.2[3d])
5.	Recreational Fires.  Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation, and ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources.  Rubber tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])
6.	Residential Waste.  Backyard burning of residential waste at dwellings of four-family units or less.  
(IAC, 567-23.2[3f])
7.	Training Fires.  Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona fide training of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided that the training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])
8.	Pesticide Containers and Seed Corn Bags.  The disposal by open burning of paper or plastic pesticide containers (except those formerly containing organic forms of beryllium, selenium, mercury, lead, cadmium or arsenic) and seed corn bags resulting from farming activities occurring on the premises if burned in accordance with rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3h])
9.	Agricultural Structures.  The open burning of agricultural structures if in accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3i])
10.	Controlled Burning of a Demolished Building.  The controlled burning of a demolished building by the City, subject to approval of the Council, provided that the controlled burning is conducted in accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3j])
11.	Variance.  Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director of the State Department of Natural Resources.  
(IAC, 567-23.2[2])
105.06	SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.  All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted or burned on the premises or transported to the City yard waste disposal site.  Rules and regulations regarding the yard waste disposal site are set by resolution of the Council.  As used in this section, “yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush, and trees.  Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.07	LITTERING PROHIBITED.  No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose.  When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08	OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED.  No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of any solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural Resources, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste on land owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the Director of the State Department of Natural Resources.  However, this section does not prohibit the use of rubble at places other than a sanitary disposal project.  “Rubble” means dirt, stone, brick, or similar inorganic materials used for beneficial fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places other than a sanitary disposal project.  Rubble includes asphalt waste only as long as it is not used in contact with water in a floodplain.  For purposes of this section, rubble does not mean gypsum or gypsum wallboard, coal combustion residue, foundry sand, or industrial process wastes unless those wastes are approved by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2)
105.09	TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.  No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste.  Such materials shall be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of Natural Resources.  As used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including (but not limited to) poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste that requires special handling and that must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.   
(IAC, 567-100.2)  
(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.10	WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.  Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises, dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in accordance with the following: 
1.	Container Specifications.  Waste storage containers shall comply with the following specifications: 
A.	Residential.  All waste containers shall be of light weight and sturdy construction with the total weight of any individual containers and contents not exceeding 35 pounds each bag, five bags per week.  All bags must be tied.  Bags may be put in a larger waste container.  Galvanized metal containers, rubber or fiberglass containers and plastic containers that do not become brittle in cold weather may be used.  Disposable containers or other containers as approved by the City may also be used.
B.	Commercial.  Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates and where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical, shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
2.	Storage of Containers.  Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential premises.  Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written permission from the City to use public property for such purposes.  The storage site shall be well drained and fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel, and fire inspection personnel.  All owners of residential and commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around neighboring yards and streets.
3.	Location of Containers for Collection.  Containers for the storage of solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed at the curb or alley line by the owner or occupant of the premises served.  Containers or other solid waste placed at the curb line shall not be so placed more than 12 hours in advance of the regularly scheduled collection day and shall be promptly removed from the curb line following collection.
4.	Nonconforming Containers.  Solid waste placed in containers that are not in compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected. 
105.11	PROHIBITED PRACTICES.  It is unlawful for any person to:
1.	Unlawful Use of Containers.  Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such containers.  
2.	Interfere with Collectors.  Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.  
3.	Incinerators.  Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the Environmental Protection Commission.
4.	Scavenging.  Take or collect any solid waste that has been placed out for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste collector.
105.12	SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.  The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Monona County Sanitary Landfill Agency are hereby designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the City.
105.13	OWNERSHIP OF SOLID WASTE.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the ownership of all solid waste set out for collection shall vest in the Monona County Sanitary Landfill Agency.  It is unlawful for any person other than the collection contractor or the owner of the premises where the solid waste originated to remove or pick up any such solid waste.  However, the provisions of this section do not apply to recyclable materials or other items specifically set out for collection by nonprofit organizations, school groups, commercial entities, service clubs, or other organizations conducting recycling or fund drives.


[The next page is 555]

 
CHAPTER 106 
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
106.01  Collection Service	106.06  Right of Entry
106.02  Collection Vehicles	106.07  Contract Requirements
106.03  Loading	106.08  Collection Fees
106.04  Frequency of Collection	106.09  Lien for Nonpayment
106.05  Bulky Rubbish	
106.01	COLLECTION SERVICE.  The City shall provide by contract for the collection of solid waste, except bulky rubbish as provided in Section 106.05, from residential premises only.  The owners or operators of commercial, industrial, or institutional premises shall provide for the collection of solid waste produced upon such premises.
106.02	COLLECTION VEHICLES.  Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be leak-proof, durable and of easily cleanable construction.  They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03	LOADING.  Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material.  Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned. 
106.04	FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.  All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once each week and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises as frequently as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05	BULKY RUBBISH.  Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in accordance with procedures therefor established by the Council.
106.06	RIGHT OF ENTRY.  Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings.
106.07	CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.  No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste from residential premises for the City without first entering into a contract with the City.  This section does not prohibit an owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved sanitary disposal project.  Furthermore, a contract is not required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities, provided that all such materials are conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
106.08	COLLECTION FEES.  The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and there shall be levied and collected fees therefor in accordance with the following: 
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449)
1.	Schedule of Fees.  The fees for solid waste collection and disposal service, used or available, are:
A.	Each dwelling user of any City utilities shall be charged $15.46 per month fee effective July 1, 2019.  
B.	Each non-dwelling user of any City utilities shall be charged $9.50 per month for operation and maintenance of the sanitary landfill, whether or not the user has refuse removed, as set forth in Section 106.01.
2.	Payment of Bills.  All fees are due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in Section 92.04 of this Code of Ordinances.  Solid waste collection service may be discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account.
(Ord. 496 – Jul. 19 Supp.)
106.09	LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.  Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid waste collection and disposal.  Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.  
(Ord. 438 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



[The next page is 625]
 
CHAPTER 110 
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE 
110.01  Franchise Granted	110.09  Confidential Information
110.02  Term	110.10  Force Majeure
110.03  Franchise Fees or Taxes	110.11  Hold Harmless
110.04  Governing Rules and Regulations	110.12  Successors and Assigns 
110.05  Provision for Inadequate Energy Supplies	110.13  No Third Party Beneficiaries
110.06  Construction and Maintenance of Grantee’s Facilities	110.14  Non-Waiver
110.07  Extension of Grantee’s Facilities	110.15  Effective Date and Acceptance
110.08  Relocation of Grantee’s Facilities 	
110.01    FRANCHISE GRANTED.  The City of Onawa, Iowa (hereinafter referred to as “Grantor”), hereby grants a non-exclusive franchise to Black Hills/Iowa Gas Utility Company, LLC d/b/a Black Hills Energy, a Delaware limited liability corporation (hereinafter called “Grantee”), its lessees, successors and assigns.  Grantee is hereby granted the right, privilege, franchise, permission and authority to lay, construct, install, maintain, operate and extend in, along, over or across the present and future streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, public rights-of-way and public easements as are now within the present or future limits of said Grantor, a natural gas distribution system and all facilities necessary for the purpose of supplying natural gas or processed gas and other operations connected therewith or incident thereto for all purposes to the inhabitants of said Grantor and consumers in the vicinity thereof, and for the distribution of natural gas from or through said Grantor to points beyond the limits thereof.  Such facilities shall include, but not be limited to, all mains, services, pipes, conduits and all other apparatus and appliances necessary or convenient for transporting, distributing and supplying natural gas for all purposes for which it may be used, and to do all other things necessary and proper in providing natural gas service to the inhabitants of Grantor and in carrying on such business. 
110.02    TERM.  The rights and privileges granted hereunder shall remain in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter. † 
110.03    FRANCHISE FEES OR TAXES.  Grantor may, during the term of this franchise, in its discretion, in compliance with and as authorized by state law, after public hearing and upon a majority vote of a majority of the members of the Grantor’s City Council then present, pass an ordinance imposing a franchise fee on Grantee’s customers located within Grantor’s corporate limits; provided, however, that the franchise fee shall not be effective, and Grantee shall not be obligated to collect and pay same, unless and until:  (1) it is satisfactory to Grantee with respect to its compatibility with Grantee’s billing system; (2) the form of assessment and collection of the franchise fee is based on either:  (a) a percentage of Grantee’s gross receipts of regulated sales or transportation revenues collected from Grantee’s customers within Grantor’s corporate limits; (b) a volumetric fee based upon Grantee’s delivery of energy within Grantor’s corporate limits; or (c) a flat fee collected on a nondiscriminatory basis from each of Grantee’s customers within Grantor’s corporate limits; and (3) Grantor has imposed a franchise fee on all other parties supplying energy within Grantor’s corporate limits, calculated in the same manner as the franchise fee imposed on Grantee’s customers. 
110.04    GOVERNING RULES AND REGULATIONS.  The franchise granted hereunder is subject to all conditions, limitations and immunities now provided for, or as hereafter amended, and applicable to the operations of a public utility, by state or federal law.  The rates to be charged by Grantee for service within the present or future corporate limits of Grantor and the rules and regulations regarding the character, quality and standards of service to be furnished by Grantee, shall be under the jurisdiction and control of such regulatory body or bodies as may, from time to time, be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction over the rates, regulations and quality and standards of service to be supplied by Grantee.  Provided however, should any judicial, regulatory or legislative body having proper jurisdiction take any action that precludes Grantee from recovering from its customers any cost associated with services provided hereunder, then Grantee and Grantor shall renegotiate the terms of this Ordinance in accordance with the action taken.  In determining the rights and duties of the Grantee, the terms of this Ordinance shall take precedence over any conflicting terms or requirements contained in any other ordinance enacted by the Grantor. 
110.05    PROVISION FOR INADEQUATE ENERGY SUPPLIES.  If an energy supplier is unable to furnish an adequate supply of energy due to an emergency, an order or decision of a public regulatory body, or other acts beyond the control of the Grantee, then the Grantee shall have the right and authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations limiting, curtailing or allocating extensions of service or supply of energy to any customers or prospective customers, and withholding the supply of energy to new customers, provided that such rules and regulations shall be uniform as applied to each class of customers or prospective customers, and shall be non-discriminatory as between communities receiving service from the Grantee. 
110.06    CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF GRANTEE’S FACILITIES.  Any pavements, sidewalks or curbing taken up and any and all excavations made shall be done in such a manner as to cause only such inconvenience to the inhabitants of Grantor and the general public as is reasonably necessary, and repairs and replacements shall be made promptly by Grantee, leaving such properties in as good as condition as existed immediately prior to excavation. Grantee agrees that for the term of this franchise, it will use its best efforts to maintain its facilities and equipment in a condition sufficient to meet the current and future energy requirements of Grantor, its inhabitants and industries.  While maintaining its facilities and equipment, Grantee shall obtain permits as required by ordinance and will fix its excavations within a commercially reasonable time period, except that in emergency situations Grantee shall take such immediate unilateral actions as it determines are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; in which case, Grantee shall notify Grantor as soon as reasonably possible.  Within a reasonable time thereafter, Grantee shall request and Grantor shall issue any permits or authorizations required by Grantor for the actions conducted by Grantee during the emergency situation.  Grantor will give Grantee reasonable notice of plans for street improvements where paving or resurfacing of a permanent nature is involved that affects Grantee’s facilities.  The notice shall contain the nature and character of the improvements, the rights-of-way upon which the improvements are to be made, the extent of the improvements, and the time when the Grantor will start the work, and, if more than one right-of-way is involved, the order in which the work is to proceed.  The notice shall be given to the Grantee as soon as practical in advance of the actual commencement of the work, considering seasonable working conditions, to permit the Grantee to make any additions, alterations, or repairs to its facilities. 
110.07    EXTENSION OF GRANTEE’S FACILITIES.  Upon receipt and acceptance of a valid application for service, Grantee shall, subject to its own economic feasibility criteria as approved by the Iowa Utilities Board make reasonable extensions of its distribution facilities to serve customers located within the current or future corporate limits of Grantor. 
110.08    RELOCATION OF GRANTEE’S FACILITIES.  If Grantor elects to change the grade of or otherwise alter any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or public place for a public purpose, unless otherwise reimbursed by federal, state or local legislative act or governmental agency, Grantee, upon reasonable notice from Grantor, shall remove and relocate its facilities or equipment situated in the public rights-of-way, at the cost and expense of Grantee, if such removal is necessary to prevent interference with Grantor’s facilities.  If Grantor orders or requests Grantee to relocate its facilities or equipment for the primary benefit of a commercial or private project, or as a result of the initial request of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, and such removal is necessary to prevent interference with such project, then Grantee shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its facilities or equipment.  Grantor shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects and exercising its authority under this section so as not to arbitrarily cause Grantee unreasonable additional expense.  If alternative public right-of-way space is available, Grantor shall also provide a reasonable alterative location for Grantee’s facilities. Grantor shall give Grantee written notice of an order or request to vacate a public right-of-way; provided, however, that its receipt of such notice shall not deprive Grantee of its right to operate and maintain its existing facilities in such public right-of way until it (a) if applicable, receives the reasonable cost of relocating the same and (b) obtains a reasonable public right-of-way, dedicated utility easement, or private easement alterative location for such facilities. 
110.09    CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.  Grantor acknowledges that certain information it might request from Grantee pursuant to this Ordinance may be of a proprietary and confidential nature, and that such requests may be subject to the Homeland Security Act or other confidentiality protections under state or federal law.  If Grantee requests that any information provided by Grantee to Grantor be kept confidential due to its proprietary or commercial value, Grantor and its employees, agents and representatives shall maintain the confidentiality of such information, to the extent allowed by law.  If Grantor is requested or required by legal or administrative process to disclose any such proprietary or confidential information, Grantor shall promptly notify Grantee of such request or requirement so that Grantee may seek an appropriate protective order or other relief. 
110.10    FORCE MAJEURE.  It shall not be a breach or default under this Ordinance if either party fails to perform its obligations hereunder due to force majeure. Force majeure shall include, but not be limited to, the following:  1) physical events such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, freezing, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or necessity of repairs to machinery, equipment or distribution or transmission lines; 2) acts of others such as strikes, work-force stoppages, riots, sabotage, insurrections or wars; 3) governmental actions such as necessity for compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order, or regulation promulgated by a governmental authority having jurisdiction; and (4) any other causes, whether of the kind herein enumerated or otherwise not reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or overcome.  Each party shall make reasonable efforts to avoid force majeure and to resolve such event as promptly as reasonably possible once it occurs in order to resume performance of its obligations hereunder; provided, however, that this provision shall not obligate a party to settle any labor strike. 
110.11    HOLD HARMLESS.  Grantee, during the term of this Ordinance, agrees to save harmless Grantor from and against all claims, demands, losses and expenses arising directly out of the negligence of Grantee, its employees or agents, in constructing, operating, and maintaining its distribution and transmission facilities or equipment; provided, however, that Grantee need not save Grantor harmless from claims, demands, losses and expenses arising out of the negligence of Grantor, its employees or agents. 
110.12    SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS.  All rights, privileges and authority granted to Grantee hereunder shall inure to the benefit of Grantee’s lessees, successors and assigns, subject to the terms, provisions and conditions herein contained, and all obligations imposed upon Grantee hereunder shall be binding upon Grantee’s lessees, successors and assigns. 
110.13    NO THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES.  This Ordinance constitutes a franchise agreement between the Grantor and Grantee. No provision of this Ordinance shall inure to the benefit of any third person, including the public at large, so as to constitute any such person as a third party beneficiary of the agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of action for any person not a party hereto. 
110.14    NON-WAIVER.  Any waiver of any obligation or default under this Ordinance shall not be construed as a waiver of any future defaults, whether of like or different character. 
110.15    EFFECTIVE DATE AND ACCEPTANCE.  This Ordinance shall become effective and be a binding contract between the Grantor and Grantee upon its final passage and approval by Grantor, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, and upon Grantee’s acceptance by written instrument, within sixty (60) days of passage by the City Council, and filing with the City Administrator of the City of Onawa, Iowa.  The City Administrator of the City of Onawa, Iowa shall sign and affix the community seal to acknowledge receipt of such acceptance, and return one copy to Grantee.  If Grantee does not, within sixty (60) days following passage of this Ordinance, either express in writing its objections to any terms or provisions contained therein, or reject this Ordinance in its entirety, Grantee shall be deemed to have accepted this Ordinance and all of its terms and conditions. 

(Ch. 110 – Ord. 446 – Oct. 13 Supp.)



[The next page is 635]
 
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC UTILITY
111.01  Purpose	111.04  Service Rules and Regulations
111.02  Policy Direction	111.05  Rates
111.03  Superintendent	111.06  Automatic Rate Adjustment
111.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the municipally owned electric system. 
111.02	POLICY DIRECTION.  The Mayor and Council shall establish appropriate rules and regulations governing the operation and maintenance of the electric system. 
111.03	SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent shall be responsible for execution of policies governing the system as established by the Council. 
111.04	SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS.  The rules and regulations for electric service are contained in the Municipal Electric Utility of the City of Onawa Tariff, on file with the State Utilities Board.  Also, an official copy of the rules and regulations as adopted is now on file in the office of the Clerk.  The rules and regulations contained therein shall apply to all users of the municipal electric system. 
111.05	RATES.  The rate for electric service shall be as follows:
1.	Residential Service:
A.	Applicable to:  Residential customer for all domestic uses in single-family dwellings and individually metered apartments within the service territory of City of Onawa Municipal Electric.  This schedule includes the use of motors of not more than 5 horsepower individual capacity; water heating units not exceeding 5kW simultaneous capacity; and space heating and air conditioning.  
The rate schedule applies to all meters in residential applications, including second “Electric Heat” meters.
B.	Service Available:  Single-phase, 60 hertz, 120/240 volt, 400 amp max., 3-wire, single meter.
C.	Monthly Rate:
Rate Designation
(1)	Service Charge (no kWh)	$10.00		S1
(2)	Service Charge Dual Meter	$15.00		S2
plus
(3)	Energy Charge			9.836¢
	All kWh
D.	Load Control Credits:  Load management or incentive credit rates will be applied to monthly bills for each customer meeting the requirements of the respective program.  Credit amount may be changed from time to time as determined by Northwest Iowa Power Cooperative (NIPCO) policies.  
To enroll in this program, customers must purchase and install a second meter and associated panels to separate electric heat without backup from the normal usage meter.  To ensure conformance of respective program by NIPCO, City will contact customer to conduct a bi-annual inspection during normal business hours.  
(1)	During the Winter Season billing months of January – April & October – December the energy charge will be: 
(i)	Dual Heat – Controlled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & with load control switch on A/C). 
Energy Charge 
All kWh	9.44¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
(ii)	Uncontrolled Electric Heat Only – Uncontrolled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & w/o load control switch on A/C)
Energy Charge 
All kWh	9.44¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
(2)	Controlled Air Conditioners, Summer Months Only (5 Months)
Monthly Credit		$3.50
(3)	Controlled Water Heaters, Summer and Winter Months (12 Months)
Monthly Credit		$3.50
E.	Sales Tax: Sales Tax to be added to all electric bills so as to be in compliance with the provisions of the laws of the state of Iowa.
F.	Prompt Payment Provisions:  All charges are net.  If the bill is not paid or mailed and postmarked by the last day of the month following the billing date, a late payment charge of 1.5% per month will apply.  If the last day of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the due date will be the next working day.
G.	Energy Cost Adjustment:  All energy usage is subject to provisions of an Energy Cost Adjustment feature, if implemented by the City Council of the City of Onawa.
2.	Commercial Single Phase:
A.	Applicable to:  This schedule is applicable to all kWh sales to establishments which are operating as a business and are provided single-phase service. This schedule shall include apartments, schools, offices, small manufacturers, stores, shops, trailer camps and similar operations where metered under one name within the service territory of City of Onawa Municipal Electric, with a peak demand that is generally less than 75kW during most months.
B.	Service Available:  Single-phase, 60 hertz, 120/240 volt, 400 amp max., 3-wire, single meter or two meters for dual heat, 60 Hertz.
Monthly Rate:
Rate Designation
(1)	Service Charge (no kWh)	$20.00		S4
(2)	Service Charge Dual Meter	$25.00		S8 
plus
(3)	Energy Charge			11.481¢
	All kWh
C.	Load Control Credits:  Load management or incentive credit rates will be applied to monthly bills for each customer meeting the requirements of the respective program.  Credit amount may be changed from time to time as determined by Northwest Iowa Power Cooperative (NIPCO) policies.  
To enroll in this program, customers must purchase and install a second meter and associated panels to separate electric heat without backup from the normal usage meter.  To ensure conformance of respective program by NIPCO, City will contact customer to conduct a bi-annual inspection during normal business hours.  
(1)	During the Winter Season billing months of January – April & October – December the energy charge will be: 
(i)	Dual Heat – Controlled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & with load control switch on A/C). 
Energy Charge all kWh	11.06¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
(ii)	Uncontrolled Electric Heat Only – Uncontrolled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & w/o load control switch on A/C)
Energy Charge all kWh	11.06¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
D.	Sales Tax: Sales Tax to be added to all electric bills so as to be in compliance with the provisions of the laws of the state of Iowa.
E.	Prompt Payment Provisions:  All charges are net.  If the bill is not paid or mailed and postmarked by the last day of the month following the billing date, a late payment charge of 1.5% per month will apply.  If the last day of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the due date will be the next working day.
F.	Energy Cost Adjustment:  All energy usage is subject to provisions of an Energy Cost Adjustment feature, if implemented by the City Council of the City of Onawa.
3.	Commercial Three Phase:
A.	Applicable to:  This schedule is applicable to all kWh sales to establishments which are operating as a business and are provided three-phase service. This schedule shall include apartments, schools, offices, small manufacturers, stores, shops, trailer camps and similar operations where metered under one name within the service territory of City of Onawa Municipal Electric, with a peak demand that is generally less than 75kW during most months.
B.	Service Available: Three-phase, 60 hertz, 120/240 or 120/208 or 277/480 volt, 400 amp max., 4-wire, single meter or two meters for dual heat, 60 Hertz.
C.	Monthly Rate:
Rate Designation
(1)	Service Charge (no kWh)	$25.00		S8
(2)	Service Charge Dual Meter	$30.00		S7
plus
(3)	Energy Charge			11.481¢
	All kWh
D.	Load Control Credits:  Load management or incentive credit rates will be applied to monthly bills for each customer meeting the requirements of the respective program.  Credit amount may be changed from time to time as determined by Northwest Iowa Power Cooperative (NIPCO) policies.  
To enroll in this program, customers must purchase and install a second meter and associated panels to separate electric heat without backup from the normal usage meter.  To ensure conformance of respective program by NIPCO, City will contact customer to conduct a bi-annual inspection during normal business hours.  
(1)	During the Winter Season billing months of January – April & October – December the energy charge will be: 
(i)	Dual Heat – Controlled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & with load control switch on A/C). 
Energy Charge all kWh	11.06¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
(ii)	Uncontrolled Electric Heat Only – Uncontrolled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & w/o load control switch on A/C)
Energy Charge all kWh	11.06¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
E.	Sales Tax:  Sales Tax to be added to all electric bills so as to be in compliance with the provisions of the laws of the state of Iowa.
F.	Prompt Payment Provisions:  All charges are net.  If the bill is not paid or mailed and postmarked by the last day of the month following the billing date, a late payment charge of 1.5% per month will apply.  If the last day of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the due date will be the next working day.
G.	Energy Cost Adjustment:  All energy usage is subject to provisions of an Energy Cost Adjustment feature, if implemented by the City Council of the City of Onawa.
4.	Large Power Service:
A.	Applicable to:  Any commercial or industrial load within the City of Onawa Municipal Electric service territory, with an annual peak demand, defined as the maximum hourly integrated demand during the previous 12 months, in excess of 75 kW, or any new customer (or existing customer that modifies its usage) that is projected to have an annual peak demand in excess of 75 kW.
B.	Service Available:  Three-phase, 60 Hertz, 240/120 V, 208 Y/120 V, or 480 Y/277 V, 4-wire, or standard primary voltage available at point of delivery. Special voltages may be provided at the discretion of the utility. Utility furnishes only one transformer bank and/or one meter.
C.	Monthly Rate:
Rate Designation
(1)	Service Charge (no kWh)	$41.25		S6
(2)	Energy Charge			3.822¢
	All kWh
(3)	Demand Charge			$14.96
	All kWh
D.	Load Control Credits:  Load management or incentive credit rates will be applied to monthly bills for each customer meeting the requirements of the respective program.  Credit amount may be changed from time to time as determined by Northwest Iowa Power Cooperative (NIPCO) policies.  
To enroll in this program, customers must purchase and install a second meter and associated panels to separate electric heat without backup from the normal usage meter.  To ensure conformance of respective program by NIPCO, City will contact customer to conduct a bi-annual inspection during normal business hours.  
(1)	During the Winter Season billing months of January – April & October – December the energy charge will be: 
(i)	Dual Heat – Controlled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & with load control switch on A/C). 
Energy Charge all kWh	3.822¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
(ii)	Uncontrolled Electric Heat Only – Uncontrolled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & w/o load control switch on A/C)
Energy Charge all kWh	3.822¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
E.	Metered Demand:  The metered demand for any month shall be the maximum kilowatt demand established by the consumer for any fifteen-minute interval during the month as indicated or recorded by a demand meter.
F.	Power Factor Adjustment:  If the customer’s average monthly power factor falls below 90%, leading or lagging, the utility may adjust the metered demand by the ratio of 90% to the measured average monthly power factor in percent. Example:
Metered Demand = 739kW
Ave. Mo. Power Factor = 73.0%
Ratio = 90/73 = 1.2329
Adjusted Demand = (739)(1.2329) = 911kW
G.	Adjusted Demand:  The adjusted demand consists of the metered demand adjusted for power factor, if applicable.
H.	Billing Demand:  The demand to be billed shall be adjusted demand for the month but not less than 60% of the highest adjusted demand during the preceding 11 months. 
Primary Metering:  The utility will furnish and install primary metering when service is taken by the consumer and metered at primary voltage.  If the consumer owns and installs all necessary primary and transformers beyond point of service, a 2% discount will apply to demand and energy charges to allow for losses and investment return.  
If the customer is metered at primary voltage, but City of Onawa Municipal Electric owns the primary and transformers, a 1% discount will apply to demand and energy charges to allow for losses.  
If service is taken at primary voltage (that is, customer owns primary and transformers) and metered at secondary voltage, a 1% discount will apply to demand and energy charges to allow for investment return
I.	Sales Tax:  Sales Tax to be added to all electric bills so as to be in compliance with the provisions of the laws of the state of Iowa.
J.	Prompt Payment Provisions:  All charges are net.  If the bill is not paid or mailed and postmarked by the last day of the month following the billing date, a late payment charge of 1.5% per month will apply.  If the last day of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the due date will be the next working day.
K.	Energy Cost Adjustment:  All energy usage is subject to provisions of an Energy Cost Adjustment feature, if implemented by the City Council of the City of Onawa.
5.	Municipal Service:
A.	Applicable to:  Any electrical load under the jurisdiction of City of Onawa government within the City of Onawa Municipal Electric service territory.
B.	Service Available:  Single- or Three-Phase, 60 Hertz, 240/120 V, 208 Y/120 V, or 480 Y/277 V, 3 or 4-wire, or standard primary voltage available at point of delivery.  Special voltages may be provided at the discretion of the utility.
C.	Monthly Rate:
Rate Designation
(1)	Service Charge (no kWh)	$10.00		T1
plus
(2)	Energy Charge			9.298¢
	All kWh
D.	Load Control Credits:  Load management or incentive credit rates will be applied to monthly bills for each customer meeting the requirements of the respective program.  Credit amount may be changed from time to time as determined by Northwest Iowa Power Cooperative (NIPCO) policies.  
To enroll in this program, customers must purchase and install a second meter and associated panels to separate electric heat without backup from the normal usage meter.  To ensure conformance of respective program by NIPCO, City will contact customer to conduct a bi-annual inspection during normal business hours.  
(1)	During the Winter Season billing months of January – April & October – December the energy charge will be: 
(i)	Dual Heat – Controlled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & with load control switch on A/C). 
Energy Charge all kWh	9.298¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
(ii)	Uncontrolled Electric Heat Only – Uncontrolled Heat Rate (Electric Heat & w/o load control switch on A/C)
Energy Charge all kWh	9.298¢ (Less the current applicable energy credit)
E.	Sales Tax:  Sales Tax (if applicable) to be added to all electric bills so as to be in compliance with the provisions of the laws of the state of Iowa.
F.	Prompt Payment Provisions:  All charges are net.  If the bill is not paid or mailed and postmarked by the last day of the month following the billing date, a late payment charge of 1.5% per month will apply.  If the last day of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the due date will be the next working day.
G.	Energy Cost Adjustment:  All energy usage is subject to provisions of an Energy Cost Adjustment feature, if implemented by the City Council of the City of Onawa.
6.	Street Lighting:
A.	Applicable To:  All energy associated with furnishing of street lighting by City of Onawa Municipal Electric.
B.	Service Available:  Single-phase, 60 Hertz, 120/240 volt, 2 or 3-wire, or as otherwise available.
C.	Monthly Rate:
 (1)	Customer Charge Per Meter (no kWh)	$2.30
	Plus
(2)	Energy Charge				5.475¢
	All kWh
D.	Energy Cost Adjustment:  All energy usage is subject to provisions of an Energy Cost Adjustment feature, if implemented by the City Council of the City of Onawa. 
7.	Security Light Rate:
A.	Applicable To:  All customers for dusk-to-dawn outdoor lighting in close proximity to existing secondary circuits.
(1)	Rate Per Light Per Month:  Light mounted on existing pole with bracket attachment and connected to a secondary circuit is $5.40 per month.
B.	Sales Tax:  Iowa Sales Tax shall be added.
C.	Prompt Payment Provisions:  All charges are net.  If the bill is not paid or mailed and postmarked by the last day of the month following the billing date, a late payment charge of 1.5% of the balance due will apply.  If the last day of a month falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the due date will be the next working day.
D.	Conditions of Service:  The utility shall furnish, install, operate and maintain the outdoor lighting equipment, electrically connected so that the power for the operation of the light does not pass through the customer’s meter.  The utility shall maintain the lighting equipment, including lamp replacement, at no additional cost to the customer.  The lighting equipment shall remain the property of the utility.  The customer shall protect the lighting equipment from deliberate damage
 (Section 111.05   Ord. 481 – Jun. 17 Supp.)
111.06	AUTOMATIC RATE ADJUSTMENT.  Rates for service provided above shall be adjusted in the manner and method established for sliding scale or automatic adjustment of rates and charges as provided in the tariff on file with the State Utilities Board.  Adjustments made hereunder shall be approved by resolution of the Council which resolution shall be set out in the published proceedings of the Council.



[The next page is 645]

 
CHAPTER 112
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
112.01  Definitions	112.10  Insurance and Indemnification
112.02  Grant of Authority	112.11  Transfer of Franchise
112.03  Franchise Term	112.12  Franchise Extension and Renewal
112.04  Conditions of Street Occupancy	112.13  Franchise Termination
112.05  Cable System Operations and Safety	112.14  Termination Procedures
112.06  System 	112.15  Unauthorized Reception of Cable Service;
112.07  Additional Services to City	Tampering with Facilities
112.08  Customer Service and Rates	112.16  Notices
112.09  Franchise Fee	112.17  Complete Agreement
112.01    DEFINITIONS.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section.
1.	“Cable service” means:
A.	The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and
B.	Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.
2.	“Cable system” means Grantee’s facility located within the City, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service to multiple subscribers within the City.
3.	“Facilities” means any reception, processing, distribution or transmission component of the cable system, including cables, conduits, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, manholes, vaults, poles, equipment, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, fiber, and related facilities maintained by Grantee.
4.	“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.
5.	“Franchise” means the rights granted to Grantee under this chapter to construct and operate the cable system and to provide cable services and other services as permitted under applicable law.
6.	“Grantee” means Long Lines, LLC, and its permitted successors.
7.	“Gross revenues” means all revenue received by Grantee from subscribers for the provision of cable service in the City, except franchise fees and FCC regulatory fees, equipment fees, late fees, deposits, any fees itemized and passed through as a result of franchise-imposed requirements; or any taxes or fees on services furnished by Grantee, imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any municipality, state, or other governmental unit, and collected by Grantee for the governmental unit.  
8.	“Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity.
9.	“Street” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or later existing within the City.
10.	“Subscriber” means any person who lawfully receives cable service from Grantee. 
112.02    GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
1.	Grant of Nonexclusive Authority.  The City grants to Grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, all facilities necessary or desirable for the construction, maintenance, and operation of the cable system.  This franchise shall be nonexclusive, and the City may grant franchises to other persons.  Any additional franchises shall contain the same substantive terms and conditions as this franchise and shall be competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory as compared to this or any other franchise granted by the City for the operation of a cable system or other wireline multichannel video distribution system.  Grantee may use the cable system to deliver non-cable services as permitted by applicable law.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the City grants any other cable franchise containing any terms or conditions that are less costly or burdensome to the franchise holder than the terms and conditions of this franchise, Grantee may, upon notice to City, amend this franchise to contain the less costly or burdensome terms and conditions included in the other franchise.  
2.	State or National Franchises.  If another operator of a cable system or other wireline multichannel video distribution system obtains the right to provide service in the City through a national or state franchise, Grantee may petition the City to replace this chapter with the applicable terms of such state or national franchise.  The City shall act on the petition at a public meeting within 90 days of filing.  The City shall not unreasonably deny the petition.  Grantee may appeal any decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.  Grantee’s rights under this section to petition for amendments to this agreement shall be in addition to any rights to amend or terminate local franchises under State or Federal law.
3.	Rules of Grantee.  The Grantee may promulgate rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing its business and services as reasonably necessary to enable Grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligation under this chapter.
112.03    FRANCHISE TERM.  The franchise granted under this chapter commences upon adoption by the City Council and shall continue for 10 years,† unless renewed, revoked, or terminated sooner.  So long as Grantee remains in material compliance with the provisions of this chapter, Grantee, at its option, may extend the term for an additional 10 years by providing written notice to the City no more than 24 months, but not less than 12 months before expiration of the initial term. 
112.04    CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY.
1.	Location of Facilities.  Grantee shall locate all facilities so as to minimize interference with the use of the streets and with the rights and reasonable convenience of adjacent property owners.
2.	Construction Codes and Permits.  Grantee shall obtain all necessary permits and shall comply with all ordinances of general applicability before commencing any construction, upgrade or extension of the cable system, including the opening or disturbance of any street.
3.	Repair of Streets and Property.  Grantee, at its expense, shall promptly restore any street or public property damaged by Grantee during the construction, repair, maintenance or reconstruction of the cable system.
4.	Public Projects.  After reasonable prior notice, Grantee, at its expense, shall relocate its facilities as required by the City due to traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, or other public improvements by the City.  In requiring Grantee to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any portion of its property, the City shall treat Grantee the same as, and require no more of Grantee, than any other similarly situated utility.  Grantee shall have the right to seek reimbursement from the City, including under any applicable insurance or government program for reimbursement.
5.	Building Movement.  Upon request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the City and after reasonable prior notice, Grantee shall temporarily move its facilities to permit the moving of buildings.  Grantee may require the requesting person to pay all costs related to the temporary relocation of facilities, and may require payment in advance.
6.	Tree Trimming.  Grantee may trim any trees in or overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public easements of the City as necessary to protect Grantee’s facilities.
112.05    CABLE SYSTEM OPERATIONS AND SAFETY.
1.	Technical Standards.  Grantee shall operate the cable system in compliance with all applicable technical standards promulgated by the FCC.
2.	Safety Requirements.  Grantee shall employ ordinary care and shall maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices to reduce failures and accidents.
3.	System Maps.  Upon request by the City, Grantee shall make available to City representatives for review at Grantee’s office up-to-date as-built maps showing locations of all facilities in the streets. 
4.	System Maintenance.  When feasible, Grantee shall schedule cable system maintenance to minimize service interruptions.  
112.06    SYSTEM.  Grantee may develop, construct, and operate the cable system to provide cable services and non-cable services such as cable modem services, telecommunications services, and other competitive services as permissible under applicable law.  Grantee may activate and offer those services in response to consumer and business demand.
122.07    ADDITIONAL SERVICES TO CITY.  
1.	Access Channel.  Grantee shall make available channel capacity on the cable system for transmission of governmental programming by the City on a shared basis with other government and educational users to the extent such channel capacity is provided as of the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter.  Upon request by the City, Grantee shall establish rules and procedures governing scheduling of programming by different users.
2.	Basic CATV Service.  Grantee shall provide basic cable television service to the following City buildings:
A.	City Hall – 914 Diamond Street
B.	City Shop – 1514 6th Street
C.	Community Center – 400 10th Street
D.	Library – 707 Iowa Ave. 
E.	Fire Station – 912 9th Street 
112.08    CUSTOMER SERVICE AND RATES.
1.	Subscriber Inquiries.  Grantee shall have a publicly listed toll-free telephone number and be operated so as to receive subscriber complaints and requests during normal business hours.  Grantee shall investigate and promptly resolve customer complaints regarding quality of service or service outages.
2.	Rates.  Grantee shall provide the City and subscribers with 30 days written notice of changes to cable services or rates.
112.09    FRANCHISE FEE.  Grantee shall pay to the City an annual franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of gross revenues.  Grantee shall deliver payment of each year’s franchise fee to City on or before March 31 of the following year.  Upon reasonable prior notice, the City may inspect Grantee’s books, records, and reports to verify franchise fee calculations and payments.
112.10    INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
1.	Insurance.  During the term of the franchise granted under this chapter, Grantee shall maintain a comprehensive general liability insurance policy with the following minimum coverage limits:
A.	$1,000,000 for personal injury or death;
B.	$1,000,000 for property damage; and
C.	$500,000 automobile insurance/combined bodily injury and property damage.
Each policy of insurance shall contain a statement that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy for any reason without first giving 30 days’ advance written notice to the City.
2.	Indemnification.  During the term of the franchise granted under this chapter, Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees (“indemnitees”) from and against any claims, liabilities, damages, losses, and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable attorney fees) (“losses”), which may arise out of or be in any way connected with Grantee’s construction, installation, operation, maintenance of the cable system, unless such losses arise from the negligence or intentional misconduct of the City, its officers, agents or employees.
112.11    TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.  Grantee shall not transfer or assign its rights granted under this chapter without providing prior written notice to the City.  Prior notice shall not be required for the following: (i) the assignment of, or the granting of a security interest in, the franchise or the cable system for the purpose of securing indebtedness; or (ii) the assignment or transfer of the franchise or the cable system to an affiliate under common ownership or control with Grantee.
 
112.12    FRANCHISE EXTENSION AND RENEWAL.
1.	Extension.  Beyond the term provided in Section 112.03, City and Grantee may extend by mutual agreement the term of the franchise granted under this chapter, and the existing terms and conditions of this chapter shall govern the extended term.
2.	Renewal.  Any renewal of the Grantee’s Franchise shall be done in accordance with Section 546 of the Federal Cable Act, 47 USC § 546, and applicable FCC regulations.
112.13    FRANCHISE TERMINATION.  
1.	By City.  The City may terminate the franchise granted under this chapter in case of material noncompliance by Grantee.  Material noncompliance shall include:
A.	A material violation by Grantee of any term, condition, or provision of this chapter that remains uncured within the applicable cure period;
B.	Failure of Grantee to comply with any reasonable provision of any applicable ordinance;
C.	Grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt, or there is a notice of prospective foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the cable system;
D.	Grantee abandons the cable system;
E.	Grantee fails to operate the cable system for a period of 60 days; or
F.	Grantee is found to practice any fraud upon the City.
2.	By Grantee.  Grantee may terminate this franchise:
A.	At the end of the term or a renewal term by providing sixty (60) days notice to City; or
B.	Upon notice to the City if Grantee obtains franchise rights to serve the City under a valid State-issued franchise.
112.14    TERMINATION PROCEDURES.  If the City seeks to terminate the franchise under Section 112.13, the City shall follow the procedures in this section.
1.	Notice of Complaint.  The City shall provide Grantee with written notice describing with reasonable specificity the alleged noncompliance.
2.	Opportunity to Cure.  Grantee shall have 60 days from receipt of written notice to cure the alleged noncompliance.  If Grantee cures the alleged noncompliance within the 60-day period, the City shall provide Grantee with written notice withdrawing the complaint.
3.	Public Hearing.  If Grantee fails to cure the alleged noncompliance within the 60-day cure period, or if Grantee provides the City with written notice disputing the complaint, and the parties fail to otherwise resolve the matter, the City shall schedule a public hearing on the alleged noncompliance.  At the public hearing, Grantee may present testimony, cross-examine witnesses and deliver to the City Council all evidence relevant to Grantee’s defense.  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may dismiss the complaint, defer action, order appropriate sanctions, or terminate the franchise in accordance with this section.
4.	Termination.  The City Council may, after a duly noticed public hearing, terminate the franchise for material and willful continuing noncompliance by Grantee.  If Grantee contests the termination in a court of competent jurisdiction, Grantee may operate the cable system in accordance with this chapter while the case is pending.
5.	Force Majuere.  Grantee’s failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall not constitute noncompliance when the failure is due to circumstances beyond Grantee’s control, including, without limitation, acts of nature, adverse weather, natural or man-made disaster, civil disturbance, war or insurrection, or shortage of supplies, material, or labor.
6.	Removal of Facilities.  Upon expiration or termination of the franchise, Grantee shall be afforded a six-month period to sell or otherwise dispose of the cable system.  During the six-month period, Grantee shall operate the cable system in accordance with this chapter.  At the expiration of the six-month period, Grantee has the right to remove its facilities within a reasonable time.
112.15    UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION OF CABLE SERVICE; TAMPERING WITH FACILITIES.
1.	It shall be unlawful for any person without Grantee’s consent to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any of Grantee’s facilities.
2.	It shall be unlawful for any person to make or use any unauthorized connection to any part of Grantee’s cable system. 
3.	Any person that violates this section regarding theft of service shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each occurrence or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or both, such fine and imprisonment as may be imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
112.16    NOTICES.  Notices under this chapter shall be in writing and shall be deemed given delivery by hand delivery, certified mail return receipt requested, or overnight courier to the following addresses:
To City:	City of Onawa
		914 Diamond
		Onawa, IA  51040
		Attn:  Larry Burks, City Administrator
		Phone:  712-433-1181
		Fax:  712-433-1128
To Grantee:	Long Lines, LLC
		501 4th Street – PO Box 67
		Sergeant Bluff, IA  51054
Attn:  Chief Financial Officer
Phone:  712-271-4000
Fax:  712-271-2728
A party may designate other addresses for providing notice by providing notice in writing of such addresses.
 
112.17    COMPLETE AGREEMENT.  All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are repealed as of the effective date of this chapter, excluding all public utility franchises granted to public utilities, including utilities regulated by the Iowa Utilities Board.

 


[The next page is 725]

 
CHAPTER 115 
CEMETERY 
115.01  Definition	115.06  Sale of Interment Rights
115.02  Trusteeship	115.07  Perpetual Care
115.03  Cemetery Sexton Appointed	115.08  Cemetery Lots Without Perpetual Care
115.04  Duties of Sexton	115.09  Annual Care
115.05  Records	115.10  Rules and Regulations
115.01	DEFINITION.  The term “cemetery” means the Onawa Cemetery, which is a municipal cemetery under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and which shall be operated under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and this chapter. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.501)
115.02	TRUSTEESHIP.  Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City Council hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual maintenance of the cemetery property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.502)
115.03	CEMETERY SEXTON APPOINTED.  The Council shall appoint a Cemetery Sexton who shall operate the cemetery in accordance with the rules and regulations therefor and under the direction of the Council.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
115.04	DUTIES OF SEXTON.  The duties of the Cemetery Sexton are as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.	Supervise Openings.  Supervise the opening of all graves and be present at every interment in the cemetery;  
2.	Maintenance.  Be responsible for the maintenance of the cemetery buildings, grounds and equipment and make a monthly report of the cemetery operation to the Council.   
115.05	RECORDS.  It is the duty of the Clerk to make and keep complete records identifying the owners of all interment rights sold by the cemetery and historical information regarding any transfers of ownership.  The records shall include all of the following: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.311)
1.	Sales or Transfers of Interment Rights.
A.	The name and last known address of each owner or previous owner of interment rights.
B.	The date of each purchase or transfer of interment rights.
C.	A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the location of each interment space sold by the cemetery.
2.	Interments.  
A.	The date the remains are interred.
B.	The name, date of birth, and date of death of the decedent interred, if those facts can be conveniently obtained.
C.	A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the location of each interment space where the remains are interred.
115.06	SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS.  The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price.  The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information required by Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.  The payment of all fees and charges shall be made at the office of the Clerk where receipts will be issued for all amounts paid.  Said fees and charges shall be based upon the charges as established by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.310)
115.07	PERPETUAL CARE.  The Council, by resolution, shall accept, receive, and expend all moneys and property donated or left to them by bequest for perpetual care, and that portion of interment space sales or permanent charges made against interment spaces which has been set aside in a perpetual care fund.  The assets of the perpetual care fund shall be invested in accordance with State law.  The Council, by resolution, shall provide for the payment of interest annually to the appropriate fund, or to the cemetery, or to the person in charge of the cemetery, to be used in caring for or maintaining the individual property of the donor in the cemetery or interment spaces that have been sold with provisions for perpetual care, all in accordance with the terms of the donation or bequest or the terms of the sale or purchase of an interment space and Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.503, 523I.507 & 523I.508)
115.08	CEMETERY LOTS WITHOUT PERPETUAL CARE.  Owners of lots or other interested persons may secure perpetual care on lots or parts of lots in the older portions of the cemetery not having perpetual care by the payment to the City of the perpetual care charges at the rates specified in the rules and regulations. 
115.09	ANNUAL CARE.  An annual care charge, as specified in the rules and regulations, shall be made by the City on those lots in the older portions of the cemetery which are not at present under perpetual or endowed care.  The City reserves the right to refuse to furnish maintenance service, or to permit the erection of any monumental work on those lots not under perpetual or endowed care or when the annual care on such lot has not been paid in advance. 
115.10	RULES AND REGULATIONS.  Rules and regulations for the cemetery may be adopted, and may be amended from time to time, by resolution of the Council and may cover such things as the use, care, control, management, restrictions and protection of the cemetery as necessary for the proper conduct of the business of the cemetery.  The rules shall specify the cemetery’s obligations in the event that interment spaces, memorials, or memorializations are damaged or defaced by acts of vandalism.  Any veteran, as defined in Section 35.1 of the Code of Iowa, who is a landowner or who lives within the City shall be allowed to purchase an interment space and to be interred within the cemetery.  In addition, any veteran who purchases an interment space within the cemetery shall be allowed to purchase an interment space for interment of the spouse of the veteran if such a space is available, and the surviving spouse of a veteran interred within the cemetery shall be allowed to purchase an interment space and be interred within the cemetery if such a space is available.(Ord. 437 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.304)
 
CHAPTER 116 
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
116.01  Purpose	116.04  Council Control
116.02  Definition	116.05  Regulations
116.03  Extent of Power	116.06  Air Traffic Rules
116.01	PURPOSE.  This chapter is to provide for the establishment, control, supervision and operation of the Onawa Municipal Airport.
116.02	DEFINITION.  As used in this chapter, “airport” includes landing fields, airdrome, aviation field or other similar terms used in connection with aerial traffic.
116.03	EXTENT OF POWER.  The provisions of this chapter extend to the lands and waters within the corporation and to the space above the land and waters within the corporation and to the airport controlled, maintained, and operated by the City outside its corporate limits and to the space above the same.
116.04	COUNCIL CONTROL.  The Onawa Municipal Airport is under the control of the Council.  The airport committee of the Council has general supervision over the airport, subject to the control of the entire Council.
116.05	REGULATIONS.   Any rules and regulations so made or laid down by the Council shall in no way be contrary to or in conflict with the rules and regulations for the operation of aircraft adopted by the Federal government or the State.
116.06	AIR TRAFFIC RULES.  It is unlawful to operate any aircraft over or within the City or the Onawa Municipal Airport in violation of the air traffic rules and regulations which have been or may hereafter be established by the Secretary of Commerce of the United States or by any other office of the Federal or State government whose duty it may be to establish such rules.

 



[The next page is 743]
 
CHAPTER 118
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
118.01  Findings and Rationale	118.10  Permit To Be Displayed
118.02  Definitions	118.11  Sale or Transfer
118.03  Definition of Operator	118.12  Renewal of Permit
118.04  Location Restrictions	118.13  Suspension or Revocation of Permit
118.05  Premises Standards	118.14  Health Standards
118.06  Application Procedures	118.15  Development Design Standards
118.07  Application Contents	118.16  Responsibilities of Operator
118.08  Issuance of Permits	118.17  Unlawful Acts
118.09  Separate Permit for Each Place of Business	118.18  Protection
118.01	FINDINGS AND RATIONALE.  The City Council of the City of Onawa, Iowa, finds:
1.	Adult entertainment businesses require special consideration in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of such establishments as well as the citizens of Onawa;
2.	Adult entertainment businesses, because of their very nature, have a detrimental effect on both existing establishments around them and surrounding residential areas adjacent to them;
3.	The concern of over sexually-transmitted  diseases is a legitimate health concern of the City that demands reasonable regulation of adult entertainment businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of the community;
4.	Adult entertainment businesses, due to their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, thereby contributing to blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area;
5.	The City of Onawa wants to prevent these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety, and welfare of its residents; protect residents from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of the surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of blight;
6.	It is not the intent of this ordinance to suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact content neutral regulations that address the secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses as well as the health problems associated with such establishment.
7.	Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the City has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the City's  rationale for this ordinance, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and  non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the City's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the City. The City finds that the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, Inc., 427 U.S. 50 (1976); and Doctor John's, Inc. v. City of Sioux City, 389 Fed. Supp. 2d. 1096 (N.D. Iowa 2005) and studies Weinstein McCleary, The Association of Adult Business with Secondary Effects: Legal Doctrine, Social Theory, and Empirical Evidence; Cardoza Arts & Entertainment Law Review Vol. XX, p. 30 (2011); McCord Tewksbury, Does the Presence of Sexually Oriented Businesses Relate to Increased Levels of Crime? An Examination Using Spatial Analyses, Crime and Delinquency, XX (X) 1-18 (2013) relied on in this ordinance are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects.
118.02	DEFINITIONS.  "Adult Entertainment Business" means those places of commerce commonly referred to as strip joints, or juice bars, i.e. a commercial establishment having as its stock in trade any live or recorded entertainment or performance presented for commercial purposes, that consists in whole or in part of human genitalia, human buttocks, or the human female breast nipples; "Adult Entertainment Business" also means those places of business commonly called "adult bookstores" or "adult theaters," i.e. commercial establishments having as its stock in trade books, films, video cassettes, magazines and other material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on subject matter depicting or describing sex acts, acts of human masturbation, human nudity or sexual intercourse in which human sexual organs are shown as so engaged, or acts of fondling or adult touching of genitalia or showing the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid or erect state. "Adult Entertainment Business" further means any premises to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments, or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or a member, where such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated, or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. "Adult Entertainment Business" also includes, without limitation, any premises physically arranged and used as such whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, or any other term of like import.
118.03	DEFINITION OF OPERATOR. Any person, partnership, or corporation operating, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult entertainment business.
1.	Name and Address.  The name, residential address, and business address of the applicant.
2.	Vehicles.  A list of the make, model, year, VIN, and license plate number of each vehicle to be used in the service.
3.	Hours.  The hours the service will be operated.
4.	Other.  Such other information deemed pertinent in the judgment of the Clerk.
118.04	LOCATION RESTRICTIONS. An adult entertainment business shall be permitted within the City of Onawa only in the Light Industrial (LI) and Heavy Industrial (HI) zones. No adult entertainment business shall be located within the following distances as measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the proposed adult entertainment business is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or zoning district boundary line from which the proposed adult entertainment business is to be separated.
1.	Adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited within eight hundred (800) feet of the borders of a residential district.
2.	Adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited within eight hundred (800) feet of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other place of religious worship.
3.	Adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited within two thousand (2,000) feet of any public or private school offering general education for students between the years of Kindergarten and Twelfth grade, public library or museum.
4.	Adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited within two thousand (2,000) feet of any registered daycare home or registered daycare business.
5.	Adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited within one thousand, five hundred (1,500) feet of any cemetery, public park or playground. For purposes of this section, bike paths, trails, waterways, and boat launches shall not be deemed a public park.
6.	Adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other adult entertainment business.
7.	Adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited within five hundred (500) feet of any existing establishment selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises.
118.05	PREMISES STANDARDS. No person shall operate, own, conduct, carry on or permit to be operated, owned, conducted or carried on any adult entertainment business in the City of Onawa unless the premises at which such business is located meets the minimum standards set forth in this Chapter and unless a permit to operate the adult entertainment business is obtained from the City in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
118.06	APPLICATION PROCEDURES. Any person or party seeking a permit to operate an adult entertainment business shall make application to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall cause an investigation of such application to be made by the appropriate police authority to determine if the applicant is of good moral character.  Good moral character is defined as a person who does not have a conviction for any of the offenses described in sub-paragraph A of this section.. The Clerk shall also cause an investigation to be made by the Fire Department and appropriate City departments to determine that all requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied and the applicant has fully complied with all applicable ordinances and regulations relating to the buildings, zoning, fire and health.
1.	The operator has made fraudulent statements in the application for the permit or in the conduct of business.
2.	The operator has substantially violated the requirements of this chapter, this Code of Ordinances or State law.
3.	The operator has conducted the business in a manner that substantially endangers the public safety, health, welfare or order.
118.07	APPLICATION CONTENTS.  The application shall contain the following:
1.	Personal.  The full name, address, and social security number of the applicant.
2.	Business Information. The full name of the business and the address of the premises for which the application is being made.
3.	Criminal Record. The criminal record of the applicant, if any. An applicant has been convicted or pled nolo contendere to a crime involving:
A.	Prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation of prostitution; solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; sale, distribution, or display of material harmful to minors; sexual performance by minors; contributing to the delinquency of a minor; possession of child pornography; lewdness; obscenity; indecent exposure; any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a child; sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault; rape; forcible sodomy;  forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring a runaway child; any felony; any violation under the Utah Controlled Substances Act or substantially similar state or federal statute; any crime of violence; criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from any jurisdiction,  regardless of the exact title of the offense; for which:
(1)	Less than two years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense, or less than five years if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors within the five years; or
(2)	Less than five years have elapsed from the date of conviction if the offense is a felony;
B.	The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification pursuant to this chapter.
4.	Statement of Truth.  A statement that the contents of the application are true.
5.	Age.  Proof that the applicant is an adult.
6.	Type of Business. The type of business entity such as sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company or corporation and, in the case of any legal entity, the names and addresses for all the officers, managers, and/or directors of the entity as the case may be.
7.	Background of Management. All information required herein of any applicant shall also be provided for every person who, directly or indirectly, has any right to participate in the management, control, or oversight of the business to be conducted at the premises of the proposed adult entertainment business. In addition, the applicant shall outline information about any previous or current adult entertainment businesses operated by the applicant.
8.	Owner of the Building. The name and address of the owner of the building where the adult entertainment business will be located.
9.	Copies of the Lease or Rental Agreement. A certified copy of any lease or rental agreement governing the applicants' rights in the premises shall be attached to the application.
10.	Signatures. The signatures of the applicant or applicants if the application is in the name of a corporation, the signature of each officer, manager and/or director is required on the application.
11.	Fees. A license fee of $150 shall be submitted with the application for a license. Consider including a provision regarding fees for the permit.
118.08	ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. The applicable City departments (i.e. building, fire and health departments and the applicable police authority) shall make a written report of their investigations and shall submit such reports to the City Clerk within forty-five (45) days of the date of application. The Clerk shall place the matter before the City Council who shall approve or deny said application within thirty (30) days after receipt of the police, fire, and health department reports. If the City Council finds that the applicant has fully complied with all the requirements of this Chapter and all applicable ordinances and codes regulating fire, building, health and zoning, and the applicant is of good moral character, the City Council shall authorize the issuance of a permit to conduct an adult entertainment business at the location designated in the application. Said permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance.
118.09	SEPARATE PERMIT FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS. Each adult entertainment business shall have a separate permit for each place of business. Each permit will be valid only for the business conducted at that location.
118.10	PERMIT TO BE DISPLAYED.  Each  adult  entertainment  business  shall  display  its permit conspicuously in the lobby or waiting area where such permit may be readily observed by all persons entering the premises.
118.11	SALE OR TRANSFER. No adult entertainment business permit issued under this Chapter shall be sold or transferred. The purchaser or purchasers of any adult entertainment business or of the majority of the stock of any corporation or majority interests of any limited liability company which owns or operates an adult entertainment business shall obtain a new permit before operating such adult entertainment business at the location of which the permit has been issued.
118.12	RENEWAL OF PERMIT.
118.13	SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
1.	Grounds for Suspension or Revocation.  The adult entertainment business permit may be suspended or revoked for violation of the provisions of this Chapter or for failure to comply with the applicable fire regulations, building regulations, or health ordinances or for permitting any employee of the adult entertainment business to violate the provisions  of this Chapter.
2.	Revocation and Suspension Procedure.
A.	Upon receiving information indicating that grounds for suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment business permit exists, the Clerk shall cause an investigation of such grounds to be made by the appropriate City department or departments and shall advise the City Council in writing of the results of the investigation.
B.	If the City Council determines that the report reveals the probable existence of grounds for suspension or revocation, the City Council shall direct written notice by certified mail to the permittee named on the application for the adult entertainment business at the address listed on the permit of the intention to hold a public hearing on the question of whether the permit for the adult entertainment should be suspended or revoked and upon the grounds thereof stating the date and time for such hearing.
C.	If after the public hearing the City Council determines that cause for suspension or revocation of license exists, the City Council shall act as follows:
(1)	The City Council may suspend the permit for up to one month if it is the first time that the City Council has determined that the permittee has undertaken such actions or omissions as would warrant suspension or revocation of the permit. Upon suspension, the permittee shall cease any business at that location or at any other location in the City, for the period of the suspension.
(2)	For subsequent determinations that the permittee has undertaken such actions or omissions as would warrant suspension or revocation of the permit, the City Council may revoke the permit at that location. Upon revocation, no business permit shall be issued nor shall such business be conducted at that location for a period of one year, nor shall permittee be permitted to conduct any other adult entertainment business in the City for that period.
118.14	HEALTH STANDARDS.  No  adult entertainment  business  shall be established, maintained  or operated in the City that does not conform to or comply with the following standards:
1.	Water.  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.
2.	Storage. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of all equipment and supplies. All disposable materials and towels shall be kept in covered containers or cabinets which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from storage cabinets.
3.	Surfaces. All tables, dance floors, stages, bathing areas, and all floors shall have surfaces which may be readily cleaned.
4.	Facilities Provided. Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for all employees at any given time. All employee lockers shall be lockable. In the event that both male and female employees are to be working simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided.
5.	Building Conditions and Cleanliness. All walls, ceilings, floors, tables, chairs, stages, countertops and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Bathing, dressing, locker and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation.
6.	Service Sink and Janitor Room. The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial services which sink shall be located in a janitorial room or custodial room separate from the adult entertainment business service rooms.
7.	Food and Beverage. All food and beverage consumption shall comply with applicable health ordinances.
8.	Animals. Animals, except for seeing eye dogs and aquarium life, shall not be permitted in any adult entertainment business.
9.	Building Regulations. All adult entertainment businesses shall continuously comply with all applicable building, fire, or health ordinances and regulations.
118.15	DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
1.	Exterior.  It shall be unlawful for an owner of an adult entertainment business:
A.	to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from any point outside the establishment.
B.	to allow the exterior portion of the adult entertainment business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representation of any manner depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
2.	Signage. The operator shall comply with Chapter 124 of the Onawa City Code. Additionally, the display surfaces of the sign shall not contain photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
118.16	RESPONSIBILITIES OF OPERATOR.  Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
118.17	UNLAWFUL ACTS. The following acts shall be unlawful:
1.	Patron Sexual Actions. No adult entertainment business patron receiving or conducting any commercial business shall engage in sexual relations with any employee while the employee is performing a commercial  service.
2.	Adult Entertainment Business Employees Sexual Actions. No employee of any adult entertainment business shall masturbate the genital area of a patron.
3.	Minors. It shall be unlawful to allow any person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of an adult entertainment business at any time that the establishment is open for business.  The operator must ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance at all times during regular business hours. The attendant shall prohibit any person under the age of eighteen ( 18) from entering the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished a valid driver's license issued by a state reflecting that person's age.
4.	Service. It shall be unlawful to serve or allow the consumption of alcohol on the premises.
118.18	PROTECTION. To protect the public safety, and the safety of all employees and patrons of an adult entertainment business, every permittee who owns or operates an adult entertainment business must provide at least one law enforcement or trained professional security person on the premises of each adult entertainment business establishment during all business hours. All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be constructed, located, covered, or screened in such manner as to prevent a view into the interior of such building from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street or other public or semi-public area. Operator shall allow inspection of the premises so as to determine compliance with this ordinance.
(Ch. 118 – Ord. 466 – Aug. 15 Supp.)

 




? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 120 
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
120.01  License or Permit Required	120.04  Action by Council
120.02  General Prohibition	120.05  Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03  Investigation	120.06  Amusement Devices
120.01	LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.  No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02	GENERAL PROHIBITION.  It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms, conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03	INVESTIGATION.  Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit, the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application.  The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the City.  The Council shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises that does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04	ACTION BY COUNCIL.  The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce for such further action as is provided by law.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
120.05	PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.  A person or club holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the following:
1.	Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.			      (Ord. 490 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
2.	Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer on the premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b and 2k] & 123.150)
3.	Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona fide credit card.  This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or events center.   (Ord. 490 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
4.	Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.	      (Ord. 490 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
5.	In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.			      (Ord. 490 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
6.	Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
7.	Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered by the license or permit. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
8.	Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption.  However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on the licensed premises, subject to rules adopted by the Alcoholic Beverages Division.					      (Ord. 434 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
9.	Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
10.	Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee, or employees of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
11.	Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
12.	Permit or allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to remain upon licensed premises unless over fifty percent (50%) of the dollar volume of the business establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods.  This provision does not apply to holders of a class “C” beer permit only.
120.06	AMUSEMENT DEVICES.  The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement devices possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa.  (Said devices are allowed only in premises with a liquor control license or beer permit, as specifically authorized in Section 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
1.	As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of the Code of Iowa.
2.	It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to participate in the operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
3.	It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
4.	It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the age of 21.
(Ord. 469 – Oct. 15 Supp.)




? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS 
121.01  Definitions	121.06  Refunds
121.02  Permit Required	121.07  Persons Under Legal Age
121.03  Application	121.08  Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04  Fees	121.09  Permit Revocation
121.05  Issuance and Expiration	
121.01	DEFINITIONS.  For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1.	“Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or by any other means.  “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes, tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
2.	“Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material.  However, this definition is not to be construed to include cigars. 
3.	“Place of business” means any place where cigarettes or tobacco products are sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.  
4.	“Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products to ultimate consumers.
5.	“Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
6.	“Tobacco products” means the following:  cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
7.	“Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other substance.  “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.  “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
(Ord. 456 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
121.02	PERMIT REQUIRED.
1.	Retail Cigarette Permits.  It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products within the City without a valid permit for each place of business.  The permit shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2.	Retail Tobacco Permits.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a retail tobacco permit.  However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, during such time.
(Ord. 456 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
121.03	APPLICATION.  A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk.  Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June.  If a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.04	FEES.  The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)

FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:	FEE:
July, August or September	$ 75.00
October, November or December	$ 56.25
January, February or March	$ 37.50
April, May or June	$ 18.75
121.05	ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.  Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued.  Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable.  All permits expire on June 30 of each year.  The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within 30 days of issuance of a permit.
(Ord. 489 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
121.06	REFUNDS.  A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.  
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.07	PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.  No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.  The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a vending machine.  If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:
1.	For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00).  Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2.	For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days.  The retailer may select its preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3.	For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
4.	For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
5.	For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit.  The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
(Ord. 456 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
121.08	SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.  Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display. (Ord. 456 – Oct. 14 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09	PERMIT REVOCATION.  Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder.  If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council.  The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)

 
CHAPTER 122 
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 
122.01  Purpose	122.10  Time Restriction
122.02  Definitions	122.11  Revocation of License
122.03  License Required	122.12  Hearing
122.04  Application for License	122.13  Record and Determination
122.05  License Fees	122.14  Appeal
122.06  Bonds Required	122.15  Effect of Revocation
122.07  License Issued	122.16  Rebates
122.08  Display of License	122.17  License Exemptions
122.09  License Not Transferable	122.18  Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud, unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants. 
122.02	DEFINITIONS.  For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1.	“Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon the public street.   
2.	“Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any order for goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
3.	“Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business  hires, leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City limits.  Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant. 
122.03	LICENSE REQUIRED.  Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in violation of this chapter. 
122.04	APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.  An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under this chapter.  Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent and local address, and business address if any.  The application shall also set forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business and the length of time sought to be covered by the license.  An application fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein. 
 
122.05	LICENSE FEES.  The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the issuance of any license. 
1.	For one week	$	30.00
2.	For one month	$	50.00
3.	For three months	$	100.00
4.	For six months	$	150.00
5.	For one year	$	250.00
For periods not covered above, an applicant may purchase a license by adding together the license fees for the periods that, when added together, constitute the period for which the license is desired, or by purchasing a license for the next longer period, whichever is less.
122.06	BONDS REQUIRED.  Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of Iowa.  In addition, each peddler or solicitor shall post with the Clerk a $10,000.00 bond to indemnify the City against any and all causes of action that might be brought against such peddler or solicitor.  Said bond shall not be retired until after a lapse of one year from the expiration of the peddler’s or solicitor’s license.
122.07	LICENSE ISSUED.  If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct, and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08	DISPLAY OF LICENSE.  Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter.  Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09	LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.  Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the application.
122.10	TIME RESTRICTION.  All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in force and effect only between sunrise and sunset.
122.11	REVOCATION OF LICENSE.  Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Clerk may revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
1.	Fraudulent Statements.  The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2.	Violation of Law.  The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3.	Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety.  The licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local address.  The notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.12	HEARING.  The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint and notice.  Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
122.13	RECORD AND DETERMINATION.  The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or State law.
122.14	APPEAL.  If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a part of the record the reasons therefor.  The licensee, or the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting.  The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall carry out the decision of the Council. 
122.15	EFFECT OF REVOCATION.  Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the revocation.
122.16	REBATES.  Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires.  The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired.  In all cases, at least five dollars ($5.00) of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
122.17	LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.  The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
1.	Newspapers.  Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling subscriptions to newspapers.
2.	Club Members.  Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
3.	Local Residents and Farmers.  Local residents and farmers who offer for sale their own products.
4.	Students.  Students representing the West Monona Community School District conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
5.	Route Sales.  Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional business or make special sales.
6.	Resale or Institutional Use.  Persons customarily calling on businesses or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use.
122.18	CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.  Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of Sections 122.04 and 122.05.  All such organizations are required to submit in writing to the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof.  If the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the above information to the applicant.  In the event the Clerk denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the decision to the Council, as provided in Section 122.14 of this chapter.
 
CHAPTER 123 
HOUSE MOVERS 
123.01  House Mover Defined	123.07  Permit Issued
123.02  Permit Required	123.08  Public Safety
123.03  Application	123.09  Time Limit
123.04  Bond Required	123.10  Removal by City
123.05  Insurance Required	123.11  Protect Pavement
123.06  Permit Fee	123.12  Overhead Wires
123.01	HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.  A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies, or any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02	PERMIT REQUIRED.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building or similar structure to be moved.  Buildings of less than one hundred (100) square feet are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
123.03	APPLICATION.  Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk.  The application shall include:
1.	Name and Address.  The applicant’s full name and address and if a corporation the names and addresses of its principal officers.
2.	Building Location.  An accurate description of the present location and future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
3.	Routing Plan.  A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street superintendent, and public utility officials.  The route approved shall be the shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04	BOND REQUIRED.  The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State.  The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05	INSURANCE REQUIRED.  Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
1.	Bodily Injury – $50,000 per person; $100,000 per accident.
2.	Property Damage – $50,000 per accident.
123.06	PERMIT FEE.  A permit fee in an amount set by resolution of the Council shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the Clerk.  A separate permit shall be required for each house, building or similar structure to be moved.
123.07	PERMIT ISSUED.  Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue a permit.
123.08	PUBLIC SAFETY.  At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag persons at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure.  At all times when the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure.
123.09	TIME LIMIT.  No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve (12) hours without having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.10	REMOVAL BY CITY.  In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of Section 123.09 the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit holder’s bond.
123.11	PROTECT PAVEMENT.  It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at least one inch in width for each one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of such building.  If there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.12	OVERHEAD WIRES.  The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.



 
CHAPTER 124
TAXI SERVICE PERMIT
124.01  Taxi Defined	124.05  Permit Issued
124.02  Permit Required	124.06  Revocation of Permit
124.03  Application	124.07  Hearing
124.04  Insurance Required	
124.01	TAXI DEFINED.  The word “taxi” means any motor vehicle that is used for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire and that follows no regular route or time schedule.
124.02	PERMIT REQUIRED.  No person shall operate a taxi service within the City without first having obtained a permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
124.03	APPLICATION.  Application for a taxi service permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk annually and shall contain the following information:
5.	Name and Address.  The name, residential address, and business address of the applicant.
6.	Vehicles.  A list of the make, model, year, VIN, and license plate number of each vehicle to be used in the service.
7.	Hours.  The hours the service will be operated.
8.	Other.  Such other information deemed pertinent in the judgment of the Clerk.
124.04	INSURANCE REQUIRED.  Upon approval of the application, but before issuance of the permit, the applicant shall file with the Clerk a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Council.
124.05	PERMIT ISSUED.  Upon Council approval of the application and filing of the insurance certificate, a permit shall be issued, to be effective for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
124.06	REVOCATION OF PERMIT.  The Council may revoke or suspend any permit issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
4.	The operator has made fraudulent statements in the application for the permit or in the conduct of business.
5.	The operator has substantially violated the requirements of this chapter, this Code of Ordinances or State law.
6.	The operator has conducted the business in a manner that substantially endangers the public safety, health, welfare or order.
124.07	HEARING.  The Council shall conduct a hearing before revoking or suspending a permit and the Clerk shall send a notice to the operator not less than ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing.  Such notice shall contain particulars of the reason for the hearing and the date, time and place of the hearing.



[The next page is 801]

 
CHAPTER 135 
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01  Removal of Warning Devices	135.09  Excavations  
135.02  Obstructing or Defacing	135.10  Maintenance of Parking or Terrace and Property
135.03  Placing Debris On	                  Damage
135.04  Playing In	135.11  Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace
135.05  Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley	135.12  Dumping of Snow  
135.06  Use for Business Purposes	135.13  Driveway Culverts 
135.07  Washing Vehicles	135.14  Depositing Vegetation Residue
135.08  Burning Prohibited	
135.01	REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.  It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)  
135.02	OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.  It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street or alley in any manner. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 
135.03	PLACING DEBRIS ON.  It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04	PLAYING IN.  It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2]) 
135.05	TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.  It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer or member of the Fire Department. 
135.06	USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.  It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same for sale, without permission of the Police Chief.
135.07	WASHING VEHICLES.  It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business.  This does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08	BURNING PROHIBITED.  No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09	EXCAVATIONS.  No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking or alley except in accordance with the following:
1.	Permit Required.  No excavation shall be commenced without first obtaining a permit therefor.  A written application for such permit shall be filed with the City and shall contain the following:
A.	An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
B.	A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is to be made;
C.	The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and restoration of the street or alley surface; and
D.	Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
2.	Public Convenience.  Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner that will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
3.	Barricades, Fencing and Lighting.  Adequate barricades, fencing and warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard.  Any costs incurred by the City in providing or maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the City by the permit holder/property owner.
4.	Bond Required.  The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in the minimum sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State.  The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of administration of this section.  In lieu of a surety bond, a cash deposit of $1,000.00 may be filed with the City.
5.	Insurance Required.  Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
A.	Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.   
B.	Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
6.	Restoration of Public Property.  Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
7.	Inspection.  All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.  Backfill shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved street or alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the City.  The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City with notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.  
8.	Completion by the City.  Should any excavation in any street or alley be discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after the approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses therefor to the permit holder/property owner.
9.	Responsibility for Costs.  All costs and expenses incident to the excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner.  The permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
10.	Notification.  At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of the excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the person performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa.
11.	Permit Issued.  Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and insurance certificate, a permit shall be issued.  A separate permit shall be required for each excavation.
12.	Permit Exemption.  Utility companies are exempt from the permit application requirement of this section.  They shall, however, comply with all other pertinent provisions and shall post with the City a yearly bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to guarantee such compliance.
135.10	MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE AND PROPERTY DAMAGE.  
1.	It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or, in the absence of curbing, the traveled portion of the public street, highway, road or alley within the City limits, except that the abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way.  Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up litter.
2.	Property Damage.  Snow plowing and ice control operations can cause property damage even under the best circumstances and care on the part of the operators.  The major types of damage are to improvements in the City right-of-way.  The intent of the right-of-way is to provide room for snow storage, utilities, sidewalks and other City uses.  However, certain private improvements such as mailboxes, landscaping and other private installations are located within this area.
A.	Mailboxes.  Mailboxes should be constructed sturdily enough to withstand snow rolling off a plow or wing.  While the installation of mailboxes on the City right-of-way is permitted, the mailbox owner assumes all risk of damage except when a mailbox is damaged through direct contact by a plow blade, wing, or other piece of equipment.  If a mailbox is damaged due to direct contact by snow plowing equipment, the City, at its option, will repair or replace the mailbox with a comparable replacement.  Damage resulting from snow rolling off a plow or wing is the responsibility of the resident.
B.	Landscaping.  Property owners should assume all risk of damage for landscaping, including nursery and inanimate materials that are installed or encroach on City right-of-way.  The City assumes no responsibility for damage incurred to these non-permitted elements as a result of snow plowing and ice control activities.  In addition, inanimate materials such as boulders, timbers, etc. are a hazard and can cause damage to plow equipment.
C.	Other Private Installations.  Other private installations – the City will assume no responsibility for underground lawn sprinkling systems, exterior lighting systems, underground electronic dog fences or any other non-permitted features privately installed in City right-of-way.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
(Section 135.10 – Ord. 493 – Mar. 19 Supp.)
135.11	FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE.  If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])  
135.12	DUMPING OF SNOW.  It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner or agent.  Arrangements for the prompt removal of such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13	DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.  The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City.  In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the repairs.  If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided.
135.14	DEPOSITING VEGETATION RESIDUE.  It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, place (or cause to be thrown, pushed, or placed) any grass clippings, leaves, twigs, branches, or other vegetation residue onto the traveled way of a street or alley.



[The next page is 811]
 
CHAPTER 136 
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01  Purpose	136.11  Interference with Sidewalk Improvements 
136.02  Definitions	136.12  Awnings  
136.03  Removal of Snow, Ice, and Accumulations	136.13  Encroaching Steps 
136.04  Responsibility for Maintenance	136.14  Openings and Enclosures 
136.05  City May Order Repairs	136.15  Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks 
136.06  Sidewalk Construction Ordered	136.16  Defacing 
136.07  Permit Required	136.17  Debris on Sidewalks 
136.08  Sidewalk Standards	136.18  Merchandise Display 
136.09  Barricades and Warning Lights	136.19  Sales Stands 
136.10  Failure to Repair or Barricade	136.20  Water Spouts
136.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize the liability of the City. 
136.02	DEFINITIONS.  For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.	“Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the sidewalk when it is hardening.   
2.	“Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more of the following characteristics:
A.	Vertical separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more.   
B.	Horizontal separations equal to one (1) inch or more.
C.	Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more and at least four (4) inches in diameter.  
D.	Spalling over fifty percent (50%) of a single square of the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to one-half (½) inch or more.
E.	Spalling over less than fifty percent (50%) of a single square of the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more.  
F.	A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.    
G.	A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
H.	A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater than three-fourths (¾) inch per foot.
3.	“Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.    
4.	“One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
5.	“Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required herein.  For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.  
6.	“Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.   
7.	“Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban areas.
8.	“Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair, replacement, or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.  
9.	“Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03	REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.  It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from sidewalks.  If a property owner does not remove snow, ice, or accumulations within a reasonable time, the City may do so and assess the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
136.04	RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.  It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to repair, replace or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced or reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks and to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public street. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])  
136.05	CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.  If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e]) 
136.06	SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.  The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07	PERMIT REQUIRED.  No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk unless such person has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said removal, reconstruction, or installation will comply with all ordinances and requirements of the City for such work.  The permit will include any special allowances, such as location or grade variances, and the permittee will be furnished with a copy of the City’s sidewalk regulations.
136.08	SIDEWALK STANDARDS.  Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following standards:
1.	Cement.  Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the construction and repair of sidewalks.  
2.	Construction.  Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.   
3.	Sidewalk Base.  Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil.  Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid.  The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by the City.   
4.	Sidewalk Bed.  The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed sidewalk will be at established grade.
5.	Length, Width and Depth.  Length, width and depth requirements are as follows:
A.	Residential sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick, and each section shall be no more than four (4) feet in length.
B.	Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property line to the curb.  Each section shall be four (4) inches thick and no more than six (6) feet in length. 
C.	Driveway areas shall be not less than six (6) inches in thickness.
6.	Location.  When a residential sidewalk is constructed, it shall be located so that there is a distance of one foot between the property line and the sidewalk unless a different location is approved by the inspector in the sidewalk construction permit.  No sidewalk shall be repaired, replaced or reconstructed so as to change the location of the sidewalk unless such change is similarly approved by the inspector.
7.	Grade.  Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street, which is the established grade.
8.	Elevations.  The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half (½) inch above the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
9.	Abutting Sidewalks.  If either end of a sidewalk abuts on an existing sidewalk, it shall be constructed, replaced, or reconstructed so as to meet the grade of the abutting sidewalk and the standards set out in subsections 6, 7, and 8 of this section may be modified to the minimum extent necessary to meet the grade of the abutting sidewalk.  
10.	Exceptions to Grade Requirements.  If the designated inspector finds that, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of subsections 6, 7, and 8 of this section will result in unnecessary hardship, the inspector may, in specific cases, authorize such variance from the provisions of said subsections as is necessary to avoid such unnecessary hardship.
11.	Slope.  All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch per foot toward the curb.
12.	Finish.  All sidewalks shall be finished with a “broom” or “wood float” finish.   
13.	Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities.  If a street, road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the street, road, or highway with a sidewalk or path.  If a sidewalk or path is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road.  Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to this subsection shall be constructed or installed in compliance with applicable Federal requirements adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act, including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09	BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.  Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same.  The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof. 
136.10	FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.  It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11	INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.  No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter. 
136.12	AWNINGS.  It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight (8) feet above the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians. 
136.13	ENCROACHING STEPS.  It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the Council. 
136.14	OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.  It is unlawful for a person to:
1.	Stairs and Railings.  Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the Council.  
2.	Openings.  Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.   
3.	Protect Openings.  Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
136.15	FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.  It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.16	DEFACING.  It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)    
136.17	DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.  It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])  
136.18	MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.  It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall more than three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes.
136.19	SALES STANDS.  It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
136.20	WATER SPOUTS.  It is unlawful to cause or permit any water spout, trough, gutter or balcony extending from any building (owned or leased) to discharge or conduct water upon the surface of any public sidewalk.




? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 137 
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
137.01  Power to Vacate	137.04  Findings Required 
137.02  Planning and Zoning Commission	137.05  Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys 
137.03  Notice of Vacation Hearing	137.06  Disposal by Gift Limited
137.01	POWER TO VACATE.  When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
137.02	PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.  Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council.  The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the Commission.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03	NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.  The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered. 
137.04	FINDINGS REQUIRED.  No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be vacated unless the Council finds that:
1.	Public Use.  The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.   
2.	Abutting Property.  The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05	DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.  When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06	DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.  The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose or to a fair. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] & 364.7[3])

EDITOR’S NOTE 

The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public grounds and remain in full force and effect.

ORDINANCE NO.	ADOPTED	ORDINANCE NO.	ADOPTED
101	June 7, 1949		
184	February 6, 1979		
217	July 6, 1982		
231	March 5, 1985		
236	December 2, 1986		
255	August 6, 1991		
309	June 11, 1996		
410	April 27, 2010		
472	November 10, 2015		
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
 
CHAPTER 138 
STREET GRADES
138.01  Established Grades	138.02  Record Maintained 
138.01	ESTABLISHED GRADES.  The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been heretofore established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as official grades. 
138.02	RECORD MAINTAINED.  The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request. 

EDITOR’S NOTE 

The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and remain in full force and effect.

ORDINANCE NO.	ADOPTED	ORDINANCE NO.	ADOPTED
43	March 12, 1928		
172	May 3, 1977		
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			



? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 139 
NAMING OF STREETS
139.01  Naming New Streets	139.04  Official Street Name Map 
139.02  Changing Name of Street	139.05  Revision of Street Name Map 
139.03  Recording Street Names	
139.01	NAMING NEW STREETS.  New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
1.	Extension of Existing Street.  Streets added to the City that are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing street.
2.	Resolution.  All street names, except streets named as a part of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3.	Planning and Zoning Commission.  Proposed street names shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02	CHANGING NAME OF STREET.  The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03	RECORDING STREET NAMES.  Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04	OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.  Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map, which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.  The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words:  “This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Onawa, Iowa.”
139.05	REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.  If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the Official Street Name Map as follows:  “On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:  (brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.

EDITOR’S NOTE 

The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted naming streets and remain in full force and effect.

ORDINANCE NO.	ADOPTED	ORDINANCE NO.	ADOPTED
305	April 2, 1996		
364	July 23, 2002		



? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 
CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
140.01  Exercise of Police Power	140.05  Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility 
140.02  Definition	140.06  Permitted Access Points 
140.03  Right of Access Limited	140.07  Parking Restricted
140.04  Access Controls Imposed	
140.01	EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.  This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)   
140.02	DEFINITION.  The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled right or easement of access, light, air, or view by reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other reason. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)  
140.03	RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.  No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at which access is permitted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)  
140.04	ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.  There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities on the Primary Road System extension improvement, Project No. F-184(4), F-993(1), and P-1055 Primary Roads No. 175 and 75 within the City and regulating access to and from the facilities described as follows:
1.	On extension of Iowa Avenue from West Corporate limits of the City (Station 1788 + 72.0) east to 15th Street (Station 422 + 89.0).
2.	From the South Corporate limits at Station 806 + 96 to the curb section at Station 791 + 32, which is approximately 396 feet south of Maple Street.
3.	From the North Corporate limits (Station 720 + 90.1) south to the curb section (Station 748 + 56.8) at intersection of 10th and Jasper Streets.
All in accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Projects No. F-993(1), F-184(4) and P-1055 on file in the office of the Clerk. 
140.05	UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY.  It is unlawful for any person to: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366)
1.	Cross Dividing Line.  Drive a vehicle over, upon, or across any curb, central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such controlled access facilities.
2.	Turns.  Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation, or line.
3.	Use of Lanes.  Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb, separation, section, or line.
4.	Enter Facility.  Drive any vehicle into the controlled access facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line that separates such service road from the controlled access facility property.  
140.06	PERMITTED ACCESS POINTS.  Following is a list of available accesses approved by the State Highway Commission on the extension of Iowa Avenue from 15th Street to the West Corporate limits on Project F-993(1) Iowa Highway 175:


STATION	SIDE OF STREET	
WIDTH	
USE OF DRIVE OR ENTRANCE
390 + 00			
1791 + 47.0	North	24 feet	Field
398 + 00	North and South	24 feet	Field
412 + 00	North	36 feet	Field
416 + 94.0	North	30 feet	Alley

140.07	PARKING RESTRICTED.  The parking of vehicles on or along controlled access facilities is restricted as follows:
1.	No vehicle shall be parked on or alongside the controlled access facilities described in Section 140.04.
2.	No vehicle shall be parked on any street from 1st Street West through 15th Street on Iowa Avenue or from Maple Street north through Emerald Street on 10th Street within 35 feet of the sidewalk line of the intersecting street approaches.



[The next page is 841]
 
CHAPTER 145 
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
145.01  Enforcement Officer	145.05  Conduct of Hearing 
145.02  General Definition of Unsafe	145.06  Posting of Signs 
145.03  Unsafe Building	145.07  Right to Demolish; Municipal Infraction
145.04  Notice to Owner	145.08  Costs
145.01	ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  The Mayor is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02	GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.  All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this chapter, unsafe buildings.  All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])  
145.03	UNSAFE BUILDING.  “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the following criteria:
1.	Various Inadequacies.  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
2.	Manifestly Unsafe.  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
3.	Inadequate Maintenance.  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.
4.	Fire Hazard.  Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5.	Abandoned.  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04	NOTICE TO OWNER.  The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice stating the defects thereof.  This notice may require the owner or person in charge of the building or premises, within forty-eight (48) hours or such reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within ninety (90) days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer.  If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])  
1.	Notice Served.  Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if the owner is found within the City limits.  If the owner is not found within the City limits such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or certified mail.  The designated period within which said owner or person in charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
2.	Hearing.  Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05	CONDUCT OF HEARING.  If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the following:
1.	Notice.  The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date, time and place of hearing.
2.	Owner’s Rights.  At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
3.	Determination.  The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may issue such order as it deems appropriate.†
145.06	POSTING OF SIGNS.  The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice to read:  “DO NOT ENTER.  UNSAFE TO OCCUPY.  CITY OF ONAWA, IOWA.”  Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal or repairs are completed.  Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the building.
145.07	RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.  In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice.  A statement of the cost 
 
of such work shall be transmitted to the Council.  As an alternative to this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08	COSTS.  Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury.  Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.  In addition, the City may take any other action deemed appropriate to recover costs incurred.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])  




? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 146
FIRE ZONE
146.01  Fire Zone Established	146.05  Reconstruction Prohibited 
146.02  Plans Submitted	146.06  Special Permit   
146.03  Buildings Prohibited	146.07  Removal of Buildings 
146.04  Construction Standards	146.08  Storage of Materials Restricted 
146.01	FIRE ZONE ESTABLISHED.  A Fire Zone is established to include all of the following territory:
All territory within the BC – Central Business Commercial District, as identified on the Official Zoning Map

146.02	PLANS SUBMITTED.  It is unlawful to build, enlarge, or alter any structure, building, or part thereof, within the Fire Zone until a plan of the proposed work, together with a statement of materials to be used has been submitted to the Council, who shall, if in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, issue a permit for the proposed work.
146.03	BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.  The erection of any building or structure of any kind, or additions thereto, or substantial alterations thereof, involving partial rebuilding, are prohibited in the Fire Zone, unless constructed in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
146.04	CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.  The construction standards for all buildings, structures, or parts thereof within the Fire Zone shall be of Type I, Type II, or, at a minimum, Type III - 1 hour fire resistant - construction, as specified in the Uniform Building Code.
146.05	RECONSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.  Any building within the Fire Zone not constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter which is hereafter damaged by fire, decay, or otherwise shall not be rebuilt, altered, or reconstructed except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
146.06	SPECIAL PERMIT.  The Council may, by four-fifths (4/5) vote, issue a special permit to improve any property within the Fire Zone contrary to the provisions of this chapter, on condition that such improvement shall not increase the rates for fire insurance or the fire hazard potential of the area, or to allow any person to erect or move in any building or structure for temporary purposes for a period of time not exceeding six (6) months from the date of such permission.
146.07	REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS.  Any person who erects any building in the Fire Zone, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall be given written notice by the Mayor to remove or tear down the same, and if such removal or taking down is not completed within thirty (30) days from the time of the service of such notice, the Mayor shall cause the same to be removed or taken down.  The Mayor shall report an itemized bill of the expense to the Clerk, and the same shall be charged to the person owning such building.  The Clerk shall present the bill to the owner of the property and if the bill is not paid within ten (10) days from the date it is presented, the amount of the bill shall be certified, by the Clerk, to the County Treasurer, as a lien against the property and collected the same as other taxes.
146.08	STORAGE OF MATERIALS RESTRICTED.  No person shall have or deposit any grain stack, pile of rubbish, explosives, hazardous chemicals or other flammable substance within the Fire Zone, nor shall any person have or deposit any cord wood or fire wood, within the Fire Zone without written permission from the Mayor, specifying the maximum amount of such cord wood or fire wood, that may be kept, stored, or deposited on any lot or part of a lot within the Fire Zone, unless the same be within one of the buildings allowed by this chapter.  No person shall build or allow any fires, whether trash fires or otherwise, within the Fire Zone as described in this chapter.
 
CHAPTER 147
CONTROL OF WEEDS AND RANK GROWTH OF VEGETATION
147.01  Definitions	147.05  Failure to Comply
147.02  Health, Safety and Fire Hazard	147.06  Assessment Against Property
147.03  Prohibited	147.07  Misdemeanor
147.04  Inspections	
147.01	DEFINITIONS.  For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.	“Owner” means the record titleholder or titleholders of a premises as shown by the transfer books at the County Auditor’s office.
2.	“Premises” means any lot, part of a lot, combinations of lots or parcels of real estate, whether public or private, and including land owned by any railroad, located within the City upon which weeds are growing.  Premises shall also specifically include the area between the curb and the adjoining property line even though title thereto is not held by the owner.
3.	“Weed Commissioner” means the City Building Inspector or such other person as may be designed by the Council from time to time to administer the City’s weed control program.
4.	“Weeds” means all noxious weeds as defined by Chapter 317 of the Code of Iowa and all other weeds, grasses, plants and other growth which have grown to a height exceeding twelve (12) inches, except for trees, ornamental bushes, flowers, garden plants or other ornamental plants which are commonly allowed to exceed 12 inches in height and which are therefore not weeds under this definition.  “Weeds” also means growth that has not been cut or destroyed, including volunteer trees as defined in Chapter 151.					      (Ord. 491 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
147.02	HEALTH, SAFETY AND FIRE HAZARD.  Weeds are hereby deemed and found to be a health, safety, and fire hazard and therefore must be cut or destroyed periodically.
147.03	PROHIBITED.  It is unlawful for any owner of any premises within the City to permit weeds to grow upon any such premises.  
147.04	INSPECTIONS.  The Weed Commissioner is authorized and empowered to enter upon any premises within the City at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting, photographing and measuring the growth of weeds thereon.
147.05	FAILURE TO COMPLY.  In the event that an owner of any premises fails to comply with Section 147.03, the Weed Commissioner or other designated person shall have full power and authority to enter upon the premises for the purpose of cutting or destroying weeds.  Such entry may be made without the consent of the owner, occupant or person in possession or control of the premises.
147.06	ASSESSMENT AGAINST PROPERTY.  If the Weed Commissioner or other designated person cuts or destroys weeds on any premises, the actual cost of cutting or destruction, plus ten percent additional for administrative costs, with a minimum charge of $100.00, shall be reported to the City Clerk, who shall forthwith send a statement for such costs to the owner at the address used for mailing of tax statements.  If not paid within thirty (30) days, such costs shall be certified by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer to be collected as regular taxes against the premises, or by any other means available to the City.
(Ord. 491 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
147.07	MISDEMEANOR.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.  Each day of noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an additional offense.



[The next page is 865]
 
CHAPTER 150 
BUILDING NUMBERING
150.01  Definitions	150.03  Building Numbering Plan
150.02  Owner Requirements	
150.01	DEFINITIONS.  For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.	“Owner” means the owner of the principal building.  
2.	“Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision thereof.
150.02	OWNER REQUIREMENTS.  Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
1.	Obtain Building Number.  The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2.	Display Building Number.  The owner shall place or cause to be installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than two and one-half (2½) inches in height and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3.	Failure to Comply.  If an owner refuses to number a building as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after being notified in writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03	BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.  Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building numbering plan on file in the office of the Clerk.



? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
CHAPTER 151
TREES
151.01  Definition	151.04  Trimming Trees to be Supervised 
151.02  Planting Restrictions	151.05  Disease Control 
151.03  Duty to Trim Trees	151.06  Inspection and Removal
151.01	DEFINITION.  For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.  
151.02	PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.  No tree shall be planted in any parking or street except in accordance with the following:
1.	Alignment.  All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the parking midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb.  In the event a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line ten (10) feet from the property line.   
2.	Spacing.  Trees shall not be planted on any parking that is less than nine (9) feet in width, or contains less than eighty-one (81) square feet of exposed soil surface per tree.  Trees shall not be planted closer than twenty (20) feet from street intersections (property lines extended) and ten (10) feet from driveways.  If it is at all possible trees should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk and the curb.
3.	Prohibited Trees.  No person shall plant in any street any fruit-bearing tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder, Chinese elm, evergreen, willow, or black walnut.  Volunteer trees are prohibited and are defined as any tree that was not specifically planted on the property and all trees that grow out of a fence line, hedges, and around foundations and alleyways.  The duty to cut and remove prohibited trees is the same as provided under Section 147.01. 
(Subsection 3 – Ord. 491 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
151.03	DUTY TO TRIM TREES.  The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least fifteen (15) feet above the surface of the street and eight (8) feet above the sidewalks.  If the abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five (5) days.  If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax, or by any means available to the City.						      (Ord. 491 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])
151.04	TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.  Except as allowed in Section 151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is done under the supervision of the City. 
151.05	DISEASE CONTROL.  Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may harbor serious insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
151.06	INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.  The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to the following:
1.	City Property.  If it is determined that any such condition exists on any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by treatment or removal.  The Council may also order the removal of any trees on the streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with travel thereon.
2.	Private Property.  If it is determined with reasonable certainty that any such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge of such property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within fourteen (14) days of said notification.  If such owner, occupant, or person in charge of said property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice, the Council may cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])



[The next page is 881]
 
CHAPTER 155 
FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES
155.01  Permitted 	155.03  Exemptions
155.02  Specific Regulations	
155.01	PERMITTED.  Fences, walls, and hedges are permitted in any required yard, provided that no fence, wall, or hedge along the front or front side edge of any front yard shall be over four (4) feet in height.  Hedges may be no higher than six (6) feet in height in any side, rear yard or next to an alley.	(Ord. 491 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
155.02	SPECIFIC REGULATIONS. 
1.	Permit Required.  It is unlawful for any person to install, erect, construct, relocate, or alter a fence or wall within the City without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Zoning Administrator.  A sketch or plan of the proposed fence or wall, including a description of the materials to be used and a specification of the height shall be submitted with the application for a permit.
2.	Materials.  Fences or walls may not be constructed out of unsightly or nondurable materials such as sheet metal panels, fiberglass or plastic panels, fiberboard, plywood, or particle board.  However, notwithstanding the foregoing, sheet metal, fiberglass or plastic panels may be used in nonresidential districts provided the materials are new or like new and are maintained in a like-new condition.
3.	Heights.  It is unlawful for any person to erect or construct on any premises within the City a fence or wall exceeding four (4) feet in height, except those fences or walls located within the side and rear areas of a lot, or in nonresidential areas which fences or walls may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.  No fence or wall may be erected, constructed, installed or maintained which obscures the clear view of traffic at intersections or driveways or which creates a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
4.	Location.  Fences or walls may only be constructed on private property.  No fence or wall shall be located closer than eighteen (18) inches to any alley or be constructed in such a manner as to violate the required site distances at intersections.  Line fences by agreement of adjoining property owners are permissible.
5.	Barbed Wire Fences.  Barbed wire shall not be used in the construction or maintenance of any fence or wall except when used on the top of a chain-link fence at least six (6) feet in height or when used on property zoned for agricultural uses.
6.	Electric Fences.  Electric fences shall not be used anywhere in the City unless the area of proposed use is zoned for agricultural use, except that the Zoning Administrator may issue a permit for an electrically charged fence to retain animals upon special application showing the need for an electric fence.
155.03	EXEMPTIONS.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to fences or walls in existence before June 1, 1982, except that on sale or transfer of the property upon which a nonconforming fence or wall is located, such fence or wall shall be made to conform with this chapter or be removed within thirty (30) days of closing or transfer of ownership.




[The next page is 885]


 
CHAPTER 156
SIGN REGULATIONS
156.01  Purpose	156.06  Signs Permitted Within Zoning Districts
156.02  Definitions	156.07  Signs Prohibited in All Zones
156.03  General Regulations	156.08  Nonconforming Signs
156.04  Signs Permitted in All Zones	156.09  Variance Procedure
156.05  Signs Permitted in All Zones	
156.01	PURPOSE.  The regulations in this chapter establish comprehensive minimum requirements for the control of signs in order to preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.  More specifically, this chapter is intended to assist in achieving the following objectives. 
1.	To authorize the use of signs that are: 
A.	Compatible with their surroundings and the zoning district; 
B.	Appropriate to the type of activity; 
C.	Expressive of the identity of the proprietors; and 
D.	Legible in the circumstances. 
2.	To foster high quality commercial development and to enhance the economic vitality of existing businesses by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs, and to encourage better communication with the public. 
3.	To encourage sound, proper display practices and to mitigate the objectionable effects of competition in respect to the size and placement of signs. 
4.	To enhance the physical appearance of the City by protecting the manmade and natural beauty of the area. 
5.	To protect pedestrians and motorists from damage or injury that might result from improper construction, placement, or use of signs. 
6.	To protect the public by reducing obstructions and distractions that might cause traffic accidents. 
7.	To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with nearby land uses. 
8.	To protect the physical and mental well-being of the general public by recognizing and encouraging a sense of aesthetic appreciation for the visual environment. 
9.	To preserve and enhance the natural beauty and unique character of the City. 
10.	To promote convenience, enjoyment, and free flow of traffic within the City. 
11.	To protect the public’s ability to identify uses and premises without confusion.
156.02	DEFINITIONS.  The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1.	“Accessory sign” means a sign relating only to uses of the premises on which the sign is located, or products are sold, or services offered on the premises on which the sign is located, or indicating the name or address of a building, or the occupants or management of a building of the premises where the sign is located.  See “off- premises sign” definition. 
2.	“Address sign” means a sign posted in conjunction with doorbells or mailboxes showing only the numerical address and/or the occupants of the premises upon which the sign is situated. 
3.	“Awning” means any retractable structure made of cloth, metal, or other material attached to building; erected to permit raising or retracting to a position against the building when not in use.  If the sign is on an awning, then only the awning area covered by the actual lettering or symbol shall be used in calculating the sign area.  If the awning is illuminated, then the entire lit area shall be included in computing the sign area. 
4.	“Banner sign” means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by permanent frame at one or more edges. 
5.	“Bench sign” means a sign painted or attached to a seating bench. 
6.	“Billboard sign” means a sign structure designed for the posting of changeable graphics or reading matter advertising a product, place, activity, person, profession, service institution, or business located upon property other than the premises on which the sign is located.  This definition includes the term “display board.”  Signs shall be no less than 100 square feet in area, per side and no more than 160 square feet in area, per side.  Signs must remain a minimum 1,000 feet from any other billboard or off-premises sign on each side of a street in any district.  Each sign shall have a minimum clearance of 16 feet and shall meet all County and State regulations where required.  Signs must be constructed with an all metal frame and by a State-registered contractor.  Signs must remain a minimum 500 feet from a residential or public zoned area. 
7.	“Building Code” means the Uniform Building Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials. 
8.	“Building Official” means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the Building Code in the City. 
9.	“Bulletin board” means a sign used for the temporary posting of meeting or event notice. 
10.	“Canopy” means a structure (other than an awning) design to cover or shade windows, entries, or walkways made of cloth, vinyl, canvas, or other similar material with frames. 
11.	“Combination sign” means a sign incorporating any combination of the features of freestanding, projecting, and roof signs. 
12.	“Curb line” means the line at the face of the curb nearest the street or roadway.  In the absence of a curb, the curb line shall be established by the City’s engineer. 
13.	“Directional sign” means a sign designed for the purpose of assisting traffic control, which is located on private property and limited to no more than three feet in height or six square feet in area. 
14.	“Driveway” means a private access to either a private or public street road, alley, highway, or freeway. 
15.	“Flag sign” means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
16.	“Flashing sign” means a sign containing electrical wiring and lighting where the light produces a flashing or strobe effect.  A flashing sign shall be affixed to a permanent structure and shall have at least ten feet of clearance above the sidewalk, street, or ground.  This term excludes signs illuminated by an exterior light source. 
17.	“Freestanding sign” means a sign that is supported by one or more uprights, columns, pole, pylons, or braces in or upon the ground and not attached to any building or wall.  This term also applies to those signs having their framework permanently embedded in the ground. 
18.	“Home occupation sign” means a sign or nameplate limited to the display of the occupant and/or the name of the home occupation.  The sign shall not exceed two square feet in area, shall not be illuminated, shall be affixed to the main structure, or shall be visible through a window, and shall be limited to one per home. 
19.	“Legal setback line” means a line established by ordinance beyond which a building may not be built.  A legal setback line may be a property line. 
20.	“Marquee sign” means a sign that is a permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property. 
21.	“Memorial sign” means a sign dedicated to an historical event, figure, or person. 
22.	“Monument sign” means an identification device permanently embedded in the ground, upon which is affixed only the name and/or symbol of a particular neighborhood, subdivision, municipality, commercial or industrial development. 
23.	“Mural sign” – see “wall sign.” 
24.	“Non-combustible” means, when applied to building construction material, means a material that will not ignite and burn when subjected to fire.  Any material conforming to the Building Code or as outlined in the Uniform Building Code shall be considered non-combustible within the meaning of the section. 
25.	“Non-structural trim” means the molding, battens, caps, nailing strips, latticing, cutouts, or letters and walkways that are attached to the sign structure. 
26.	“Off-premises sign” means a sign displaying or drawing attention to a product, place, activity, person, profession, service institution, or business located upon property other than the premises on which the sign is located.  Temporary signs advertising special events or projects and government entity signs are permitted.  Signs shall be no less than 100 square feet in area, per side, and no more than 160 square feet in area, per side.  Signs must remain a minimum 1,000 feet from any other billboard or off-premises sign on each side of a street in any district.  Each sign shall have a minimum clearance of 16 feet and shall meet all County and State regulations where required.  Signs must be constructed with an all metal frame and by a State-registered contractor.  Signs must remain a minimum 500 feet from a residential or public zoned area. 
27.	“Pennant sign” means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material (whether or not containing a message of any kind) suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
28.	“Plastic materials, approved” are those materials having a self-ignition temperature of 650 degrees Fahrenheit or greater and a smoke-density rating not greater than 450 degrees when tested in accordance with UBC Standards. 
29.	“Pole sign” – see “freestanding sign.” 
30.	“Political sign” means an outdoor sign of a temporary nature that is non-illuminated and not larger than 32 square feet in surface area, erected for the purpose of soliciting votes or support for, or in opposition to, any candidate or any political party under whose designation any candidate is seeking nomination or election or any public question or issue on the ballot in an election held under the laws of the State of Iowa. 
31.	“Portable sign” means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to “A” or “T” frames; menu and sandwich board signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.  Portable signs are not permitted unless specifically authorized for temporary use by the Building Official.  Said sign shall be permitted for ninety (90) days in any consecutive 12-month period. 
32.	“Projecting sign” means a sign supported by a building or other structure which projects over any street, sidewalk, alley or public way or public easement, or which projects more than 12 inches from the face of the building, structure or supporting wall, excluding canopies, awnings, and marquees.  No projecting sign shall project from the face of the building or structure over a street, alley or other public space, beyond a line drawn perpendicular from a line two feet inside the curb line.  This definition includes signs and structures that are perpendicular and parallel to the building or other supporting structure.  Those projecting signs that are perpendicular are limited to 20 square feet in area, while those projecting signs that are parallel shall not exceed 25 percent of the surface area of any store wall to which the sign is affixed.  In either case, a projecting sign shall have at least seven feet of clearance above the sidewalk, street or ground. 
33.	“Regulatory sign” means traffic and other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossings, danger, and other such necessary, temporary, emergency, or non-advertising signs. 
34.	Roads or Streets.
A.	“City street” means any throughway having a public right-of-way, which is designed to channel or circulate vehicular and pedestrian traffic.  The term “street” may refer to any right-of-way bounded by adjacent property lines or to the paving installed within such right-of-way. 
B.	“County road” means any road or street owned, operated, and maintained by Monona County. 
C.	“Primary highway” means the entire primary system as officially designated, or as may hereafter be so designated by the State Department of Transportation. 
D.	“Private street” means any privately owned road, street, or driveway.
35.	“Roof sign” means a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by said building.  Said roof sign shall not be larger than 40 square feet in area. 
36.	“Sign” means an identification, description, illustration, or device that is affixed to, or represented on a building, structure, or parcel of land and that directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, profession, service, institution, or business. 
37.	“Sign area” means that area within a line including the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characteristics or delineations, or within a line including the outer extremities of the framework or background of the sign, whichever line includes the larger area.  When the irregularity of a sign shape warrants, such area shall include the extreme points or edges of the sign.  The support for the sign background, whether it be columns, pylons, or a building or part thereof, shall not be included in the sign area, unless said building part provides back-lighting for sign lettering and then said back-lit portion will be calculated as part of the sign area.  Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be included in the computation of sign area. 
38.	“Sign structure” means any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a sign as defined in this section.  A sign structure may be one or more poles, beams, and/or frames, and may or may not be an integral part of the building. 
39.	“Structure” means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed together in some definite matter. 
40.	“Temporary sign” means a sign or advertising device intended to be displayed for a limited period typically identifying construction, community or civic projects, show homes, or other special events on a temporary basis.  Said sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.  Said sign shall be permitted for 90 days in any consecutive 12-month period. 
41.	“U.B.C. standards” means the Uniform Building Code Standards volume, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials. 
42.	“Wall sign” means a sign other than a roof that is supported by a building or wall.  Such a sign shall not project, in height, beyond the peak of said building or wall more than one-third (1/3) of the sign’s longest dimension.  Signs surpassing said peak projections shall be designated as roof signs.  Wall signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the surface area of any wall to which the sign is affixed. 
156.03	GENERAL REGULATIONS.
1.	All signs permitted herein shall be contained entirely upon private property; set back from existing and proposed public right-of-way. 
2.	No sign shall be permitted within the line of sight triangles formed at the intersection of a public right-of-way with an access, driveway, or alley; nor shall any sign be permitted within the line of sight triangles at the intersection of two rights-of-way, with two sides of the respective triangles being measured in length along the street boundaries measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two sides already established.  See Section 165.31(15) of the Zoning Ordinance for additional reference.  As defined in this subsection, no advertising device shall be erected or maintained in the triangular area shown below unless said triangular area is occupied by an existing building or structure.  In that event, no advertising device shall be erected or maintained closer to the intersection than the building or structure itself.  A wall sign that does not protrude more than 12 inches may be attached to said building or structure. 
3.	Any light, exclusive of the sign area itself, used to illuminate any sign shall be situated and arranged as to shine or reflect the light away from adjoining premises, including public right-of-way. 
4.	Lawful signs, other than portable signs as herein defined, existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter, that do not conform to the terms of this chapter shall be classified as legal, nonconforming signs and may be maintained as such, yet shall not (except when required by law) be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted, or structurally altered, unless altered in a nature so as to conform with the written terms of this chapter.  Any sign in existence at the adoption hereof that was not an authorized nonconforming sign under previous ordinances shall not be authorized to continue as a nonconforming sign pursuant to this chapter, or amendments thereto.  In the event that nonconforming sign is either removed, replaced, or destroyed, new signs shall thereafter conform to the terms of this chapter. 
5.	Calculation of Sign Area: 
A.	If a sign is enclosed by a rectangle or an outline, the total area will be the sign area; or if a sign consists of individual letters or figures, the imaginary square or rectangle that would enclose all letters or figures shall be the sign area.  For freestanding signs, the sign area shall be the total square footage of all individual signs anchored to the same support structure or the ground. 
B.	Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be counted.
C.	The area of signs of unusual shapes, such as globes, cylinders, pyramids, shall be computed as one-half the total of the exposed surfaces. 
D.	In all cases, total allowable sign area for signs attached to buildings shall not exceed 25 percent of the total square footage of the front of any building. 
E.	In all cases, total allowable sign area for rear entrances shall not exceed 25 percent of the total square footage of the rear facade of any building. 
 
6.	Maximum sign heights, per each zoning district, are shown in the following figure. 
Sign Height Table
(Height is shown in feet and is measured from the base of the sign to highest point of the sign.)

Zoning District	Maximum Sign Height
AG	20 feet
RS	10 feet
RM	10 feet
MH	10 feet
FB	10 feet
AC	40 feet
BC	40 feet
LI	50 feet
HI	50 feet
PD	20 feet

7.	Structural and Maintenance Requirements: 
A.	The wiring of all signs shall be contained and enclosed and shall conform to the provisions of the National Electric Code. 
B.	Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, neat, and attractive condition by its owner.  The sign supports shall be kept painted/treated to prevent rust, deterioration, rotting, or corrosion. 
C.	No sign shall be erected, placed or mounted in such a manner as to interfere with any exit, fire escape, or window in any building. 
D.	If a sign is illuminated, the source of such illumination shall be kept in a state of working order at all times. 
E.	All signs shall be designed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 80 miles per hour and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the building code or other ordinances of the City. 
F.	No signs or sign structures shall have any nails, tacks, wires, or sharp metal edges protruding from them. 
G.	Any glass forming a part of a sign shall be heavy safety glass and a minimum of 1/4 inch in thickness.  Where any single piece or pane of glass has an area exceeding three square feet, it shall be wired glass. 
H.	No sign shall be erected, placed or mounted in such a manner to interfere with snow removal or utility maintenance. 
I.	No sign shall be erected, placed or mounted closer than ten feet to any existing overhead electrical service wire nor closer than five feet from any existing overhead telephone or communication cable. 
J.	All letters, figures, characters, or representations in cut-out or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
K.	Every marquee, freestanding, wall, or projecting sign (including frame, braces, and support thereof) shall be securely built, as may be required by the Building Official. 
L.	All signs shall be mounted in one of the following manners: 
(1)	Flat against a building or wall. 
(2)	Back-to-back in pairs so that the backs of signs will be screened from public view. 
(3)	Otherwise mounted so that the back of all signs or sign structures showing to the public view shall be painted and maintained a neutral color or a color that blends with surrounding environment. 
M.	All signs shall be constructed to not hold water, snow or ice. 
N.	When any sign is found to be hazardous to a person or property, or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the same, shall upon written notice of the Building Officer forthwith in the case of immediate danger, and in any case within not more than 10 days, make such sign conform to the provisions of this chapter or remove it. 
O.	Any business that ceases operation or changes location shall remove all signs and sign structures within 30 days.  Failure to do so will result in the property owner receiving notification from the City.  All associated costs of this provision shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property.  An abandoned sign or remaining sign structure thereof, existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, shall have 30 days to be removed. 
P.	Signs constructed or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter are hereby deemed to constitute a nuisance and are subject to actions and any civil or criminal nuisance violation procedures under the Code of Iowa as well as this Code of Ordinances. 
8.	A sign permit must be obtained from the Building Official prior to installing or erecting a sign.  A one-time fee will be charged for a sign permit; and the City Council shall, by resolution, determine the fee schedule.  A copy of the fee schedule shall be located in the City Office. 
156.04	SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONES.  Signs hereafter designated shall be permitted in all zoning districts without prior Building Department approval.  A sign permit is not required.
1.	Signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises, or part of the premises, on which the sign is displayed.  One non-illuminated sign, not to exceed six square feet in area, shall be permitted on each premises. 
2.	Signs advertising the architects, engineers, contractors, occupants, other individuals involved in the construction, reconstruction, or remodeling of a building and/or development project and such signs announcing the character and/or purpose of the site.  Total non-illuminated signage, not to exceed 40 square feet in area, shall be permitted on each premises.  Said signs shall not be erected sooner than 30 days prior to site development, nor continued being displayed longer than 30 days following project completion.  Said signs shall be placed in accordance with the regulation in this section. 
3.	Signs announcing candidates seeking public political office or pertinent political issues.  Said signs shall be confined to private property and shall be subject to applicable State and municipal regulations.  It is lawful to place political signs on private property with permission of the owner of person in charge of the property at any time during the period beginning 45 days before the date of the election to which the signs pertain, and the exemptions afforded to political signs shall expire seven days following the date of the election to which the signs pertain. 
4.	Address signs posted in conjunction with doorbells or mailboxes showing only the numerical addresses and/or occupants of the premises upon which the sign is situated. 
5.	Home occupation signs that are illuminated and do not exceed two square feet in area.  Said sign shall be attached to the front of the principal building.  For the purposes of this subsection, “front” shall be determined by the street from where the address is derived. 
6.	Accessory signs identifying hospitals, civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organizations.  All signs must comply with the general regulations found in Section 156.03.  All freestanding, monumental and roof signs exceeding 40 square feet in area must be approved by City Council. 
7.	Signs that primarily consist of balloons, ribbons, streamers, spinners, or other similarly moving devices.  Said signs shall be permitted for 90 days in any consecutive 12-month period. 
8.	All flag signs exceeding 40 square feet in area must be approved by City Council. 
156.05	SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONES.  Signs hereafter designated shall be permitted in all zoning districts without prior Building Department approval.  A sign permit is not required.
1.	Traffic and other regulatory, municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing, danger and other such necessary, temporary, emergency, or non-advertising signs. 
2.	Signs required to be posted and maintained by law or governmental order, rule of regulation, unless specifically prohibited in this section. 
3.	Portable signs, banners pennants, and other temporary advertising devices identifying public events, special promotions, holidays and similar events, providing that specific approval is granted under regulations established by the City Council. 
4.	Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical markers, and similar representations, 
5.	Monumental signs intended to identify residential, commercial and/or industrial developments, in accordance with this section. 
6.	Mural wall signs, company logo signs, hand-painted art, or any similar sign that is intended to be painted directly on the existing building facade or wall. 
156.06	SIGNS PERMITTED WITHIN ZONING DISTRICTS.  In order to implement the provisions of this section, the following signs are hereby permitted in the previously defined zoning districts as follows.
1.	AG – Agricultural District. 
A.	Signs permitted in and limited as per Section 156.04 herein.
B.	Fascia and mural wall signs used to identify the given name, symbol, and/or occupants of a farmstead located upon the premises.  Sign area shall not exceed 25 percent of the surface area of the single wall to which the sign is affixed.  Signs exceeding 40 square feet in area must be approved by City Council. 
C.	Accessory signs, subject to approval of the Building Officer, appertaining to any material that is mined, grown, or treated upon the premises; provided, however, such signs shall be located upon or immediately adjacent to the buildings or in the area in which such materials are treated, grown, processed, or stored.  Said sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area.  No more than one such sign shall be permitted per parcel. 
D.	Billboard and off-premises signs. 
2.	RS – Residential Single-Family District. 
A.	Signs permitted in and limited as per Section 156.04 herein. 
B.	Residential developments of four or more dwelling units shall be permitted one development complex sign for each public street frontage within the project (or for each entrance in the case of a subdivision project).  Said signs may be placed in any location on private property provided the sign complies with the height limitations in this chapter.  The maximum sign area for each sign shall be four square feet, plus one square foot for each dwelling unit or lot, not to exceed 25 square feet in area per face of the sign. 
C.	Accessory signs, not to exceed four square feet in area, identifying principal permitted and accessory used in “RS” zones other than dwellings and churches.  Not more than one sign shall be issued per parcel.  All permitted signs must be of the fascia or mural wall type, unless the product, place, activity, person, service, institution, or business being advertised is located within a structure surpassing setback requirements from the lot line being utilized for access.  If said setback exceeds Code requirements, one directional sign may be permitted. 
D.	One bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 40 square feet in area pertaining to construction, lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises, or sale of land or lots is allowed.  The board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired, sold, or construction is completed. 
E.	Church bulletin boards. 
F.	Home occupation signs, provided that only one non-illuminated sign be attached directly to the front of the principal dwelling.  Said sign shall not exceed four square feet in area.  For the purposes of this subsection, “front” shall be determined by the street from where the address is derived. 
3.	RM – Residential Multi-Family District. 
A.	Any sign permitted in the “RS” Single-Family District. 
4.	MH – Mobile Home District. 
A.	Any sign permitted in the “RS” Single-Family District. 
5.	FB – Factory Built Housing District. 
A.	Any sign permitted in the “RS” Single-Family District. 
6.	AC – Arterial Commercial District. 
A.	Signs permitted in and limited as per Section 156.05 herein. 
B.	Accessory and projecting wall signs. 
C.	Accessory freestanding signs shall be permitted as follows:
(1)	Said sign shall not be larger than 40 square feet in area. 
(2)	Maximum of all signs shall be no larger than 25 percent of building frontage.
D.	Roof signs are not allowed. 
E.	Flashing signs provided said sign is affixed to a permanent structure and has at least seven feet of clearance above the sidewalk, street, or ground. 
F.	Areas designated as a “shopping center” shall have a limited number of freestanding signs and shall be designed to identify the shopping center and/or the stores contained therein.  Individual business signs are discouraged.  To meet this end, one such sign freestanding sign structure shall be permitted for each 250 linear feet, or fractional part thereof, of frontage on a public street.  Said signs shall be no larger than 350 square feet in area.  When separate principal uses are situated on parcels containing less than 250 feet of street frontage, one freestanding sign may be permitted.  Said sign shall be no larger than 100 square feet in area. 
G.	Billboards and off-premises signs.
7.	BC – Business Commercial District.
A.	Signs permitted in and limited as per Section 156.05 herein.
B.	Accessory and projecting wall signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)	Said sign shall not be larger than 40 square feet in area. 
(2)	Maximum of all signs shall be no larger than 25 percent of building frontage. 
C.	Roof signs are not allowed. 
D.	Flashing sign, projecting wall sign, awning, and canopies provided said sign is affixed to a permanent structure and has at least seven feet of clearance above the sidewalk street, or ground. 
8.	LI – Light Industrial District. 
A.	Any sign permitted in the “AC” District.
B.	Roof signs are allowed. 
C.	Billboards and off-premises signs.
9.	HI – Heavy Industrial District. 
A.	Any sign permitted in the “AC” District.
B.	Roof signs are allowed.
C.	Billboards and off-premises signs.
10.	PD   Public/Semi-Public District.
A.	Any sign permitted in the “RS” or “AC” District. 
B.	Roof signs are not allowed.
156.07	SIGNS PROHIBITED IN ALL ZONES.  Signs hereinafter designated shall be prohibited in all zoning districts.
1.	Signs that advertise a product, place, activity, person, service, institution, or business no longer conducted on the premises on which the sign is located.  Said signs and any supporting sign structures shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City. 
2.	Signs that are larger than 25 percent of the surface area of a wall or 40 square feet in area, unless otherwise allowed under this chapter. 
3.	Signs erected in a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of streets, alleys, or driveways or erected, designed, or positioned to interfere with, obstruct, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device that may mislead or confuse traffic. 
4.	Signs posted on public property, including utility poles, lighting fixtures, street signs, benches and similar fixtures. 
5.	Signs that imitate or resemble official traffic control signs, signals, regulatory signs, or devices. 
156.08	NONCONFORMING SIGNS.  Signs existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter and not conforming to its provision, but which were constructed in compliance with previous regulations and ordinance shall be regarded as nonconforming signs.  Nonconforming signs shall not be:
1.	Changed to another nonconforming sign. 
2.	Structurally altered so as to prolong life of the sign. 
3.	Expanded.
4.	Re-established after discontinuance of the sign use for a period of 30 days.
5.	Moved in whole or in part to another location unless said sign, and the use thereof, is made to conform to all regulations of this chapter. 
6.	Re-established after damage or destruction by any means, including and act of nature, exceeding 50 percent of the estimated initial value of the sign, as determined by the Building Official. 
 
156.09	VARIANCE PROCEDURE.  See Section 165.18(3) of this Code of Ordinances. 




[The next page is 915]

 
CHAPTER 157
AIRPORT HANGAR CONSTRUCTION
157.01  Construction on City Property	157.04  Removal Upon Termination
157.02  Notice of Termination	157.05  Rental Charges
157.03  Written Lease Required	
157.01	CONSTRUCTION ON CITY PROPERTY.  Airplane hangars and other related improvements may be constructed by private individuals on land adjacent to the landing strip at the Onawa Airport, which land is owned by the City, by first obtaining City approval of the proposed hangar plan or other improvement and the location thereof.  Any hangars or other improvements already constructed on the date of the ordinance codified by this chapter shall be considered acceptable.  No additional improvement or hangar construction of any kind shall take place without City approval.
157.02	NOTICE OF TERMINATION.  Any occupancy of the City land for hangar construction or airplane storage shall be at the pleasure of the City and may be terminated by giving thirty (30) days’ written notice of termination to the party occupying said land, unless a longer notice is required by any written lease.
157.03	WRITTEN LEASE REQUIRED.  No airplane storage space on said property, either with or without a hangar, shall be occupied by any party until said party has entered into a written lease with the City upon such terms and conditions as the City may determine from time to time, by resolution or otherwise.
157.04	REMOVAL UPON TERMINATION.  Any improvement on City property shall be removed by the party occupying the City property, or by a successor to the original constructor, upon termination of the lease between such party and the City.  Said improvement on City property shall be removed within sixty (60) days after the termination of the lease, or said improvement shall become the property of the City and the City may either occupy the abandoned improvement for its own use, or lease it to another for airplane storage.  If the City elects not to occupy or lease said improvement, it may remove same at the former tenant’s expense.
157.05	RENTAL CHARGES.  Rentals shall be based on a charge per square foot, whether or not a hangar is constructed on the leasehold premises.  The charge per square foot shall be fixed from time to time by resolution or otherwise.



[The next page is 945]


 
CHAPTER 160
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
160.01  Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact and Purpose	160.07  General Flood Plain (Overlay) District (FP)
160.02  Definitions	160.08  Shallow Flooding (Overlay) District (SF)
160.03  General Provisions	160.09  Administration
160.04  Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) Districts	160.10  Nonconforming Uses
160.05  Floodway (Overlay) District (FW)	160.11  Penalties for Violation
160.06  Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (FF)	160.12  Amendments
160.01	STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
1.	The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.  
2.	Findings of Fact.
A.	The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
B.	These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by:  (i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and (ii) the cumulative effect of obstructions on the flood plain causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
C.	This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of Natural Resources.
3.	Statement of Purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and its residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in paragraph (2)(A) of this section with provisions designed to: 
A.	Reserve sufficient flood plain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
B.	Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
C.	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or substantial improvement. 
D.	Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard. 
E.	Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program. 
160.02	DEFINITIONS.  Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1.	“Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.  (See 100-year flood).
2.	“Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides.  Also see “lowest floor.”
3.	“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
4.	“Existing construction” means any structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the first flood plain management regulations adopted by the community and may also be referred to as “existing structure.”
5.	“Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first flood plain management regulations adopted by the community.
6.	“Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
7.	“Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use which is wholly (or in substantial part) made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building site.  For the purpose of this chapter, factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes and also include “recreational vehicles” that are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
8.	“Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
9.	“Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
10.	“Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood.  For instance, the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of flood waters related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood.
11.	“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
12.	“Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood.
13.	“Flood plain management” means an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of flood plains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and flood plain management regulations.
14.	“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
15.	“Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.
16.	“Floodway fringe” means those portions of the flood plain, other than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
17.	“Historic structure” means any structure that is:
A.	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places maintained by the Department of Interior or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of the National Register;
B.	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C.	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
D.	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either (i) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
18.	“Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met: 
A.	The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of Section 160.06(4)(A) of this chapter; and 
B.	The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or storage; and 
C.	Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and 
D.	The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this section. 
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C and D above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above. 
19.	“New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the first flood plain management regulations adopted by the community.
20.	“New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of first flood plain management regulations adopted by the community.
21.	“One-hundred-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 100 years.
22.	“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
A.	Built on a single chassis;
B.	Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C.	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D.	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
23.	“Special flood hazard area” means the land within a community subject to the “100-year flood.”  This land is identified as Zone A on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.
24.	“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
25.	“Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, and other similar uses.
26.	“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
27.	“Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which satisfies either of the following criteria:
A.	Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either (i) before the “start of construction” of the improvement, or (ii) if the structure has been “substantially damaged” and is being restored, before the damage occurred.  The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.  The term also does not include any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as a “historic structure.”
B.	Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by 25 percent or more.  All additions constructed after the first flood plain management regulations adopted by the community shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
28.	“Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the flood plain management regulations.
29.	“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations.
160.03	GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1.	Lands to Which Chapter Apply.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Flood Plain, and Shallow Flooding (Overlay) Districts, as established in Section 160.04.
2.	Establishment of Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.  The Flood Insurance “Rate Map (FIRM) prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Monona County, Iowa, and Incorporated Areas, Onawa, Panels C0125, dated May 2, 2002, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.  The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained within the Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this chapter.
3.	FEMA Flood Map Legend - Special Flood Hazard Areas Inundated by 100-Year Flood.  Only Zones A, AE and X are in the Onawa corporate boundaries.  Only Zones A and AE require Iowa Department of Natural Resources permits to develop.
A.	Zone A – No base flood elevation determined.
B.	Zone AE – Base flood elevations determined.  Floodway areas in Zone AE are colored in dark gray.
C.	Zone AH – Flood depths of 1 to 3 feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations determined.
D.	Zone AO – Flood depths of 1 to 3 feet (usually sheet flowing on sloping terrain); average depths determined  For areas of alluvial fan flooding; velocities also determined.
E.	Zone A99 – To be protected from 100-year flood by Federal flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations determined.
F.	Zone V – Costal flood with velocity hazard (wave action); no base flood elevations determined.
G.	Zone VE – Costal flood with velocity hazard (waive action); base flood elevations determined.
H.	Zone X (shaded) – Areas of 500-year flood; areas of 100-year flood with average depths of less than 1 foot or with drainage areas less than 1 square mile; and areas protected by levees from 100-year flood; (not shaded)   Areas determined to be outside the 500-year flood plain.
I.	Zone D – Areas in which flood hazards are undetermined.
4.	Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries.  The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.  When an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
5.	Compliance.  No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
6.	Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.  It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail.  All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
7.	Interpretation.  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
8.	Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.  The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes.  This chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated Flood Plain (Overlay) District areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
9.	Severability.  If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
160.04	ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS.  The flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into the following districts:  (i) Floodway District (FW); (ii) Floodway Fringe District (FF); (iii) General Flood Plain District (FP); and (iv) Shallow Flooding District (SF).  The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.  Within these districts, all uses not allowed as permitted uses or permissible as conditional uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the Board of Adjustment.
160.05	FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FW).  The Floodway Overlay District areas are shown as “Floodway” on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.
1.	Permitted Uses.  The following uses shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of material or equipment, excavation, or alteration of a watercourse.
A.	Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
B.	Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
C.	Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
D.	Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
E.	Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above uses.
2.	Conditional Uses.  The following uses which involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in Section 160.09(3) of this chapter.  Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the Floodway District Performance Standards.  
A.	Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
B.	Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises.
C.	Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs, and billboards.
D.	Extraction of sands, gravel, and other materials.
E.	Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves.
F.	Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.
G.	Other uses similar in nature to uses described in subsection 1 and this subsection which are consistent with the provisions of subsection 3 of this section and the general spirit and purpose of this chapter.
3.	Performance Standards.  All Floodway District uses allowed as a permitted or conditional use shall meet the following standards.
A.	No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District which would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level.  Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.  
B.	All uses within the Floodway District shall:
(1)	Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2)	Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
(3)	Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
C.	No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
D.	Structures, buildings, and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
E.	Buildings, if permitted, shall have low flood damage potential and shall not be for human habitation.
F.	Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.  Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District within the time available after flood warning.
G.	Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion.  In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
H.	Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
I.	Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
160.06	FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FF).  The Floodway Fringe Overlay District areas are those areas shown as “Zone AE” on the Official Flood Plane Zoning Map but excluding those areas shown as “Floodway.”  All uses within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District.  All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance standards.
1.	All Structures.  All structures shall: 
A.	Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
B.	Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
C.	Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage. 
2.	Residential Buildings.  All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level.  Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon.  Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed subject to favorable consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill.  In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding.  All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.
3.	Nonresidential Buildings.  All new or substantially improved non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.  When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure, below the 100-year flood level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.  A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator. 
4.	All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
A.	Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)	A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(2)	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
(3)	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage.
B.	New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
C.	New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
5.	Factory-Built Homes.
A.	All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. 
B.	All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
6.	Utility and Sanitary Systems.
A.	On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding. 
B.	All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters.  Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. 
C.	New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.  Water supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. 
D.	Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems. 
7.	Storage of Flammable Materials.  Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level.  Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
8.	Structural Works.  Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage.  In addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
9.	Watercourses.  Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion.  In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
10.	Subdivisions.  Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.  Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter.  Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.  Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for those areas located within the Flood Plain (Overlay) District.
11.	Accessory Structures.
A.	Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements where the following criteria are satisfied.  
(1)	The structure shall not be used for human habitation. 
(2)	The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. 
(3)	The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
(4)	The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures. 
(5)	The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the 100-year flood level. 
B.	Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the structure and its contents.
12.	Recreational Vehicles.
A.	Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Section 160.05(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
(1)	The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than 180 consecutive days, and,
(2)	The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
B.	Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of subsection 5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
13.	Pipeline Crossings.  Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
160.07	GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FP).  The General Flood Plain Overlay District areas are those areas shown as “Zone A” on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.  
1.	Permitted Uses.  The following use shall be permitted within the General Flood Plain District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, the storage of materials or equipment, excavation, or alteration of a watercourse.
A.	Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
B.	Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
C.	Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
D.	Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
2.	Conditional Uses.  Any uses which involve placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in Section 160.09(3) of this chapter.  All such uses shall be reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources to determine:  (i) whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe; and (ii) the 100-year flood level.  The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination.
3.	Performance Standards.  
A.	All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay) District (Section 160.05).
B.	All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (Section 160.06).
160.08	SHALLOW FLOODING (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (SF).  
1.	Permitted Uses.  All uses within the Shallow Flooding District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance standards of the Shallow Flooding District.
2.	Performance Standards.  The performance standards for the Shallow Flooding District shall be the same as the performance standards for the Floodway Fringe District with the following exceptions:
A.	In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation shall be equal to the number of feet as specified on the FIRM (or a minimum of two feet if no number is specified) above the highest natural grade adjacent to the structure.  
B.	In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation shall be equal to the elevation as specified on the FIRM.
160.09	ADMINISTRATION.
1.	Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of the Flood Plain Administrator.
A.	The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to implement and administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator.
B.	Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following: 
(1)	Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
(2)	Review flood plain development applications to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and local governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for flood plain construction.
(3)	Record and maintain a record of:  (i) the elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures; or (ii) the elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
(5)	Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(6)	Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
(7)	Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
(8)	Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
(9)	Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Board of Adjustment of potential conflict.
2.	Flood Plain Development Permit.
A.	Permit Required.  A Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any flood plain development (any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations), including the placement of factory-built homes.
B.	Application for Permit.  Application shall be made on forms furnished by the Administrator and shall include the following:
(1)	Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made.
(2)	Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will readily identify and locate the work to be done.
(3)	Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
(4)	Elevation of the 100-year flood.
(6)	Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a building is to be floodproofed.
(7)	For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
(8)	Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
C.	Action on Permit Application.  The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed flood plain development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application.  For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefor.  The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the City Board of Adjustment.
D.	Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application and Plans.  Flood Plain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction.  Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
3.	Conditional Uses, Appeals and Variances.
A.	Appointment and Duties of Board of Adjustment.  A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall hear and decide:  (i) applications for conditional uses upon which the Board is authorized to pass under this chapter; (ii) appeals; and (iii) requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter, and shall take any other action which is required of the Board.
B.	Conditional Uses.  Requests for conditional uses shall be submitted to the Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of Adjustment for consideration.  Such requests shall include information ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the Board of Adjustment.
C.	Appeals.  Where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance, the aggrieved party may appeal such action.  The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and with the official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal.  The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
4.	Variance.  The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter which will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship.  Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
A.	Variances shall only be granted upon:  (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances. 
B.	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result.  Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
C.	Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
D.	In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that:  (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property.
E.	All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
5.	Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment.
A.	Hearings.  Upon the filling with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal, an application for a conditional use or a request for a variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing.  The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest.  At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence.  The Board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources.
B.	Decisions.  The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal, conditional use or variance within a reasonable time.  In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.  In granting a conditional use or variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe such conditions as contained in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph.
(1)	In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and: 
a.	The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 
b.	The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the injury of others. 
c.	The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions. 
d.	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
e.	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City. 
f.	The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location. 
g.	The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
h.	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
i.	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
j.	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
k.	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site. 
l.	The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.  
m.	Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter. 
(2)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter.  Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
a.	Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities. 
b.	Limitation of periods of use and operation. 
c.	Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions. 
d.	Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees. and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purpose of this chapter. 
e.	Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood.  The Board of Adjustment shall require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.  
6.	Appeals to the Court.  Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality.  Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
160.10	NONCONFORMING USES.
1.	A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
A.	If such use is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
B.	Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.  
2.	Except as provided in paragraph (1)(B) above, any use which has been permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a conforming use.
160.11	PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.  Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of conditional uses or variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days.  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.  Nothing herein contained prevents the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy violation.
160.12	AMENDMENTS.  The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed.  No amendment, supplement, change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the Department of Natural Resources.



[The next page is 985]

 
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
165.01  Title and Purpose	165.20  Districts Established
165.02  Application of District Regulations	165.21  Agricultural District
165.03  Establishment of Districts; Official Zoning Map	165.22  Residential Single-Family District
165.04  Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries	165.23  Residential Multi-Family District
165.05  Definitions	165.24  Mobile Home District
165.06  Nonconformities	165.25  Factory-built Housing Residential District
165.07  Nonconforming Lots of Record	165.26  Arterial Commercial District
165.08  Nonconforming Uses of Land 	165.27  Central Business Commercial District
165.09  Nonconforming Structures	165.28  Light Industrial District
165.10  Nonconforming Uses of Structures or of Structures	165.29  Heavy Industrial District
and Premises in Combination	165.30  Public/Semi-public District
165.11  Repairs and Maintenance	165.31  Supplementary District Regulations
165.12  Uses Under Special Exception Provisions	165.32  Duties of Zoning Administrator, Board of 
165.13  Administration and Enforcement	Adjustment, Commission and Courts on
165.14  Building/Zoning Permits Required	Matters of Appeal
165.15  Occupancy Certificate Required	165.33  Amendments
165.16  Issuance of Certificates	165.34  Penalties for Violation
165.17  Establishment of Board of Adjustment	165.35  Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses
165.18  Powers and Duties of Board of Adjustment 	165.36  Complaints Regarding Violations
165.19  Appeals from the Board of Adjustment	
165.01	TITLE AND PURPOSE.  This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Onawa, Iowa, Zoning Ordinance.”  The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to regulate the use of land, and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare in the City.
165.02	APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.  The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided:
1.	No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
2.	No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
3.	No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.  Yards or lots created after the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by the Zoning Ordinance.
4.	Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
165.03	ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
1.	Official Zoning Map.  The City shall be divided into districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, shall be adopted by ordinance.  The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the Seal of the City, under the following words:  “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 165.03 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Onawa, Iowa,” together with the date of adoption.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Council, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows:  “By official action of the City Council, the following changes were made to the Official Zoning Map.”  (Indicating the changes by ordinance numbers and date of publication.)  No amendment of the Zoning Ordinance codified in this chapter which involves matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map.
2.	Annexation of New Land.  Any land annexed to the City after the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance shall be zoned [AG] Agricultural until the Zoning Commission and City Council shall have studied the area and adopted a final zoning plan for the area in accordance with this chapter.
3.	Replacement of the Official Zoning Map.  In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may by ordinance adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.  The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.  The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the Seal of the City under the following words:  “This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of Ordinance No. ________ of the City of Onawa, Iowa.”  Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
165.04	RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.  Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
2.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
3.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits.
4.	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
 
5.	Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
6.	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 1 through 3 above shall be so construed.  Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
7.	Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 6 above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries.  
8.	Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance, the Board of Adjustment may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
9.	Whenever the Council vacates and disposes of a street or alley, adjacent districts shall extend to the centerline of the vacation.
10.	Whenever a variance exists between the Zoning Map and the legal description on an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, the legal description applies.
165.05	DEFINITIONS.  For the purpose of this chapter, the interpretation of the words “used or occupied” should include the words “intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied, “ and the word “lot” should include “plot or parcel.”  For use in this chapter, the following terms and words are defined:
1.	“Abutting” means having property or district lines in common.
2.	“Access” means a way of approaching or entering a property from a public street.
3.	“Accessory building” means a subordinate building located on the same lot with a main building, occupied by or devoted to an accessory use.  An accessory building shall occupy the same lot as the main use or building.  No accessory building shall be used without occupancy of the principal building on the lot.  No accessory building shall have a side wall height greater than 10 feet or a peak height greater than 16 feet 6 inches and shall not be covered in bare galvanized steel (painted steel is acceptable).  No accessory building shall occupy more than 1,200 square feet.  No accessory building shall be used for human habitation.  Where an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, such as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered part of the main building.  
4.	“Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the main use or building and located on the same lot therewith.  In no case shall such accessory use dominate, in area, extent or purpose, the principal lawful use or building.
5.	“Agriculture” means the production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease, or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to:  forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, mules or goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds; vegetables; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program.
6.	“Alley” means a public way, other than a street, 20 feet or less in width, affording secondary means of access to abutting property.
7.	“Basement” means a story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) its height above grade.  A basement shall be counted as a story if the vertical distance from the average adjoining grade to its ceiling is over 5 feet.
8.	“Bed and breakfast house” means a house or portion thereof where short-term lodging rooms and meals are provided, and the operator lives on the premises.
9.	“Billboard” includes all structures, regardless of the material used in the construction of the same, which are erected, maintained, or used for public display of posters, painted signs, wall signs, whether the structure be placed on the wall or painted on the wall itself, pictures or other pictorial reading matter which advertises a business or attraction which is not carried on or manufactured in or upon the premises upon which said signs or billboards are located.
10.	“Board” means the Board of Adjustment.
11.	“Boarding house” means a building other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals and lodging are provided for four (4) or more persons.
12.	“Building” means any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property, but not including signs or billboards.
13.	“Building, height of” means the vertical distance from the average natural grade at the building line to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
14.	“District” means a section or sections of the City within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings and premises are uniform.
15.	“Dwelling” means any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, but not including a tent, cabin, or a trailer.
(Ord. 455 – Aug. 14 Supp.)
16.	Dwelling, single-family” means a building designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by one family.
17.	Dwelling, multiple” means a building or portion thereof designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by two or more families.
18.	“Family” means one or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities.  
19.	“Family home” means a community-based residential home which is licensed as a residential care facility under Chapter 135C of the Code of Iowa or as a child foster care facility under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa to provide room and board, personal care, habilitation services, and supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight developmentally disabled persons and any necessary support personnel.  However, “family home” does not mean an individual foster care family home licensed under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa.
20.	“Garage” means a building or portion thereof in which a motor vehicle containing gasoline, distillate or other volatile, flammable liquid in its tank is stored, repaired, or kept.
21.	“Garage, private” means a building or part thereof accessory to a main building and providing for the storage of private motor vehicles used by occupants of the main building and in which no occupation or business for profit is carried on.  A private garage shall occupy the same lot as the main use or building.  No private garage may be erected in any required front yard, or when erected in a rear yard, closer than five (5) feet to a side or rear lot line of a rear yard.  Private garages located in a rear yard may not occupy more than 45 percent of a rear yard.  A private garage must be a subordinate building located on the same lot with a main building.  No garage shall be used without occupancy of the main building on the lot.  No private garage shall have a side wall height greater than 10 feet or a peak height greater than 16 feet 6 inches and shall not be covered in bare galvanized steel (painted steel is acceptable).  No private garage shall occupy more than 1,200 square feet.  No private garage shall be used for human habitation.  Where a private garage is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, such as by a wall or roof, such private garage shall be considered part of the main building.  Private garages which fail to meet the above requirements require a special exemption authorized by the Board of Adjustment.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
22.	“Garage, public or storage” means a building or part thereof other than a private garage for the storage of motor vehicles and in which service station activities may be carried on.
23.	“Grade” means the average elevation of the finished ground at the exterior walls of the main building.
24.	“Health care facility” means any residential care facility, intermediate care facility, or skilled nursing facility.
A.	“Residential care facility” means any institution, place, building, or agency providing for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours’ accommodation, board, personal assistance and other essential daily living activities to three or more individuals, not related to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of consanguinity, who by reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity are unable to sufficiently or properly care for themselves but who do not require the services of a registered or licensed practical nurse except on an emergency basis.
B.	“Intermediate care facility” means any institution, place, building or agency providing for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours’ accommodation, board, and nursing services, the need for which is certified by a physician, to three or more individuals, not related to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of consanguinity, who by reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity require nursing services which can be provided only under the direction of a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse.
C.	“Skilled nursing facility” means any institution, place, building, or agency providing for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours’ accommodation, board, and nursing services, the need for which is certified by a physician, to three or more individuals not related to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of consanguinity and who by reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity require continuous nursing care services and related medical services, but do not require hospital care.  The nursing care services provided must be under the direction of a registered nurse on a 24-hour-per-day basis.
25.	“Home occupation” means an occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that:
A.	No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
B.	The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit, including the area of attached garages, shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
C.	There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding 16 square feet in area, non-illuminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building.
D.	No home occupation may be conducted in any accessory building, except by special exception of the Board of Adjustment.
E.	No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by providing off-street parking and shall not be in a required front yard.
F.	No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence.  No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
26.	“Hospital” means an institution which is devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment, or care over a period exceeding 24 hours of two or more nonrelated individuals suffering from illness, injury, or deformity, or a place that is devoted primarily to the rendering, over a period exceeding 24 hours, of obstetrical or other medical or nursing care for two or more nonrelated individuals, or any institution, place, building, or agency in which any accommodation is primarily maintained, furnished or offered for the care, over a period exceeding 24 hours, of two or more non-related aged or infirm persons requiring or receiving chronic or convalescent care; and includes sanatoriums or other related institutions.  Provided, however, this does not apply to hotels or other similar places that furnish only food and lodging, or either, to their guests.  “Hospital” includes, in any event, any facilities wholly or partially constructed or to be constructed with federal financial assistance, pursuant to Public Law 725, 79th Congress, approved August 13, 1946.
27.	“Hotel” means a building occupied as the more or less temporary residence of individuals who are lodged for compensation with or without meals, in which there are sleeping rooms or suites of rooms with no provision made for cooking in any individual room or suite of rooms, and entrance is through a common lobby or office.
28.	“Junk yard” means any area where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled or handled, including places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including areas where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building and not including the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations.
29.	“Kennel (commercial)” means an establishment in which dogs or domestic animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold.
30.	“Lodging house” means a building originally designed for or used as single-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains lodging rooms or rooming units which accommodate persons who are not members of the keeper’s family.  Lodging or meals, or both, are provided for compensation.  The term “lodging house” should be construed to include boarding house, rooming house, fraternity house, sorority house, and dormitories.
31.	“Lot” means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required.  Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:
A.	A single lot of record;
B.	A portion of a lot of record;
C.	A combination of complete lots of record, or complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record;
D.	A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
E.	Any combination of lots under this section must be of lots directly adjacent to one another with a common border of equal distance.
(Ord. 433 – Aug. 12 Supp.)
32.	“Lot frontage” means the portion nearest the street.  For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under “yards” in this section.
33.	“Lot measurements” consist of the following:
A.	The depth of a lot is the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
B.	The width of a lot is the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the building line, provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line or front property line) shall not be less than 80 percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sac where the 80 percent requirement shall not apply.
34.	“Lots of record” means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.

PLATE 1
 
35.	“Lot Types” – Plate 1 illustrates terminology used in this chapter with reference to “corner” lots “interior” lots, “through” lots and “reversed corner” lots as follows:
A.	A “corner” lot is a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
B.	An “interior” lot is a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street other than an alley.
C.	A “through” lot is a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an alley.  Lots with frontage on two non-intersecting streets may be referred to as “through” lots.
D.	A “reversed corner” lot is a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
36.	“Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure, which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Section 4403 and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A “mobile home” as defined in Section 135D.1 of the Code of Iowa is not a manufactured home, unless it has been converted to real property as provided in Section 135D.26 of the Code of Iowa, and shall be taxed as a site-built dwelling.  A manufactured home shall be located and installed according to the same standards, including but not limited to, a foundation system, setback, and minimum square footage which would apply to a site-built, single-family dwelling on the same lot.  This section shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded restrictive covenant.
37.	“Mobile home” means any vehicle or structure without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle or structure to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons; but shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in the State of Iowa or elsewhere.  The term “mobile home” does not include “manufactured home” or “modular home” and is intended to apply only to those vehicles or structures originally manufactured as mobile homes and having a manufacturer’s certificate or statement of origin for the purpose of obtaining a vehicle title, whether or not a title is actually procured.
38.	“Modular home” means factory-built housing certified as meeting the State Building Code as applicable to modular housing.  Once certified by the State, modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes.
39.	“Motel (also motor hotel, motor court, motor lodge or tourist court)” means a building or group of buildings designed to provide sleeping accommodations to transient guests for compensation, and provides near each guest room a parking space for the guest’s vehicle.  A swimming pool, restaurant, meeting rooms, management offices, and other such accessory facilities may be included.
40.	“Nonconformities” means lots, structures, uses of land and structures, or characteristics of uses which are prohi¬bited under the terms of this chapter but were lawful at the date of the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance.
41.	“Nursing or convalescent home” means a building or structure having accommodations for and where care is provided for invalid, inform, aged, convalescent, or physically disabled persons, not including insane and other mental cases, inebriate, or contagious cases.
42.	“Parking space” means an area of not less than 250 square feet either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveway or access drives, for the parking of a motor vehicle.
43.	“Permitted use” means a use by right which is specifi¬cally authorized in a particular zoning district.
44.	“Planning Commission” or “Commission” means the duly designated Planning Board of the City with the responsibility for reviewing and recommending for or against applications for rezoning or amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, and for the preparation of various land use master plans.
45.	“Principal use” means the main use of land or structures as distinguished from an accessory use.
46.	“Projections” (into yards) means parts of buildings such as architectural features that extend beyond the building’s exterior wall.
47.	“Setback” means the required distance between every structure and lot line on the lot in which it is located.
48.	“Statement of Intent” means a statement preceding regulations for individual districts, intended to characterize the districts, and their legislative purpose.
49.	“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling or roof next above it.
50.	“Story, half” means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than four (4) feet above the top floor level.  A half-story containing independent apartments or living quarters shall be counted as a full story.
51.	“Street” means all property dedicated or intended for public or private use for access to abutting lands or subject to public easements therefor, and whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or however otherwise designated.
52.	“Street line” means the right-of-way line of a street.
53.	“Structure” means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, including signs and billboards, but not including fences or walls used as fences.
54.	“Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls.
55.	“Use” means the purpose or activity for which a piece of land or its buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which such land or buildings are occupied or maintained.
56.	“Variance” means a device used by the Board of Adjustment which grants a property owner relief from certain provisions of the Zoning Ordinance when, because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make more money and which condition is not of the owner’s own making.
57.	“Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, excepting as otherwise provided herein.  In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.  Fences and walls are permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations as indicated herein.
58.	“Yard, front” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the front lot line and the building or any projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual steps or unenclosed porches, and is the narrow frontage on a corner lot.  (See Plate 2)
59.	“Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear lot line and the building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies, or unenclosed porches.  On corner lots, the rear yard is considered as adjoining the street upon which the lot has its greater dimension.  On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard is the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.  (See Plate 2)
60.	“Yard, side” means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the side lot lines and the building.  (See Plate 2)
PLATE 2
 

61.	“Zoning Administrator” means the local official responsible for granting zoning permits and following a determination by the Zoning Board of Adjustment for special exceptions and variances.  Decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
62.	“Zoning district” means a section of the City designated in this chapter and delineated on the Zoning Map in which requirements for the use of land, the buildings, and development standards are prescribed.  Within each district, all requirements are uniform.
63.	“Zoning map” means the map delineating the boundaries of districts which, along with the zoning text, comprises the Zoning Ordinance.



[The next page is 1009]

 
165.06	NONCONFORMITIES.  Within the districts established by this chapter there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before the Zoning Ordinance was passed or amended, but which are prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments.  It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.  Further nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment to the Zoning Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently.  Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner.  Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
165.07	NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter.  This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, if the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.  Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through the action of the Board of Adjustment.
165.08	NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.  Where at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding $1,000.00, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
1.	No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance.
2.	No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance.
3.	If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 12 months or 18 months in any three-year period, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located.
4.	No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
165.09	NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.  Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1.	No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in such a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
2.	Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
3.	Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regula¬tions for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
165.10	NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN COMBINATION.  If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1.	No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
2.	Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
3.	If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of Adjustment, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use.  In permitting such change, the Board of Adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this chapter.
4.	Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted 	use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
5.	When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes access to the premises) the structure (or structure and premises in combination) shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
6.	When nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.  Destruction for the purpose of the subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the structure.  Replacement shall begin within six months of the time of destruction or the nonconforming status shall expire.  Said construction shall also be completed within 18 months of the time of destruction or the nonconforming status shall expire.
165.11	REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.  On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance shall not be increased.
165.12	USES UNDER SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROVISIONS.  Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this chapter (other than a change through Board of Adjustment action from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use.
165.13	ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.  An administrative official designated by the City Council (the “Zoning Administrator”) shall administer and enforce the Zoning Ordinance.  The Zoning Administrator may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City Council may direct.  If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, the Zoning Administrator shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and noting the action necessary to correct it, and shall also notify the City Attorney, who shall take any action necessary to correct the violation. 
165.14	BUILDING/ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.  No building or other structure shall be erected, moved or added to without a permit therefor issued by the Zoning Administrator.  No permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except after written order from the Board of Adjustment.  Fees for building/zoning permits shall be as provided by resolution of the Council.
165.15	OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.  An occupancy certificate shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator before the use or occupancy of any building, structure, mobile home or land may commence for any use.
165.16	ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES.  The Zoning Administrator shall issue within seven (7) days of the completed application, a written building/zoning permit or occupancy certificate or denial thereof with the reasons in writing.  Where a written extension of time has been obtained from the Zoning Administrator, permits thereafter issued shall expire within 90 days if a substantial beginning has not been made in the construction, or if the use applied for has not been established in one year.
165.17	ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.  
1.	Board Created.  A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five (5) members.  The terms of office of the members of the Board and the manner of their appointment shall be five years as provided by the Code of Iowa.  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
2.	Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment.  The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter.  Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other time as the Board may determine.  The Chairperson or, in the absence of the Chairperson, the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.  All meetings shall be open to the public.  The Board of Adjustment shall, through its Secretary, keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.  All actions of the Board concerning special exceptions or variances shall also be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.  It shall be the responsibility of the appellant to record said action and all corresponding stipulations and further said action shall take effect upon the Board receiving sufficient confirmation of the same.  A copy of said action shall also be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
165.18	POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.  The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
1.	Administrative Review.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter.
A.	Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator.  Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.  The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken.
B.	The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, and give not less than seven (7) days or more than  twenty (20) days thereof by publishing said notice in a paper with general circulation in the City, as well as give due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within 30 days.  At said hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
C.	An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the Notice of Appeal is filed with the Zoning Administrator, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, cause imminent peril to life and property.  In such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown.
2.	Special Exceptions; Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures.  To hear and decide only such special exceptions as the Board of Adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of these regulations; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter.  A special exception shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
A.	A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of this chapter under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested.
B.	The owner of the property for which special excep¬tion is sought or an agent shall be notified by mail of the time and date of the hearing.  Notice of such hearings for which special exception is sought shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 7 and not more than 20 days prior to the public hearing.
C.	The public hearing shall be held and adjacent property owners within 200 feet of subject property shall be notified by regular mail of the hearing.  Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney.
	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
D.	The Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this chapter described in the application to grant the special exception, that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public interest.
E.	The Board of Adjustment shall consider the following factors when considering a special exception for a private garage or accessory building:
(1)	Objections by neighbors or other residents of the City;
(2)	Increase in taxable valuation of the property;
(3)	Purpose for the structure;
(4)	Impact on neighboring properties;
(5)	Whether the building is visually integrated with the existing house and the complimentary use of materials, colors, and details;
(6)	Aesthetic considerations and physical appearance;
(7)	Any other factors the Board deems relevant.
	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
F.	In granting any special exception, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions, safeguards, and covenants in conformity with this chapter.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
G.	Council may provide for its review of special exceptions granted by the Board of Adjustment before their effective date.  The Council may remand a decision to grant a special exception to the Board of Adjustment for further study.  The effective date of the special exception is, in such case, delayed for 30 days from the date of remand.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
3.	Variance; Conditions Governing Application; Procedures.  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship.  A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
A.	A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating that:
(1)	Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district;
(2)	Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter;
(3)	The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
(4)	Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of land, structures, or buildings in other districts may be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
B.	The owner of the property for which variance is sought or an agent shall be notified by mail of the time and date of the hearing.  Notice of such hearings for which variance is sought shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 7 days and not more than 20 days prior to the public hearing.
C.	The public hearing shall be held.  Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney.
D.	The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that requirements of Section 165.18(3)(A) have been met by the applicant for a variance.
E.	The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
F.	The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.  Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under this chapter.  Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in said district.  The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation in the application of this chapter.  The Council may provide for its review of variances granted by the Board of Adjustment before their effective date.  The Council may remand a decision to grant a variance to the Board of Adjustment for further study.  The effective date of the variance is, in such case, delayed for thirty days from the date of the remand.
165.19	APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.  Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the State and particularly by Chapter 414, Code of Iowa.
165.20	DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.  The City is hereby divided into the following districts:
AG	Agricultural District
RS	Residential Single-Family District
RM	Residential Multi-Family District
MH	Mobile Home District
FB	Factory-Built Housing Residential District
AC	Arterial Commercial District
BC	Central Business Commercial District
LI	Light Industrial District
HI	Heavy Industrial District
PD	Public/Semi-Public District
These districts are established within the City as identified on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matters thereon, is hereby included by reference as a part of this chapter.
 



[The next page is 1021]

 
165.21	AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
1.	Intent.  This district is intended to provide for areas in which agriculture and related uses are encouraged as the principal use of land.  However, uses which may be offensive to the surrounding area or to the community as a whole by reasons of noise, dust, smoke, odor, traffic or physical appearance or other similar factors are not permitted.  The district prohibits urban density residential use until these areas may be served by utilities and services of the City.  This district is also intended to preserve land suited for eventual development into other uses, pending proper timing for economical and practical provisions of streets, utilities, schools and other facilities so that reasonably compact development will occur and the fiscal integrity of the City is preserved.  All newly annexed areas to the City will automatically be placed into this district classification unless otherwise suitably classified.
2.	Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the AG District:
A.	Agriculture, including the usual agricultural buildings and structures and excluding offensive uses.
B.	Home occupations.
C.	Publicly owned buildings and facilities.
3.	Accessory Uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted:
A.	Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the AG District.
B.	Living quarters of persons employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
C.	Private garages, barns and other farm buildings.
D.	Roadside stands offering for sale only agricultural products or other products produced on the premises.
E.	Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4.	Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the AG District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
A.	Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.
B.	Commercial kennels.
C.	Stables, private or public.
D.	Greenhouses and nurseries.
E.	Publicly operated sanitary landfills.
F.	Private recreational camps, golf courses, and recreational facilities.
G.	Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc.
H.	Private garages or accessory buildings.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
 
5.	Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the AG District.

Use	Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Maximum Height 
(lesser of)
Dwelling	2 acres	160 feet	50 feet	15 feet	50 feet	2½ stories or 35 feet
Other Uses	5 acres	200 feet	50 feet	25 feet	50 feet	2½ stories or 35 feet, excluding farm buildings
6.	Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking requirements apply in the AG District:
A.	Dwellings:  2 parking spaces on the lot for each living unit in the building.
B.	Churches:  1 parking space on the lot for every 5 seats in the main auditorium.
C.	Public Buildings and Facilities:  1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area or 1 parking space for each 5 seats in the main assembly area.
D.	Roadside Stands:  1 parking space for each 50 square feet of enclosed floor area.
E.	Greenhouses and nurseries:  1 parking space per 1,000 square feet of enclosed floor area.
7.	Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading requirements apply in the AG District:
A.	All activities or uses allowed in the AG District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
B.	Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of-way.



[The next page is 1033]
 
165.22	RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT.
1.	Intent.  This district is intended to provide for a variety of single-family residential areas where public utilities and services are available and to encourage a suitable living environment through the promotion of public health, safety and welfare.  Low and medium population density neighborhoods are recognized and provided for by varying the minimum bulk regulations.  Criteria such as topography, soil types, access, traffic load on streets, schools, utilities, recreation and other public facilities shall be taken into consideration when the lot area requirement is established for the various single-family residential areas of the City.
2.	Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the RS District:
A.	Single-family detached dwellings.
B.	Home occupations.
C.	Publicly owned buildings and facilities.
D.	Health care facilities.
E.	Family homes.
3.	Accessory Uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted:
A.	Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the RS District.
B.	Private garages.
C.	Raising and keeping of animals and fowl, but not on a commercial basis or on a scale objectionable to neighbors; the keeping or raising of pigs, sheep, goats, cattle or horses is prohibited except on premises containing two acres or more and except within an enclosure at least 100 feet from any residential dwelling not existing or hereafter erected.
D.	Private recreational facilities.
E.	Temporary buildings for the use incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4.	Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the RS District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
A.	Nursery schools.
B.	Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc.
C.	Churches.
D.	Private schools with a curriculum similar to public schools.
E.	Golf courses (but not miniature courses or separate driving tees).
F.	Satellite dishes.
G.	Bed and breakfast houses.
H.	Hospitals.
I.	Multiple-family dwellings.
J.	Private garages or accessory buildings.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
5.	Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the RS District:

Zoning Symbol	Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Maximum Height 
(lesser of)
8 RS	8,000 square feet	60 feet	30 feet	8 feet*	30 feet	2½ stories or 35 feet
20 RS	20,000 square feet	100 feet	35 feet	15 feet	35 feet	2½ stories or 35 feet
*If a dwelling unit has an attached garage, the garage side of the dwelling unit may encroach within 
  5 feet of the side lot line.
6.	Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking requirements apply to the RS District:
A.	Dwellings:  2 parking spaces on the lot for each living unit in the building.  For dwellings not consisting of living units, 2 parking spaces on the lot for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
B.	Churches:  1 parking space on the lot for every 5 seats in the main auditorium.
C.	Public Buildings and Facilities:  1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area or 1 parking space for each 5 seats in the main assembly area.
D.	Elementary,  junior high and equivalent private or parochial schools:  1 parking space for each classroom and office plus 1 parking space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area in auditorium or gymnasium.
E.	Senior high schools and equivalent private or parochial schools:  1 parking space for each employee and 1 parking space for every 10 students.
F.	Colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning, and equivalent private or parochial schools:  1 parking space for each employee and 1 parking space for every 5 students.
G.	Public buildings and facilities:  1 parking space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area.
H.	Nursery schools:  1 parking space per employee.
7.	Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading requirements apply in the RS District:
A.	All activities or uses allowed in the RS District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
B.	Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of-way.

[The next page is 1045]
 
165.23	RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT.
1.	Intent.  This district is intended to provide for a variety of multi-family residential areas where public utilities and services are available and to encourage a suitable living environment through the promotion of public health, safety and welfare.  Medium and high population density neighborhoods are recognized and provided for by varying the minimum bulk regulations.  Criteria such as topography, soil types, access, traffic load on streets, schools, utilities, recreation and other public facilities shall be taken into consideration when the lot area requirement is established for the various multi-family residential areas of the City.
2.	Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the RM District:
A.	Single-family detached dwellings.
B.	Multi-family dwellings (per bulk regulations).
C.	Publicly owned buildings and facilities.
D.	Health care facilities.
E.	Home occupations.
F.	Family homes.
3.	Accessory Uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted:
A.	Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the RM District.
B.	Private garages.
C.	Parking lots.
D.	Raising and keeping of animals or fowl, commonly known as and identified as pets, but not on a commercial basis or in a way objectionable to normal City residential living.  All other provisions of this Code of Ordinances applicable to animal protection and control shall apply to such animals and fowl.
E.	Private recreational facilities.
F.	Temporary buildings for the use incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4.	Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the RM District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
A.	Nursery schools.
B.	Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc.
C.	Churches.
D.	Private schools with a curriculum similar to public schools.
E.	Lodging houses, dormitories, fraternities and sororities.
F.	Satellite dishes.
G.	Bed and breakfast houses.
H.	Private garages or accessory buildings.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
5.	Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the RM District:

Zoning Symbol	Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling	Units Gross	Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Lot Width	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Maximum Height 
2 RM	2,000 
square feet	21 acres	10,000 square feet	60 feet	30 feet	8 feet	35 feet	45 feet
3 RM	3,000 
square feet	14 acres	10,000 square feet	60 feet	30 feet	8 feet	35 feet	45 feet
4 RM	4,000 
square feet	10 acres	10,000 square feet	60 feet	30 feet	8 feet	35 feet	45 feet
5 RM	5,000 
square feet	8 acres	10,000 square feet	60 feet	30 feet	8 feet	35 feet	45 feet
Single-family dwellings shall meet the same bulk regulations as the multi-residential uses described above.
Where public sewer facilities are not available, no less than 20,000 square feet of lot area is required.
If a dwelling unit has an attached garage, garage side of the dwelling unit may encroach within 5 feet of the side lot line.
6.	Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking requirements apply in the RM District:
A.	Single-Family Dwellings:  2 parking spaces on the lot
B.	Multi-Family Dwellings:  1 parking space on the lot for each dwelling unit.
C.	Churches:  1 parking space on the lot for every 5 seats in the main auditorium.
D.	Elementary,  junior high and equivalent private or parochial schools:  1 parking space for each classroom and office plus 1 parking space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area in auditorium or gymnasium.
E.	Senior high schools and equivalent private or parochial schools:  1 parking space for each employee and 1 parking space for every 10 students.
F.	Colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning, and equivalent private or parochial schools:  1 parking space for each employee and 1 parking space for every 5 students.
G.	Public Buildings and Facilities:  1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area or 1 parking space for each 5 seats in the main assembly area.
H.	Nursery schools:  1 parking space per employee.
7.	Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading requirements apply in the RM District:
A.	All activities or uses allowed in the RM District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
B.	Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of-way.




[The next page is 1059]

 
165.24	MOBILE HOME DISTRICT.
1.	Intent.  This district is intended to provide for certain medium-density residential areas in the City now developed as mobile home parks that, by reason of their design and location, are compatible with surrounding residential areas and areas of the City where similar development seems likely to occur.  This district has useful application as a transition zone between shopping areas and residential areas and is normally located along thoroughfares where direct access to the site is available.
2.	Mobile Home Park Development.  The development of mobile home parks shall be governed by the following additional regulations:
A.	Plan Issuance and Approval Procedure.  The initial application shall be accompanied by four copies of the mobile home park plan, drawn to scale and prepared by a civil engineer or land surveyor duly licensed by the State, showing in detail the following:
(1)	The extent and area used for mobile home park purposes with a location insert in smaller scale showing the park location on the entire property.
(2)	Roadways, driveways and sidewalks.
(3)	Location of mobile home lots with dimensions and boundary lines.
(4)	Location of parking facilities for two vehicles per mobile home lot.
(5)	Method and plan of sewage disposal system showing sizes of pipe and connection locations.
(6)	Location and number of auxiliary sanitary facilities, including toilets, wash rooms, laundries, and utility rooms.
(7)	Method and plan of solid waste collection and disposal systems.
(8)	Plan of water supply showing location of all home and auxiliary connections and all fire hydrants.
(9)	Plan of electric power and lighting system, with location of power plug for each lot as well as location and wattage of street lighting facilities.
The Zoning Administrator shall submit said application and plan to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, which shall consider the application in accordance with its procedures for acting on special uses.
B.	General Design Requirements for Mobile Home Parks.
(1)	The park shall be located on a well-drained site suitable for the purpose, with an adequate entrance road of 24 feet, pavement width constructed to the City’s street or road specifications capable of handling heavy service vehicles such as fire and garbage trucks without injury to surface or base.
(2)	The park shall consist of a minimum lot size of 100,000 square feet.
(3)	Each mobile home park shall be served by a sanitary sewer system acceptable to the City.
(4)	Each mobile home park shall be served by a central water supply system.
(5)	No mobile home shall be located nearer the street or highway than the required front yard setback within the district in which it is proposed to be located, or nearer than 20 feet to any property line.
(6)	The open space between the bottom of each mobile home and the earth’s surface shall be enclosed or skirted within 60 days of its placement in a mobile home park.
(7)	All mobile homes must be certified as complying with Housing and Urban Development (HUD) standards.  No mobile home shall be permitted within the City limits of the City of Onawa, Iowa which has not been certified as in compliance with HUD standards.  Any mobile home located within the City legally, prior to the enactment of this Section and used and occupied as a residential dwelling shall be allowed to remain, but shall not be replaced with another non-certified mobile home under any circumstance.
(Ord. 471 – Nov. 15 Supp.)
(8)	Such mobile home park shall comply with applicable ordinances and codes of the City and the laws of the State.
(9)	Such mobile home park shall contain all-weather interior roadways free from dust and mud.  This requirement shall be applicable no later than one year following the initial construction of said interior private roadways.  Where streets are dedicated to the City, they shall be constructed in accordance with applicable City standards.
(10)	Interior roads shall be not less than 20 feet in width for two-lane roads where no parking is desired.  Eight feet of additional width shall be required per each side where roadside parking is desired.
(11)	Additional requirements as to screening, landscaping, and space reserved for recreation and playground may be required by the Board for proper development and protection of the mobile home park’s occupants and that of the surrounding area.
3.	Bulk Regulations.
A.	No mobile home park shall exceed a gross density of ten units per acre.  In computing the gross density, one-half of an adjoining public street, highway, or alley may be included.
B.	Each mobile home space shall have a minimum area of 3,500 square feet exclusive of roadways and common space.
C.	No mobile home shall be placed closer than 20 feet to any adjacent mobile home.
4.	Location of Mobile Homes.  It is unlawful for any person to park or place any mobile home on the streets, alleys or highways, any public place, or on any private land within the City, except as is provided by State law and this chapter.
A.	Mobile Home Parks.  Mobile homes parked or placed within mobile home parks.
B.	Dealer’s Stock.  Mobile homes parked upon private property as part of a dealer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human habitation.
C.	Manufactured Home.  Manufactured homes as defined in the Code of Iowa.




[The next page is 1071]

 
165.25	FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. 
1.	Intent.  This district is intended to provide for the placement of manufactured homes, mobile homes, modular homes, factory-built housing, and on-site constructed homes on individually subdivided lots with a lot size smaller than that allowed in other zones permitting single-family detached dwellings.  This district shall also provide a location for those factory-built structures built under authority of 42 USC Paragraph 5403 on or after June 15, 1976, which do not have a minimum building width of 20 feet.  Any structure placed in this district shall be assessed and taxed as real estate.
2.	Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the FB District:
A.	Manufactured homes.
B.	Mobile homes.
C.	Modular homes.
D.	Publicly owned buildings and facilities.
E.	On-site constructed (“stick-built”) homes.
3.	Accessory Uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted:
A.	Uses of land and structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the FB District.
B.	Private garages.
C.	Private recreational facilities.
4.	Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the FB District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses:
A.	Nursery schools.
B.	Public or private utility substations, relay stations and similar installations.
C.	Churches.
D.	Public schools and private schools with a curriculum similar to public schools.
E.	Lodging houses, dormitories, fraternities, and sororities.
F.	Satellite dishes.
G.	Private garages or accessory buildings.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
 

5.	Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings within the FB District:

Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Maximum Height 
6,000 square feet	49.5 feet	20 feet	8 feet*	20 feet	25 feet
*If a dwelling unit has an attached garage, the garage side of the dwelling unit may encroach within 5 feet of the side lot line.
6.	Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking requirements apply in the FB District:
A.	Dwellings:  2 parking spaces on the lot for each living unit in the building.  For dwellings not consisting of living units, 2 parking spaces on the lot for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
B.	Churches:  1 parking space on the lot for every 5 seats in the main auditorium.
C.	Public Buildings and Facilities:  1 parking space on the lot for each 300 square feet of gross floor area or 1 parking space on the lot for each 5 seats in the main assembly area.
D.	Elementary,  junior high and equivalent private or parochial schools:  1 parking space on the lot for each classroom and office plus 1 parking space on the lot for every 300 square feet of gross floor area in auditorium or gymnasium.
E.	Senior high schools and equivalent private or parochial schools:  1 parking space on the lot for each employee and 1 parking space on the lot for every 10 students.
F.	Public buildings and facilities:  1 parking space on the lot for every 300 square feet of gross floor area.
G.	Nursery schools:  1 parking space on the lot per employee.



[The next page is 1081]
 
165.26	ARTERIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
1.	Intent.  This District is intended to provide for certain areas of the City for the development of service, retail, and other nonresidential uses which because of certain location requirements and operational characteristics are appropriately located in close proximity to arterial and other main thoroughfares.  Residential type structures are also permitted.  The District is further characterized by a typical need for larger lot sizes, off-street parking, adequate setbacks, clear vision, safe ingress and egress, and access to other adjacent thoroughfares.
2.	Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the AC District:
A.	Sales and display rooms and lots, not including yards for the storage or display of new or used building materials or for any scrap or salvage operation storage or sales.
B.	Offices and clinics.
C.	Churches.
D.	Hotels and motels.
E.	Any other retail or service sales business, including food preparation for sale off-premises.
F.	Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities.
3.	Accessory Uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted:
A.	Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the AC District.
B.	Private recreational facilities.
C.	Living quarters of persons employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
D.	Private garages.
E.	Parking lots.
F.	Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4.	Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the AC District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
A.	Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc.
B.	Single-family dwellings.
C.	Multi-family dwellings.
D.	Private garages or accessory buildings.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
 
5.	Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the AC District.

Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Maximum Height (the lesser of)
6,000 square feet	60 feet	30 feet	If adjacent to a residential district, the side yard shall be equal to the minimum side yard required in the adjacent district; but in no instance less than 6 feet.	If adjacent to a residential district, the rear yard shall be equal to the minimum rear yard required in the adjacent district; but in no instance less than 6 feet.	45 feet or
3 stories

6.	Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the AC District:
A.	Sales and service buildings:  1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
B.	Offices:  1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
C.	Clinics:  1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
D.	Churches:  1 parking space on the lot for every 5 seats in the main auditorium.
E.	Public buildings and facilities:  1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area or 1 parking space for every 5 seats in the main assembly area.
F.	Hotels and motels:  1 parking space per room plus 1 parking space for each employee.
7.	Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the AC District:
A.	All activities or uses allowed in the AC District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
B.	Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of-way.



[The next page is 1091]
 
165.27	CENTRAL BUSINESS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.  
1.	Intent.  This district is intended to accommodate the major business and office concentration in the City.  It is characterized further by a variety of stores and related activities that occupy the central commercial area of the City.  This district is intended to be the single central business district of the City and no other use of this district shall be utilized other than contiguously with the currently established BC District. Bulk regulations further reflect a more in-time use and development pattern.
2.	Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the BC District:
A.	Business sales and services conducted entirely within the building, including those with incidental manufacturing or processing of goods or products.
B.	Offices/Clinics.
C.	Churches.
D.	Hotels and motels.
E.	Multi-family dwellings.
F.	Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities.
3.	Accessory Uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted:
A.	Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the BC District.
B.	Outdoor sales and service.
C.	Private garages.
D.	Parking lots.
E.	Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
F.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to any permitted principal use.
4.	Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the BC District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
A.	Service stations.
B.	Warehousing.
C.	Outdoor storage.
D.	Private garages or accessory buildings.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
 
5.	Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and building in the BC District.

Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Maximum Height (the lesser of)
None, unless used for sole residential purposes, then 6,000 square feet	20 feet	None	None, except if a side yard is provided, it shall be a minimum of 6 feet	None, except if a rear yard is provided, it shall be a minimum of 6 feet	45 feet or
3 stories
Where adjoining other districts, side and rear yards shall be equal to the setbacks of the adjoining districts.
6.	Off-Street Parking.  None required.
7.	Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the BC District:
A.	All activities or uses allowed in the BC District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
B.	Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of-way.



[The next page is 1101]
 
165.28	LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. 
1.	Intent.  This district is intended to provide for areas of development by industrial firms that have high standards of performance and that can locate in close proximity to residential and business uses.  The district regulations are designed to permit the development of any manufacturing or industrial operations that, on the basis of actual physical and operational characteristics, would not be detrimental to the surrounding area or to the community as a whole by reasons of noise, dust, smoke, order, traffic, physical appearance or other similar factors.  Outdoor storage is allowed in this district when the material is enclosed within a solid fence at least six feet high and said fence being within required building lines.  All industrial operations must be in an enclosed building.  Residential uses are not permitted.
2.	Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the LI District.
A.	Any nonresidential building or use which would not be hazardous, obnoxious, offensive, or unsightly by reason of odor, sound, vibrations, radioactivity, electrical interference, glares, liquid or solid waste, smoke, or other air pollutants.
B.	Storage, manufacture, compounding, processing, packing and/or treatment of products, exclusive of the rendering or refining of fats and/or oils.
C.	Manufacture, compounding, assembly and/or treatment of articles or merchandise derived from previously prepared materials.
D.	Assembly of appliances and equipment, including manufacture of small parts.
E.	Wholesale distribution of all standard types of prepared or packaged merchandise.
F.	Sale and storage of building materials. Outdoor or open storage shall be allowed only when the material is enclosed within a solid fence at least six feet high and said fence being within required building lines.
G.	Contractor’s offices and storage of equipment.
H.	Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc.
3.	Accessory Uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted:  
A.	Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the LI District.
B.	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use.
C.	Living quarters for watchmen or custodians of industrial properties.
4.	Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the LI District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
A.	Private garages and accessory buildings.	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
 
5.	Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the LI District.

Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Maximum Building Height (lesser of) 
None	None	30 feet	20 feet, except that if adjacent to an RS, RM, or MH District, then 30 feet	40 feet unless bordering a railroad ROW, in which case, none required	3 stories or 45 feet
6.	Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the LI District:
A.	All commercial uses shall provide one parking space on the lot for each 300 square feet of floor area.
B.	All industrial uses shall provide one parking space on the lot for every two employees (of maximum number employed at any one time).
7.	Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the LI District:
A.	All activities or uses allowed in the LI District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
B.	Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of-way.



[The next page is 1111]
 
165.29	HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. 
1.	Intent.  This district is intended to provide areas for activities and uses of a heavy industrial character and is the least restrictive of any district.  In the best interest of the City, certain uses in the HI District shall be subject to final City Council approval, conditional approval or denial to insure that proper safeguards are taken.  No residential uses are permitted.
2.	Permitted Uses.  There may be any use, excluding residential uses and mobile homes; the following uses must be given separate Council approval before a building/zoning or occupancy permit is issued.
A.	Acid manufacture.
B.	Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of parts manufacture.
C.	Distillation of bones.
D.	Explosive manufacture or storage.
E.	Fat rendering.
F.	Fertilizer manufacture.
G.	Gas manufacture.
H.	Garbage, offal, or dead animals, reduction or dumping.
I.	Glue manufacture.
J.	Petroleum, or its products, refining of.
K.	Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores.
L.	Stockyards or slaughter of animals.
M.	Junk yards (must be surrounded by a solid fence at least six feet high located within building lines and the junk piled not higher than the fence).
Before granting such separate Council approval, Council shall refer applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission for study, investigation and report.  If no report is received in 30 days, the Council may assume approval of the application by the Commission.
3.	Consideration of the Particular Use.  The Council shall then, after holding a public hearing, giving no less than 7 or more than 20 days’ public notice, consider all of the following provisions in its determination upon the particular use at the location requested:
A.	The proposed location design, construction, and operation of the particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding property.
B.	Such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to surrounding property.
C.	Such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the streets, or public danger of fire and safety.
D.	Such use shall not diminish or impair established property values in adjoining or surrounding property.
E.	Such use shall be in accord with the intent, purpose and spirit of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
4.	Required Conditions.
A.	The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse matter or water-carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or similar nuisance shall be employed.
B.	All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or structures, including loading and unloading facilities shall be located at least 100 feet from any “R” District boundary, except where adjoining a railroad right-of-way and 50 feet from any commercial boundary.
5.	Accessory Uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted:
A.	Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the HI District.
6.	Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the HI District.

Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Maximum Building Height (lesser of) 
None	None	30 feet	20 feet, except that if adjacent to an RS, RM, or MH District, then 100 feet; or 50 feet from any commercial boundary 	30 feet unless bordering a railroad ROW, in which case, none required	3 stories or 45 feet
7.	Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking requirements apply in the HI District.
A.	All commercial uses shall provide 1 parking space on the lot for each 300 square feet of floor area.
B.	All industrial uses shall provide 1 parking space on the lot for every 2 employees of maximum number employed at any one time.
8.	Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading requirements apply in the HI District:
A.	All activities or uses allowed in the HI District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
B.	Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of-way.



[The next page is 1121]
 
165.30	PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC DISTRICT.  
1.	Intent.  This district is intended to provide for a variety of public and semi-public uses, which will preserve park, recreational, and other areas of open space.  This district is also characterized to meet the needs for the development of various public/semi-public facilities, buildings and opportunities.
2.	Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the PD District.
A.	Publicly or semi-publicly owned park, recreational and open space.
B.	Publicly or semi-publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities.
C.	Publicly or semi-publicly owned and operated utility substations or other utility equipment.
D.	Publicly or semi-publicly owned parking lots.
E.	Publicly or semi-publicly owned and operated cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.
3.	Accessory Uses.  
A.	None.
4.	Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the Public/Semi-Public District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
5.	Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses in the Public/Semi-Public District.

Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Maximum Building Height (lesser of) 
None	None	The front yard shall be equal to the minimum front yard required in the adjacent districts	The side yard shall be equal to the minimum side yard required in the adjacent districts	The rear yard shall be equal to the minimum rear yard required in the adjacent districts	3 stories or 45 feet

6.	Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the Public/Semi-Public District.
A.	Public buildings and facilities:  1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area or 1 parking space for each 5 seats in the main assembly area.
B.	Elementary and junior high schools:  1 parking space for each classroom and office plus 1 parking space per each 300 square feet of gross floor area in auditorium or gymnasium.
C.	Senior high schools:  1 parking space for each employee and 1 parking space for each 10 students.
D.	Colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning:  1 parking space for each employee and 1 parking space for each 5 students.
7.	Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the Public/Semi-Public District.
A.	All activities or uses allowed in the Public/Semi-Public District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
B.	Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of-way.



[The next page is 1131]
 
165.31	SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
1.	Community Unit Plan.  The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than 10 acres may submit to the Council a plan for the use and development of the entire tract of land.  The development shall be referred to the Planning Commission for study and report and for public hearing.  If the Commission approves the development plan, the plan, together with the recommendation of the Commission, shall then be submitted to the Council for consideration and approval.  If the Council approves the plan, building/zoning permits may be issued even though the use of land and the location of the buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and open spaces contemplated by the plans do not conform in all respects to the district regulations of the district in which it is located except as follows:
A.	Only uses permitted in the “R” Districts shall be permitted.
B.	The average lot area per family contained in the proposed plan, exclusive of the area occupied by streets, will not be less than the lot area per family required in the district in which the development is located.
C.	Said area shall then be designated on the Official Zoning Map as the Community Unit Plan and dated.
2.	Building Lines on Approved Plats.  Whenever the plat of a land subdivision approved by the Planning Commission and on record in the office of the County Recorder shows a building line along any frontage for the purpose of creating a front yard or side street yard line, the building line thus shown shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line required in this chapter unless specific yard requirements in this chapter require a greater setback.
3.	Structures to Have Access.  Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.
4.	Erection of More Than One Principal Structure on a Lot.  In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot.
5.	Accessory Buildings.  No accessory building may be erected in any required front or side yard, or when erected in a rear yard, closer than five (5) feet to a side or rear lot line of a rear yard.  Accessory buildings located in a rear yard may not occupy more than 45 percent of a rear yard.  An accessory building must be a subordinate building located on the same lot with a main building, occupied by or devoted to an accessory use.  An accessory building shall occupy the same lot as the main use or building.  No accessory building shall have a side wall height greater than ten (10) feet or a peak height greater than 16 feet 6 inches and shall not be covered in bare galvanized steel (painted steel is acceptable).  No accessory building shall occupy more than 1,200 square feet.  No accessory building shall be used for human habitation.  Where an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, such as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered part of the main building.  An accessory building may be constructed prior to the main building if a variance is granted by the Board of Adjustment, which variance shall be in writing and recorded.  The time frames for construction of the accessory building and main building are governed by Section 165.16 concerning building permits.  Accessory buildings which fail to meet the above requirements require a special exception authorized by the Board of Adjustment.
	(Ord. 450 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
6.	Height Limits.  Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tank, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, wireless tower, grain elevators, or necessary mechanical appurtenances are exempt from height regulations in Sections 165.21 through 165.30.
7.	Where, on the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance, 40 percent or more of a frontage was occupied by two or more buildings, then the front yard is established in the following manner:
A.	Where the building farthest from the street provides a front yard not more than 10 feet deeper than the building closest to the street, then the front yard for the frontage is and remains an average of the then existing front yards.
B.	Where the description in paragraph A is not the case and a lot is within 100 feet of a building on each side, then the front yard is a line drawn from the closest front corners of these two adjacent buildings. 
C.	Where neither of the conditions described in A or B is the case and the lot is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, then the front yard is the same as that of the existing adjacent building.
8.	Sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features may project only two (2) feet into a required yard.
9.	Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard for a distance of not more than three and one-half (3½) feet when so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation, may be permitted by the Building Inspector.
10.	Open, unenclosed porches may extend ten (10) feet into a front yard and handicapped accessible access ramps are also permitted to extend into a front yard.
(Ord. 439 – Jan. 13 Supp.)
11.	Terraces which do not extend above the level of the ground (first) floor may project into a required yard, provided these projections are distant at least two (2) feet from the adjacent side lot line.
12.	Nothing in this chapter shall have the effect of prohibiting utility service lines.
13.	Depth of required front yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines.  The foremost point on the side lot line, in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at which the side and front lot lines would have met without such rounding.  Front and rear front yard lines shall be parallel.
14.	On lots abutting two or more streets at their intersection the front yard shall face the shortest street dimension of the lot.  The front yard may face either street if the lot is almost square.  The rear yard is always on the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
15.	Yards and Visibility.  On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of three (3) and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines fifty (50) feet from the point of the intersection.  (See Plate 3)
PLATE 3
 

16.	Placement of Mobile Homes on Foundations and Conversion to Real Estate.
A.	Except as hereinafter allowed, no mobile home shall be permitted to be placed within the City outside a duly established mobile home park, whether for the purpose of converting said mobile home to real estate by cutting off or otherwise removing the tongue and wheels for placement of any type of permanent foundation and surrendering of the mobile home title, or for any other purpose.
B.	Any structure originally manufactured as a mobile home is always a mobile home for the purposes of this chapter, whether or not the title has been surrendered and the structure converted to real estate in some other location outside the City.
C.	Notwithstanding the foregoing, any sectional mobile home with a minimum horizontal dimension of 20 feet may be placed within the City outside a duly established mobile home park if its title is surrendered and it is converted to real estate by being placed on a permanent foundation after cutting off or otherwise removing its tongue and wheels.  The minimum horizontal dimension of twenty feet is intended to be a minimum dimension for any sectional mobile home to be placed in the City outside a mobile home park and converted to real estate, and shall not be circumvented by turning or combining otherwise non-complying mobile homes in an attempt to meet this minimum dimension.  No more than one converted mobile home shall be placed on any lot or tract within the City outside a duly established mobile home park.  All converted mobile homes must meet all zoning standards applicable to on-site constructed homes.
D.	The term “section mobile home” as used above is not intended to apply to so-called “expandable” or “tip-out” mobile homes that may be 20 or more feet in minimum dimension when expanded.  Nothing in the foregoing shall be construed to allow such expandable mobile homes to be placed in the City outside a mobile home park and converted to real estate.  Nothing in the foregoing shall be construed to allow rebuilding of or replacement of existing mobile homes within the City with different mobile homes that do not meet the above requirements.  Nothing in the  foregoing shall be construed to allow additions or alterations to existing mobile homes within the City that do not meet the requirements of other City ordinances, rules and regulations.
17.	Occupancy and Use of Trailers and Motor Homes.  No one shall occupy or maintain human living quarters, or conduct any business, in any utility trailer, camping trailer, boat trailer, motor home or similar conveyance.  Nothing in the foregoing shall prohibit the temporary occupancy or use of such conveyances by guests of the owner of the property on which the conveyance is parked.  Such temporary occupancy or use shall not exceed seven days in any 30-day period. 



[The next page is 1143]
 
165.32	DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, COMMISSION, AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL.  All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator, or an assistant, and such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator, and recourse from the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law and particularly by Chapter 414, Code of Iowa.
165.33	AMENDMENTS.  The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed, provided that at least seven (7) days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the City.  In no case shall the notice be published more than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing.  The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed.  Notwithstanding Section 414.2, as a part of an ordinance changing land from one zoning district to another zoning district or an ordinance approving a site development plan, the Council may impose conditions on a property owner which are in addition to existing regulations if the additional conditions have been agreed to in writing by the property owner before the public hearing required under this section or any adjournment of the hearing.  The conditions must be reasonable and imposed to satisfy public needs which are directly caused by the requested change.  In case, however, of a written protest against a change or repeal which is filed with the City Clerk and signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots included in the proposed change or repeal, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the property which is located within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property for which the change or repeal is proposed, the change or repeal shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least three-fourths (¾) of all the members of the Council.  The protest, if filed, must be filed before or at the public hearing.  
165.34	PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.  Violation of the provisions of this chapter with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other legal action as is necessary to prevent any violation.
165.35	SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES.  The Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning district changes, zoning permits, appeals and other matters pertaining to this chapter.  The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Administrator and City Clerk, and may be altered or amended only by the Council, as recommended by the Commission.  Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
165.36	COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.  Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint.  Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.  The Zoning Administrator shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided by this chapter.


EDITOR’S NOTE 

Ordinance No. 408 adopting an Official Zoning Map for the City of Onawa, Iowa, adopted February 9, 2010, and the following ordinances amending the Official Zoning Map have not been included as a part of this Code of Ordinances, but have been specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.

ORDINANCE	ADOPTED	ORDINANCE	ADOPTED
462	March 24, 2015		
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			





[The next page is 1175]

 
CHAPTER 166
AIRPORT LAND USE AND HEIGHT OVERLAY ZONING ORDINANCE
166.01  Introduction	166.12  Airport Zoning Ordinance Administration
166.02  Authority	166.13  Airport Zoning Permits
166.03  Statement of Purpose and Findings	166.14  Hazardous Markings and Lighting
166.04  Short Title	166.15  Height Limitations
166.05  Applicability	166.16  Airport Board of Adjustment
166.06  Definitions	166.17  Variances
166.07  Air Space Obstruction Zoning	166.18  Judicial Review
166.08  Airport Zoning Requirements	166.19  Penalties and Fines
166.09  Nonconformities	166.20  Conflicting Regulations
166.10  Land Use Safety Zones	166.21  Effective Date
166.11  Land Use Zone Compatibility	Exhibit A.  Airport Land Use& Height Overlay Zoning Map
166.01    INTRODUCTION.  This ordinance shall regulate and restrict the height of structures, objects, and growth of natural vegetation, as well as land uses; otherwise regulating the use of property, within the vicinity of the Onawa Municipal Airport (the “Airport”).  Creation of appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof, as well as providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones is vested in this ordinance.  The Airport Land Use & Height Zoning maps are incorporated into and made part of this chapter.  This document also provides for the enforcement of the provisions contained within the ordinance, the establishment of an Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment; and imposition of penalties related to the implementation of the ordinance.  The 2014 Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Ordinance is created by the City of Onawa and Monona County, Iowa with assistance from Siouxland Interstate Metropolitan Planning Council of Sioux City, Iowa and DGR Engineering of Rock Rapids, IA.
166.02    AUTHORITY.  Iowa Code Section 329.3, Airport Zoning, empowers local municipalities to zone airports including dividing such area into zones, and within such zones, specify the land uses permitted, and regulate and restrict, for the purpose of preventing airport hazards, the heights to which structures and trees may be erected or permitted to grow.  
166.03    STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.  The Onawa Municipal Airport is acknowledged as an essential public facility to the State of Iowa and the local community.  The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and poses a potential concern to the surrounding communities served by the Airport.  There shall be no creation or establishment of a hazard that neither endangers public health, safety, welfare, and affects an individual’s quality of life nor prevents the safe movement of aircraft at the Airport.  For the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, and for the promotion of the most appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or establishment of airport hazards.  The prevention of airport hazards shall be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by proper exercise of the police power.  The prevention of new airport hazards, and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards, are considered to be a public purpose for which the City of Onawa and/or Monona County may raise and expend public funds, as an incident to the operation of airports, to acquire or property interest therein.
166.04    SHORT TITLE.  This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Onawa Airport Zoning Ordinance, and it is referred to as the “ordinance” within the following sections.
166.05    APPLICABILITY.  This ordinance encompasses a general area surrounding the Airport.  Specific dimensions associated with the zoning boundary are shown in the Onawa Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Maps.  See Exhibit A.
166.06    DEFINITIONS.  The following definitions shall be utilized for terms as appropriate to the ordinance.
1.	Airport.  (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3).  Any areas of land or water that is used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft.  Any appurtenant areas that are used, or intended for use, for airport buildings, other airport facilities, or rights-of-way; and all airport buildings and facilities located on the areas specified in this definition.  The Airport is owned by the City of Onawa, Iowa. 
2.	Airport Elevation.  (FAA AC 150/5190-4A).  The highest point on an airport’s usable landing area measured in feet from sea level.
3.	Airport Hazard.  (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3).  Any structure, tree or obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace for the purpose of determining the height limits as may be set forth in the Monona County Code of Ordinances.  
4.	Airport Layout Plan (ALP).  (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3).  The plan of an airport showing the layout of existing and proposed airport facilities.
5.	Airport Overlay Zones.  A zone intended to place additional land use conditions on land impacted by the airport while retaining the existing underlying zone.  The FAR Part 77 Surfaces and RPZs have been combined to create five airport overlay zones.  The five specific zones create a comprehensive area focused on maintaining compatible land use around airports.
A.	Zone A [Runway Protection Zone] - is intended to provide a clear area that is free of above ground obstructions and structures.  This zone is closest to the individual runway ends.  
B.	Zone B [Approach Surface] - is a critical overlay surface that reflects the approach and departure areas for each runway at an airport.  The size of Zone B is predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or precision) that a specific runway has and the type/size of aircraft utilizing the runway.
C.	Zone C [Transitional Surface] - includes those areas that are parallel to the runway pavement and extend from the edge of the primary surface.
D.	Zone D [Horizontal Surface] - is typically elliptical in shape, depending upon the runway types and configurations at an individual airport.
E.	Zone E [Conical Surface] - is the outermost zone of the overlay areas and has the least number of land use restriction considerations.  Zone E begins at the edge of the horizontal surface and is 4,000 feet in width paralleling the horizontal surface.  
6.	Airport Zoning Permit.  Airport zoning permit allowing new development or alteration or expansion of a nonconforming use.
7.	Airspace.  The space lying above the earth or above a certain area of land or water that is necessary to conduct aviation operations. 
8.	Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Map.  The airport land use & height overlay zoning map is compiled from the criteria in FAR Part 77, “Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace.”  It shows the area affected by the Airport Overlay Zoning Ordinance, and includes the layout of runways, airport boundaries, elevations, and area topography.  Applicable height limitation areas are shown in detail.
9.	Approach Slope. (FAR Part 77).  The ratio of horizontal to vertical distance indicating the degree of inclination of the Approach Surface.  The ratio is 20:1 for all utility and visual runways extended from the primary surface a distance of 5,000 feet.
10.	Approach Surface.  (FAA AC 150/5190-4A).  A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in this chapter.  In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
11.	City.  The City of Onawa, Iowa.
12.	Compatibility.  The degree to which land uses or types of development can coexist or integrate.
13.	County.  Monona County, Iowa.
14.	Easement.  (FAA AC 5020-1).  The legal right of one party to use a portion of the total rights in real estate owned by another party.  This may include the right of passage over, on, or below property; certain air rights above the property, including view rights; and the rights to any specified from of development or activity, as well as any other legal rights in the property that may be specified in the easement document. 
15.	Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).  A federal agency charged with regulating air commerce to promote its safety and development; encourage and develop civil aviation, air traffic control, air navigation; and promoting the development of a national system of airports.
16.	Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR). (FAA FAR).  Regulations established and administered by the FAA that govern civil aviation and aviation-related activities.
A.	FAR Part 36.  (FAA FAR Sec. 36.1).  Regulation establishing noise standards for the civil aviation fleet.
B.	FAR Part 91.  (FAA FAR Sec. 91.1).  Regulation pertaining to air traffic and general operating rules, including operating noise limits.
C.	FAR Part 150.  (FAA FAR Sec. 150.1).  Regulation pertaining to airport noise compatibility planning.
D.	FAR Part 161.  (FAA FAR Sec. 161.1).  Regulation pertaining to notice and approval of airport noise and access restrictions.
E.	FAR Part 77.  (FAA FAR Sec. 77.1).  Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace - Part 77 (a) establishes standards for determining obstructions in navigable airspace; (b) defines the requirements for notice to the FAA Administrator of certain proposed construction or alteration; (c) provides for aeronautical studies of obstructions to air navigation to determine their effect on the safe and efficient use of airspace; (d) provides for public hearings on the hazardous effect of proposed construction or alteration on air navigation; and (e) provides for establishing antenna farm areas.
17.	General Aviation Airport.  Any airport that is not an air carrier airport or a military facility.
18.	Height.  Height is utilized for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the official zoning maps; height shall be measured as the highest point of a structure, tree, or other object of natural growth, measured from the mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
19.	Imaginary Surfaces.  (FAA FAR Part 77.25).  Those areas established in relation to the airport and each runway consistent with FAR Part 77 in which any object extending above these imaginary surfaces, by definition, is an obstruction.
A.	Transitional surface.  The transitional surface extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and extends at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (7:1) from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces.  The transitional surfaces extend to the point at which they intercept the horizontal surface at a height of 150 feet above the established airport elevation.   
B.	Horizontal surface.  The horizontal surface is a horizontal plane located 150 feet above the established airport elevation and encompasses an area from the transitional surface to the conical surface.  The perimeter is constructed by generating arcs from the center of each end of the primary surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.    
C.	Conical surface.  The conical surface extends upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for every one foot vertically (20:1) for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.  
D.	Approach surface.  The approach surface is longitudinally centered on an extended runway centerline, and extends outward and upward from the end of the runway primary surface.   
20.	Incompatible Land Use.  (FAA FAR Sec. 150.7).  The use of land which is normally incompatible with the aircraft and airport operations (such as, but not limited to, homes, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, and libraries).
21.	Land Use Compatibility.  The coexistence of land uses surrounding the airport with airport-related activities.
22.	Lighting and Marking of Hazards to Air Navigation.  Installation of appropriate lighting fixtures, painted markings or other devices to such objects or structures that constitute hazards to air navigation.
23.	Mitigation.  The minimization, reduction, elimination or compensation for adverse environmental effects of a proposed action.
24.	Noise Impact.  A condition that exists when the noise levels that occur in an area exceed a level identified as appropriate for the activities in that area.
25.	Noise Sensitive Area.  (FAA AC 91-36D).  Defined as an area where noise interferes with normal activities associated with the area’s use.  Examples of noise-sensitive areas include residential, educational, health, and religious structures and sites, and parks, recreational areas (including areas with wilderness characteristics), wildlife refuges, and cultural and historical sites where a quiet setting is a generally recognized feature or attribute.
26.	Non-Conforming Use.  (FAA Web site).  Any pre-existing structure, tree, or use of land that is inconsistent with the provisions of the local land use or airport master plans.
27.	Object.  (FAA AC 150/5300-13).  Includes, but is not limited to above ground structures, navigational aids, people, equipment, vehicles, natural growth, terrain, and parked aircraft.
28.	Obstacle Free Zone (OFZ).  (FAA 150/5300-13).  The OFZ is the airspace below 150 feet (45 m) above the established airport elevation and along the runway and extended runway centerline that is required to be clear of all objects, except for the frangible visual NAVAID’s that need to be located in the OFZ because of their function, in order to provide clearance protection for the aircraft landing or taking off from the runway, and for missed approaches.
29.	Obstruction.  (FAA AC 150/5190-4A).  Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height, specific to its geographic location relative to the runway/airport.
30.	Overlay Zone.  A mapped zone imposing requirements in addition to those of the underlying zoning district.
31.	Primary Surface.  (FAA AC 150/5190-4A).  A surface longitudinally centered on a runway.  When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway.  The width of the primary surface is set forth in FAR Part 77.  The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
32.	Primary Runway.  (FAA AC 150/5325-4B).  The runway used for the majority of airport operations.  Large, high-activity airports may operate two or more parallel primary runways.
33.	Public Use Airport.  (FAA AC 150/5190-6).  Means either a publicly owned airport or a privately owned airport open for public use.
34.	Runway Protection Zone (RPZ).  (FAA AC 150/5300-13).  An area off the runway end designed to enhance the protection of people and property on the ground.
35.	Structure.  Any object constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.  Among other things, structures include buildings, antenna, mobile homes, billboards, poster panels, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, satellite dish antenna, storage tanks, towers and other similar uses.
36.	Variance.  A modification of the specific regulations of this chapter granted by resolution of the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the terms of this chapter for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances and hardships applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zoning district.
37.	Visual Approach.  An approach to an airport conducted with visual reference to the terrain.
38.	Visual Runway.  (FAA AC 150/5300-13).  A runway without an existing or planned straight-in instrument approach procedure.
39.	Wildlife Hazards.  Wildlife (birds, mammals, reptiles), including feral animals and uncontrolled domesticated animals associated with aircraft strike problems, and capable of causing structural damage to airport facilities or attractants to other wildlife that pose a strike hazard.
166.07    AIR SPACE OBSTRUCTION ZONES & AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING MAPS.  The zones established by this ordinance is illustrated on the official Onawa Municipal Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Map consisting of two (2) sheets, prepared by DGR Engineering, attached as Exhibit A to this chapter.  Such Official Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Map may be amended from time to time, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone boundaries, and other information thereon, is hereby adopted as part of this ordinance.
166.08    AIRPORT ZONING REQUIREMENTS.  In accordance with Section 329.10, Iowa Code, there are three (3) principal airport zoning requirements supported by additional information contained within the following remaining sections of this chapter.  These basic zoning requirements state:
1.	All airport zoning regulations adopted under this chapter shall be reasonable and none shall impose any requirement or restriction that is not necessary to make effective the purposes of this ordinance.
A.	Airport zoning regulations adopted under this ordinance may require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree, or a change in use, not conforming to the regulations when adopted or amended. 
B.	Airport zoning regulations adopted under this ordinance may require a property owner to permit the City of Onawa and/or Monona County to install, operate, and maintain on the property markers and lights as necessary to indicate to operators of aircraft the presence of the airport hazard, when adopted or amended.
2.	All such regulations may provide that a preexisting nonconforming structure, tree, or use, shall not be replaced, rebuilt, altered, allowed to grow higher, or replanted, so as to constitute a greater airport hazard than it was when the airport zoning regulations or amendments to the regulations were adopted.  
The City of Onawa, or the City and Monona County in conjunction, will be responsible for the initial removal of trees, structures, or other natural or man-made obstructions that are not conforming to the regulations of this ordinance when adopted or amended.  Any subsequent alterations or removal of any natural or man-made obstructions to the Airport or its airspace will be responsibility of the property owner.
166.09    NONCONFORMITIES.  It is the intent of this ordinance to permit legal nonconforming buildings, structures, or natural resources to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their continuance, unless such nonconforming use is determined by the FAA to be a hazard within one of the airport zones and must be altered or changed in accordance with FAA regulations.  It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used to add other nonconforming structures prohibited elsewhere in the defined airport zones. 
In accordance with Section 329.10, Iowa Code, and stated above in Section 166.08, any preexisting nonconforming structure, tree, or land use, shall not be replaced, rebuilt, altered, allowed to grow higher, or replanted, so as to constitute a greater airport hazard than it was when the airport zoning regulations or amendments to the regulations were adopted.  With that stated, where a lawful building or structure exists prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that cannot be built under the terms of this airport chapter by reason of restrictions on height or land use compatibility, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful and in compliance with FAA regulations; subject to the following provisions: 
1.	No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity.  Such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that does not increase its nonconformity. 
2.	Should such nonconforming structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this airport ordinance. 
3.	Should any nonconforming structure be moved within the boundaries of any of the five (5) airport zones for any reason or for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of this airport zoning ordinance.
4.	Discontinuance.  In the event a nonconforming building, structure or use is discontinued for a period of two (2) years, the height or land use compatibility shall conform thereafter to the provisions of this airport zoning ordinance.  
On any nonconforming building or structure, work may be done on ordinary repairs or replacement of non-bearing walls not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the building, provided the cubic content of the building shall not be increased.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety upon orders of such official.  There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, buildings or structures. 
166.10    LAND USE SAFETY ZONES.  FAR Part 77 Surfaces and Runway Protection Zones have been combined to create five (5) airport overlay zones.  These five zones are designed to maintain compatible land uses around the Airport.  The zones shall be evaluated for compatible land uses.  Specific dimensions for the individual zones for each runway end are noted in the following tables and text.  The Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Maps should be evaluated to determine the specific area of impact associated with each zone.
1.	Zone A – Runway Protection Zone (RPZ).  Zone A is intended to provide a clear area that is free of above-ground obstructions and structures.  Runway Protection Zones (RPZs), formerly known as clear zones, were originally established to define land areas below aircraft approach paths in order to prevent the creation of airport hazards or development of incompatible land use.  As stated in the Iowa Airport Land Use Guidebook, 2008, the FAA adopted clear zones with dimensional standards to implement a recommendation from the 1952 President’s Airport Commission study that identified the establishment of clear areas beyond runway ends was deemed worthy of federal management.  RPZs are designed with the intent to protect people and property on the ground.  They are located at the end of each runway and should ideally be controlled by the airport.  Control is preferably exercised by acquisition of sufficient property interest to achieve and maintain an area that is clear of all incompatible land uses, objects, and activities.
Table 1.  Zone A - Dimensional Requirements
Runway Ends	Approach Visibility Minimums1	Dimensions
		Length
L feet	Inner Width W1 feet	Outer Width W2 feet
Runway 15	1-mile, non precision	1,000	500	700
Runway 33	1-mile, non precision	1,000	500	700

Runway Ends	Approach Visibility Minimums1	Dimensions
		Length
L feet	Inner Width W1 feet	Outer Width W2 feet
Runway 6	Visual	1,000	250	450
Runway 24	Visual	1,000	250	450
1.  The RPZ dimensional standards are for the runway end with the specified approach visibility minimums.
Source:  FAA AC 150/5300-13, current edition, Airport Design Standards
2.	Zone B – Approach Surface.  Zone B is a critical airport overlay zoning surface that reflects the approach and departure areas for each runway at an airport.  The size of Zone B is predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or precision) that a specific runway has and the type/size of aircraft utilizing the runway.  The approach surface is longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extends outward and upward from the end of the primary surface.  The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface and expands uniformly.  Table 2 below illustrates the various sizes of Zone B based upon the specific runway criteria.  A portion of Zone B is overlain by Zone A because the approach surface and RPZ overlap the entire length of the RPZ.  Consequently, the length of Zone B begins at the inner edge of the RPZ.
Table 2.  Airport Overlay Zones B through E Dimensional Standards
Item	Runway Dimensional Standards (Feet)
	Runway 15	Runway 33	Runway 6	Runway 24
Primary Surface width and Zone B inner width	500	500	250	250
Zone B end width	2,000	2,000	1,250	1,250
Zone B length	5,000	5,000	5,000	5,000
Zone C width	1,050	1,050	1,050	1,050
Zone D radius	5,000	5,000	5,000	5,000
Zone E width	4,000	4,000	4,000	4,000
3.	Zone C – Transitional Surface.  Zone C includes those areas that are parallel to the runway pavement and extend 1,050 feet from the edge of the primary surface paralleling the runway and extended runway centerline until they reach the end of Zone A at a 90 degree angle.  The specific dimensions for Zone C are based upon various options for the primary surface that is predicated upon the type of approach and critical aircraft.  The transitional surface (Zone C) extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and extends at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each one-foot vertically (7:1) from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces.  The transitional surfaces extend to the point at which they intercept the horizontal surface at a height of 150 feet above the established airport elevation. 
4.	Zone D – Horizontal Surface.  Zone D is typically elliptical in shape, depending upon the runway types and configurations at individual airports.  The horizontal surface is a horizontal plane located 150 feet above the established airport elevation and encompasses an area from the transitional surface to the conical surface.  The perimeter is constructed by generating arcs from the center of each end of the primary surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.  The radius of each arc for all runway ends designated as utility or visual airports is 5,000 feet.
5.	Zone E – Conical Surface.  Zone E is the outermost zone of the airport overlay zoning areas and has the least number of land use restriction considerations.  The zone begins at the edge of the horizontal surface and is 4,000 feet in width paralleling the horizontal surface.  According to the Iowa Airport Land Use Guidebook, the conical surface extends upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for every one foot vertically (20:1) for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.  Height limitations for the surface range from 150 feet above the airport reference elevation at the inner edge to 350 feet at the outer edge.
166.11    LAND USE ZONE COMPATIBILITY.  The need to plan for compatible land use near airports is not a new concept.  Compatible land use was recognized as early as 1952 in a document entitled The Airport and Its Neighbors - The Report of the President’s Airport Commission.  As stated in the Iowa Airport Land Use Guidebook, the incidence of incompatible land uses and impact on airport operations and development have escalated.  As decisions to allow incompatible land uses near airports threaten the nation’s aviation system, implementation of compatible land use controls have become an industry priority.  It is important for the Onawa Airport to maintain an obstruction-free airport and associated airspace.  This includes the area that encompasses the airport, runway protection zones, approach areas, and general vicinity of the airport.  While some of these areas are owned by airports, the bulk of the land beyond airport boundaries is privately owned and needs to be managed by the local municipality and/or county in which the airport jurisdiction falls.  FAA criteria, such as grant assurances and design guidelines, along with aviation accident statistics, provide the foundation and the justification for compatible land uses.

 
The above stated definition, defined in the Iowa Airport Land Use Guidebook, appears vague since no specific land use types are specified.  However, the vagueness is intentional because nearly every type of land use can be both compatible and incompatible depending upon the particular aspects of the land use, including management of the land use, location of the land use relative to the airport.  For example, land uses typically considered to be compatible with airport operations include commercial, industrial, and agricultural activities.  With that said, each of these uses may also contain aspects considered incompatible such as:
•	Commercial uses may have dense concentrations of people
•	Industrial uses that can generate smoke/steam that creates visual obstructions
•	Agricultural operations can act as wildlife attractants in certain circumstances
The City of Onawa and Monona County must each and collaboratively assess the compatibility of the land uses in detail as related to the Airport.  Descriptions of land use issues include high concentrations of people, tall structures, visual obstructions, and wildlife and bird attractants.
Lastly, land use compatibility is critical to the Airport because certain grant assurances are required as part of a project application from airports that are eligible to request federal funds.  Upon acceptance of grant money, these assurances are incorporated into and become part of the grant agreement.  The airport sponsor is obligated to comply with specific assurances, which include the maintenance of compatible land use within the vicinity of the airport.  Specifically, Grant Assurance 21 included in the September 1999 amendment to 49 USC 47107, requires all airports that accept federal money to take appropriate action against incompatible land uses in the immediate vicinity of the airport.  Such actions include adopting zoning laws and zoning changes that will increase airport land use compatibility.  This grant assurance obligates an airport sponsor to protect the federal investment through the maintenance of a safe operating environment.  The development of compatible land uses near airports is supported through cooperative comprehensive planning that includes FAA standards.  Land use compatibility is a requirement for eligibility to receive FAA grant money for airport improvements.  Adjacent land uses that are not compatible with airports may result in the loss of federal or state funding for airports.
The following tables shall be utilized to evaluate land use compatibility for various land use classifications.
1.	Uses identified as COMPATIBLE shall not require additional review; however, consideration should be given to the following areas of concerns: High concentrations of people, tall structures, visual obstructions, or wildlife and bird attractants.
2.	Uses found to be NOT COMPATIBLE shall be precluded from development within the specific zones.  The applicant reserves the right to apply for a variance for an incompatible use to be built within the requested airport zone and in accordance with FAA requirements.  Variances will be reviewed by the Airport Board of Adjustment.
3.	Uses found to require ADDITIONAL REVIEW shall be evaluated for general compatibility by the Onawa Zoning Administrator for potential conflicting land uses or potential negative affects that may need to be mitigated.  If the areas of concern are addressed by the applicant, the Airport Zoning Administrator shall recommend issuance of the zoning permit.  If no areas of potential conflicting uses or incompatible land uses are identified, or need to be mitigated, the Airport Zoning Administrator shall proceed to recommend issuance of the zoning permit.

Onawa Airport Zone – Land Use Chart
C = Compatible             AR = Additional Review Required               NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses	Zone
A	Zone
B	Zone
C	Zone
D	Zone
E
Residential Uses
Single Family Detached Dwelling
(i.e. single family, mobile or manufactured)	AR	AR	C	C	C


Onawa Airport Zone – Land Use Chart
C = Compatible             AR = Additional Review Required               NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses	Zone
A	Zone
B	Zone
C	Zone
D	Zone
E
Commercial Uses
Eating and Drinking Establishments
(i.e. restaurants, cafes, fast food restaurants, bars, nightclubs, taverns, etc.)	AR	AR	C	C	C
Quick Vehicle Servicing Uses
(i.e. gas station, unattended card key service stations, car washes, etc.)	AR	AR	C	C	C
General Office Uses
(i.e. business offices, financial businesses, government offices - 35 ft. or less in height)	AR	AR	C	C	C
Medical Office/Clinic Uses
(i.e. medical/dental clinics, chiropractic,  physical therapy - 35 ft. or less in height)	AR	AR	C	C	C
Retail Sales
(i.e. convenience stores, electronics, furniture, groceries, hardware, malls, etc.)	AR	AR	C	C	C
Outdoor Storage and Self-Service Storage
(i.e. storage yards, vehicles sales, landscaping, equipment sales, mini-warehousing, etc.)	AR	AR	C	C	C
Vehicle Repair Uses
(i.e. repair or service shops, alignment, tire sales)	AR	AR	C	C	C
All Other Commercial Uses
Any other commercial use not classified in one of the above listed categories	AR	AR	C	C	C
Onawa Airport Zone – Land Use Chart
C = Compatible             AR = Additional Review Required               NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses	Zone
A	Zone
B	Zone
C	Zone
D	Zone
E
Industrial Uses
Light Manufacturing
(i.e. research, HVAC, plumbing, janitorial, engineering, assembly, warehousing, etc.)	AR	AR	C	C	C
*Heavy Manufacturing
(i.e. concrete plants, packing, animal, ethanol or other facilities with excessive smoke or dust)	NC	NC	AR	C	C
Mining and Extraction Uses	NC	AR	AR	C	C
Waste Related Uses
(i.e. recycling centers, landfills, waste transfer stations, hazardous waste collection sites, etc.)	NC	NC	NC	AR	AR


Onawa Airport Zone – Land Use Chart
C = Compatible             AR = Additional Review Required               NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses	Zone
A	Zone
B	Zone
C	Zone
D	Zone
E
Civic & Public Uses
Basic Utility Uses
(i.e. utility facilities, electrical substations, water and sewer lift stations, water towers)	NC	AR	AR	C	C
General Community Services
(i.e. libraries, community centers, police/fire, etc.)	AR	AR	C	C	C
Daycare Uses
(i.e. daycare, preschools, after school care)	AR	AR	C	C	C
Educational Facilities
(i.e. any public or private school)	AR	AR	AR	C	C
Hospitals
(i.e. hospitals, medical centers)	AR	AR	AR	C	C
Religious Assembly or Civic Uses
(i.e. churches, religious use or civic clubs)	AR	AR	AR	C	C





Onawa Airport Zone – Land Use Chart
C = Compatible             AR = Additional Review Required               NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses	Zone
A	Zone
B	Zone
C	Zone
D	Zone
E
Infrastructure Uses
Communication Uses
(i.e. wireless, emergency towers, antennas, etc)	NC	AR	AR	AR	AR
Transportation and Parking Uses
(i.e. highways, local roads, parking lots, etc.)	C	C	C	C	C
Utility Uses
(i.e. solar power, wind generators, wind farms)	NC	NC	AR	AR	AR
Agriculture Uses
Agriculture Plant-related
(i.e. crops, vegetable, fruit, and tree farms, etc.)	AR	C	C	C	C
Agriculture Animal-related
(i.e. livestock production, dairies, horse farms)	AR	C	C	C	C


Onawa Airport Zone – Land Use Chart
C = Compatible             AR = Additional Review Required               NC = Not Compatible
Land Uses	Zone
A	Zone
B	Zone
C	Zone
D	Zone
E
Outdoor Commercial Recreation
(i.e. camping, swimming pool, drive-in theaters, amphitheaters, fairgrounds, race tracks, etc.)	AR	AR	AR	C	C
Indoor Commercial Recreation
(i.e. health clubs, bowling alleys, skating rinks, billiard halls, arcades, indoor theaters)	AR	AR	C	C	C
Golf Recreation
(driving ranges, golf courses, country clubs)	AR	AR	AR	C	C
Parks
(i.e. aquatic, neighborhood, school, community)	AR	C	C	C	C
Regarding the land use compatibility charts on the previous pages, if a specific use of land, building or structure is proposed by an applicant and not identified on the land use compatibility charts, the Airport Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for determining the level of land use compatibility in each applicable zone.  If the applicant disagrees with the decision, they may appeal the decision of the administrator and have the Airport Board of Adjustment make a determination on the proposed land use compatibility.
166.12    AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION.  As stated in Section 329.13, Iowa Code, all airport zoning regulations adopted under this ordinance shall provide for the administration and enforcement of such regulations by an administrative agency.  For purposes of the Onawa Airport Zoning Ordinance, the administration will be enforced by the Onawa Zoning Administrator with consultation and cooperation from the Monona County Zoning Administrator.  However, in no case, shall such administrative agency be or include any member of the airport Board of Adjustment.  The duties of any administrative agency designated pursuant to the Iowa Code or this ordinance shall not include any of the powers herein delegated to the Board of Adjustment.  The Onawa Zoning Administrator will be recognized as the Airport Zoning Administrator since the operation of the Airport falls within the jurisdiction of the City.  If needed, the Monona County Zoning Administrator may be called upon from time to time to consult with and/or confer with the Airport Zoning Administrator about the airport zoning ordinance regulations.
166.13    AIRPORT ZONING PERMIT REVIEW.  Buildings or other structures located within the Airport land use and height overlay zoning area, as defined herein, shall be reviewed in accordance with the allowable height and land use classifications accordingly.  All proposed land uses, exclusive of communication uses (e.g. specifically cell towers, antennas, etc.), utility uses (e.g. specifically wind generators, wind farms) and waste related uses (e.g. specifically landfills), shall be exempted from the airport zoning review if the proposed building or structure is located within airport overlay Zones D and E and it meets the height requirements of the Onawa Airport Zoning Ordinance and the zoning ordinance for the jurisdiction it is located within.
Furthermore, those proposed buildings or structures to be located within airport overlay zones A, B, and C of the Airport land use and height overlay zoning area, as defined herein, such proposed buildings or structures shall automatically be reviewed by the Airport Zoning Administrator in accordance with both height and land use conformance.  Airport zoning permits may be reviewed and granted in conjunction with or supplemental to an Onawa zoning permit or any zoning permit in the County or other affected communities. 
It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator or reviewer in each affected jurisdiction within the boundaries of the Airport land use and height overlay zoning area to determine if such proposed building or structure meets the initial criteria for additional height and land use review or if the proposed use is exempted from additional review.  If the affected jurisdiction determines an additional level of review is needed, the appropriate authority shall submit a copy of the zoning permit under review to the Airport Zoning Administrator.  Upon review by the Airport Zoning Administrator, comments and a recommendation on approval, approval with conditions or denial of such permit shall be returned to the originating jurisdiction in which the proposed building or structure is located. 
The Airport Zoning Administrator shall approve the permit if after evaluation, the proposed project is found to be adequately compatible.  Should the proposed project be found to be incompatible after review, the Airport Zoning Administrator shall recommend denial of the permit.  Should the permit be denied, the applicant shall have the right to request an appeal as prescribed in this ordinance.  Any airport zoning review shall be null and void if the purpose for which the permit is issued has not commenced within one (1) year from date of issuance.  Should the activity not be commenced within that time, a new airport zoning review shall be required. 
166.14    HAZARDOUS MARKINGS AND LIGHTING.  This section provides for safe aircraft operations, as well as the health, safety, and welfare of individuals on the ground within the vicinity of the airport by identifying lighting and marking requirements.  Lighting and marking requirements will be determined through an FAA 7460-1 airspace analysis.  The owner of any structure, object, natural vegetation, or terrain is hereby required to install, operate, and maintain such markers, lights, and other aids to navigation necessary to indicate to the aircraft operators in the vicinity of an airport the presence of an airport hazard.  Hazardous markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the owner of such building, structure or object requiring such lighting or marking requirements within the findings of an FAA 7460-1 airspace analysis. 
166.15    HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.  No structure, object, natural vegetation, or terrain shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained within any airport zoning district established by this ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height limitations set forth in this ordinance and the airport zoning map.  The permitted height shall not exceed the difference between the grade elevation and the height limitation numbers illustrated on the “Official Onawa Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Map” within the airport zoning district encompassed by this ordinance.  The Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Map is located in the Onawa City offices and the Monona County Zoning Office.  An FAA 7460-1 airspace review shall provide a portion of the information necessary to evaluate potential height impacts.  However, it shall not be the sole source of review.  Furthermore, if the height limitations of this airport zoning ordinance and accompanying Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Map are in conflict with the underlying height limitations imposed within the City of Onawa, Monona County or any of the adjacent cities zoning ordinances, the more restrictive height limitation shall apply. 
166.16    AIRPORT BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.  The Airport Board of Adjustment shall consist of two (2) members each from the City of Onawa and Monona County, selected by the governing body thereof, and one (1) additional member to be selected by the Onawa Airport Board.  The two members from the City of Onawa and Monona County will serve a dual purpose from their current placement on the City or County’s Board of Adjustment.  The five (5) appointed members will select a chairperson amongst themselves.  Board of Adjustment members may be removed for cause by the appointing authorities (either City of Onawa or Monona County) upon written charges and after a public hearing.  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant in the same manner in which said member was selected.  The terms of the board members shall be for five (5) years, except when the board is first created, one (1) of the members appointed by each participating governmental jurisdiction shall be appointed for a term of two years and one (1) for a term of four years.  The Board of Adjustment will only be used if deemed necessary.
Any person, property owner, or taxpayer impacted by any decision of this ordinance, may appeal to the Board of Adjustment.  According to Section 329.12, Code of Iowa, the governing body of any municipality seeking to exercise powers under Chapter 329, shall by ordinance provide for the appointment of a Board of Adjustment, as provided in section 414.7 for a city, or as provided in Section 335.10 for a county.  The board of adjustment has the same powers and duties, and its procedure and appeals are subject to the same provisions as established in Sections 414.9 to 414.19 for a city, or Sections 335.12 to 335.21 for a county.  The concurring vote of a majority of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter or to effect any variance therefrom.
166.17    VARIANCES.  In accordance with Section 239.11, Code of Iowa, any person desiring to erect, alter, or increase the height of any structure, object, or to permit the growth of any natural vegetation, or otherwise use the person’s property in violation of airport zoning regulations adopted under this ordinance, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from such zoning regulations.  Such variances shall be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but would do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of the regulations and this chapter; provided, however, that any such variance may be allowed subject to any reasonable conditions that the Board of Adjustment may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this ordinance.  No application for variance to the requirements of this ordinance may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been submitted to the Airport Zoning Administrator for an opinion as to the aeronautical effects of the variance.  The variance will be filed within the correct jurisdiction.
166.18    JUDICIAL REVIEW.  This section defines the method for the judicial review process.  In following a process set forth in the Onawa Zoning Ordinance, any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek review of such decision of the Board of Adjustment by a Court of Record in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Iowa and particularly by Section 414.15, Code of Iowa.
166.19    PENALTIES AND FINES.  Any violation of this ordinance or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a municipal infraction.  In accordance with existing Onawa or Monona County zoning ordinance regulations (Chapter 100, Section 100.28 of the Monona County Code of Ordinances), any violation of the Airport Ordinance shall be subject to the same fines and penalties as a zoning violation.  Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
166.20    CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.  In accordance with Section 329.8, Code of Iowa, where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this ordinance and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to height or structures, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
166.21    EFFECTIVE DATE.  This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its adoption by the governing body and publication and posting as required by law, as provided for in Chapter 380.6 and 380.7, Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1]; Sec. 380.7[3]; and Sec. 362.3)
(Ch. 166 – Ord. 461 – Feb. 15 Supp.)
 
Exhibit A
Onawa Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Map
This exhibit provides the official Onawa Municipal Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Maps to be kept on file with the appropriate governmental entities.  The maps must be amended when changes occur within the jurisdictional boundaries of the maps.  The maps must be prepared and adopted concurrently with the ordinance.

 

 

 



[The next page is 1201]

 
CHAPTER 170
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
170.01  Purpose	170.13  Utility Easements Required
170.02  Jurisdiction	170.14  Installation, Construction of Improvements
170.03  Definitions	170.15  Grading 
170.04  Plat Required	170.16  Curb and Gutter 
170.05  Procedure	170.17  Surfacing
170.06  Drawing, Scale and Contents of Preliminary Plan	170.18  Sidewalks
170.07  Drawing, Scale and Contents of Final Plat	170.19  Water Connections Required
170.08  Improvement Plans, Profiles, Cross Sections	170.20  Sewers and Sewage Disposal
170.09  Streets	170.21  Electric and Gas 
170.10  Blocks	170.22  Street Lights
170.11  Lots	170.23  Seeding
170.12  Character of Development	170.24  Mandatory Resident Inspection by the City
	Engineer or Authorized Representative
170.01	PURPOSE.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the harmonious development of the City; for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets or with other features of the comprehensive plan of the City for adequate open spaces; for adequate provisions made for public utilities and other public requirements; and for a distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience and general welfare in the City.
170.02	JURISDICTION.  In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa, the ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted by the City, governing the subdivision of all lands within the corporate limits of the City and subdivision of all lands within two (2) miles of the corporate limits.
170.03	DEFINITIONS.  For purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms are defined:
1.	“Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys; or by streets, highways or ways except alleys and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision.
2.	“Building line” means a line on a plat between which line and a street no building or structure may be erected.  The building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use of any character, and on commercial and industrial lots when required by ordinance.  Such building lines shall not be less than required by this chapter or Zoning Ordinance.
3.	“Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
4.	“Cul-de-sac” means a minor street with only one outlet and terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
5.	“Easement” means a grant by the property owner of the use, for a specific purpose, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation or certain person or persons.  Within the limits, the owner of the fee shall not erect any permanent structure but shall have the right to make any other use of the land subject to such easement, which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee.  Public utilities shall have the right to trim or remove trees, which interfere with the use of such easements.
6.	“Engineer” means a registered engineer authorized to practice civil engineering as defined by the registration act of the State.
7.	“Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development.
8.	“Major thoroughfare” means a street used primarily for fast, large volume traffic.
9.	“Minor street” means a street not designated as a major thoroughfare.
10.	“Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to the City in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required by this chapter, said cost being estimated by the City Engineer, and said surety bond or cash bond being legally sufficient to secure to the City that the said improvements will be constructed in accordance with this chapter.
11.	“Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs.
12.	“Subdivider” means the person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, state, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined herein, and includes any agent of the subdivider.
13.	“Subdivision” means the division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll into more than two (2) parcels, sites or lots, any one of which is less than five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however, that where one lot is divided into two sites or parcels, each shall contain sufficient lot area to comply with the requirements of Chapter 165, and provided, however, that the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres not involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional building sites shall be exempted; OR the improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any street or streets, except private streets serving industrial structures; the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.
14.	“Subdivision plat” means a graphical representation of the subdivision of land, prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation for each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title and on which the subdivider’s plan of the subdivision is presented and which the subdivider submits for approval and intends in final form to record.
15.	“Surveyor” means a registered surveyor authorized to practice surveying as defined by the registration act of the State.
170.04	PLAT REQUIRED.  It is unlawful for the owner, agent or persons having control of any land within the corporate limits of the City or within two (2) miles thereof, to subdivide or lay out such land into lots, blocks, streets, avenues, alleys, public ways and grounds, unless by plat in accordance with the laws of the State and the provisions of this chapter.  
170.05	PROCEDURE.  In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plan, a performance bond as may be required, and a final plat in accordance with this chapter.
1.	The subdivider shall first prepare and file with the Commission four (4) copies of a preliminary plan conforming to the requirements set forth in this chapter.  Said plans shall be accompanied by a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each lot in the subdivision, providing said subdivision does not consist of less than ten (10) lots, in which case a minimum filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required.
2.	The Commission shall refer one copy of the preliminary plan to the City.
3.	The City shall carefully examine said plan as to its compliance with the laws and regulations of the City, the existing street system, and good engineering practices and shall, within fifteen (15) days, submit findings in writing to the Commission.
4.	The Commission, upon receiving the City’s report, shall, within a reasonable time, consider said report and pass upon the plan.  It shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval, modification, or disapproval.  In case of modification or disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefor.  The Commission shall return one copy of the approved preliminary plan to the subdivider.
5.	Before approving a preliminary plat, the Commission may, at its discretion, hold a public hearing on the proposed plat, notice of which shall be given by publication in a local newspaper of general distribution, or by posting notices on the tract, or by sending notices to affected property owners by mail.  Such notice shall be given within seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
6.	Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the Commission, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat and detailed construction drawing and specifications for the improvements required under this chapter.
7.	The approval of the preliminary plan by the Commission is revocable and does not constitute final approval or acceptance of the subdivision by the Council or authorization to proceed with construction of improvements within the subdivision, but shall constitute approval of layout and general engineering proposals and plans.
8.	Before submitting the final plat to the Commission for approval, the subdivider shall furnish all plans and information required by this chapter and necessary for the detailed engineering consideration for the improvements required and obtain the approval of the City Engineer, which shall be endorsed thereon.
9.	For final plat approval, the subdivider shall submit to the Commission:
A.	Nine (9) copies of the final plat. 
B.	A performance bond as required and approved by the City.
C.	One copy of the certified approved plans, profiles, cross sections and specifications.
D.	A certificate from the City that the final plat is substantially in accord with the preliminary plan as approved by the Commission.
10.	When the final plat has been passed upon by the Commission, nine (9) copies of the final plat, and the performance bond, shall be transmitted to the Council, together with a certificate showing the action of the Commission.
11.	When the final plat has been approved by the Council, the performance bond accepted and all nine (9) copies duly certified, six (6) copies shall be delivered to the Commission, one copy to the City Engineer and one to the Clerk for their respective files, and one to the subdivider for filing with the County Recorder.  If said Council disapproves plat, such disapproval shall point out in writing wherein said proposed plat is objectionable.
12.	The passage of the resolution accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting area shown on the final plat, but the owner shall cause such plat to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Monona County, Iowa, and shall file satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the Clerk before the City shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect.  Approval by the Council of the final plat or of a final development plan subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the subdivision of land shall be null and void if the plat or final development plan is not recorded within thirty (30) days after the date of such approval, unless application for an extension of time is made to the Council, in writing, during said 30-day period and said application is approved.
13.	The State requires certain certificates be entered of record together with the certified plat.
14.	Upon receipt of the duly certified copies of the final plat by the Commission, the Commission will transmit copies of the plat, upon which have been placed the official house numbers as determined by the City, to the subdivider, Onawa Municipal Electric, or its successor, and the telephone company.
15.	Receipt of the duly certified final plat by the subdivider is authorization that such subdivider may proceed with the installation and construction of the required improvements.
16.	The Council will return the performance bond to the subdivider upon certification by the City of satisfactory completion of the installation and construction of the required improvements and acceptance of the required improvements by the Council.  Prior to certification by the City Engineer, the subdivider shall file with the City plans, profiles and cross sections of the required improvements as they have been built on reproducible mylar.
170.06	DRAWING, SCALE AND CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.  The preliminary plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') or less and shall be plainly marked “Preliminary Plan.”  The preliminary plan is not intended to serve as a record plat.  Its purpose is to show on a map all facts needed to enable the Commission to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest.  The subdivider, owner or a representative may contact the office of the Commission in advance of the preliminary plan in order to discuss the proposed subdivision and in order to obtain information as to the requirements necessary for approval of the plan.  The plan shall show:
1.	The proposed name of the subdivision and, if different, the title under which the subdivision is to be recorded.
2.	Name and address of the owner and the name, address and profession of the person preparing the plan.
3.	The date, scale, and north point and a key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development.
4.	The legal description of the area being platted.
5.	The boundary line (accurate in scale and indicated by a heavy line), the dimensions and location of the property to be platted and the location of section lines.  Contour lines with intervals of not more than five (5) feet or adequate to show drainage pattern.
6.	The names and location of adjacent subdivisions and the names of record owners and locations of adjoining parcels of unplatted land.  
7.	The location of property lines, streets and alleys, easements, buildings, utilities, watercourses, tree masses, and other right-of-ways or existing features affecting the plan.
8.	The zoning classification and proposed use for the area being platted.
9.	The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots.
10.	The layout of all existing and proposed building lines and easements.
11.	The location, width and dimensions of all streets, alleys and grounds proposed to be dedicated for public use.
12.	Proposed names for all streets in the area being platted.
13.	Written and signed statements explaining how and when the subdivider proposes to provide and install all required sewers or other disposal of sanitary wastes, water pavement, sidewalks and drainage structures.
14.	Written and signed statements of the appropriate officials of the availability of gas, electricity and water to the proposed subdivision.
15.	A title opinion from an attorney showing that the fee title to the subdivision land is in the owner’s name as shown on the plat and showing any encumbrances that may exist against said land.
16.	A percolation test in the event where public sewer cannot reasonably serve a plat.  The test shall show results of soil percolation tests made by the subdivider or engineer preparing the plan.  Such tests shall be made in accordance with the specifications approved by the City Engineer.
17.	Any restriction proposed to be included in the owner’s declaration of plat. 
170.07	DRAWING, SCALE AND CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT.  The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') or less as approved by the City Engineer and in ink on tracing cloth.  The plat shall show:
1.	The title under which the subdivision is to be recorded.
2.	The name or names of the owners and subdividers.
3.	The date, scale and northpoint, and a key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision.
4.	The legal description of the area being platted.
5.	Accurate distances and bearings of all boundary lines of the subdivision including all sections, U.S. Survey and Congressional township lines.
6.	Centerlines of all proposed and adjoining streets with their right-of-way widths and names.
7.	Lines of all lots with a simple method of numbering to identify all lots and blocks.
8.	All building lines and all easements provided for public service together with their dimensions and any limitations of the easements.
9.	All dimensions necessary for accurate location of the boundaries of the site to be developed and of all streets, lots, easements and dedicated areas.  These dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.
10.	All radii, arcs, points of tangency, central angles and lengths of curves.
11.	Certification by a registered land surveyor that the final plat as shown is a correct representation of the survey as made.
12.	All survey monuments and benchmarks, together with their description.
13.	Private restrictive covenants and their period of existence. 
14.	The accurate outline, dimensions and purposes of all property which is offered for dedication or is to be reserved for acquisition for public use or is to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision.
15.	A deed to the City, properly executed, for all streets intended as public streets, and for any other property intended for public use.
16.	The following certificates:
A.	A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds.  The statement by the proprietors may also include a dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designated for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if the dedication is approved by the Council.
B.	A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds.  An affidavit and bond as provided for in Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the mortgage or lienholder.  When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public.
C.	A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa. 
D.	A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
170.08	IMPROVEMENT PLANS, PROFILES, CROSS SECTIONS.  The subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer the following plans, profiles and cross sections, drawn to a horizontal scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') or less and a vertical scale of one inch to twenty feet (1" = 20') or less, and specifications for the construction of the improvements for the subdivision as required in this regulation; all elevations shall be referred to mean sea level:
1.	The plan and profiles of each street with tentative grades and street intersection elevation:
2.	The cross sections of proposed streets showing the width of roadways, present and proposed grade lines and location and size of utility mains.  The cross sections shall be taken and platted at intervals of not more than 100 feet along the centerline unless otherwise required by the City Engineer, and shall extend out to the sides to that point where the proposed grade intersects the existing grade.  In no case shall these cross sections be extended less than the full width of the right-of-way.  
3.	The plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers and storm water sewers with grades and pipe sizes indicated, and a plan of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants.
4.	Standard specifications for the required improvements.  Standard specifications approved by the City Engineer may be used.
The standards and details of design herein contained are intended only as minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and layout of a subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances.  However, in the design and development of a plat, the subdivider shall use standards consistent with the site conditions so as to assure economical, pleasant and durable neighborhood.
170.09	STREETS.
1.	Continuation of Existing Streets.  Proposed streets shall provide for continuation or completion of any existing streets (constructed or recorded) in adjoining property, at equal or greater width, but not less than 80 feet in width, and in similar alignment, unless the Commission recommends variations.
2.	Circulation.  The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within the subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets, thoroughfares or unsubdivided land as may be required by the Commission.  In a case where a street will eventually be extended beyond the plat, but is temporarily dead-ended, an interim turnaround may be required.
3.	Location, Width of Street and Alleys.
A.	The minimum width of a minor street shall be 80 feet.  Where streets adjoin unsubdivided property, a half street at least 40 feet in width shall be dedicated and whenever subdivided property adjoins a half street the remainder of the street shall be dedicated.  No homes shall be constructed on half streets.
B.	Alleys need not be provided in a residential block.  Alleys are required in the rear of all business lots and shall be at least 20 feet wide.
4.	Width of Roadways.  
A.	The minimum roadway widths for streets shall be 25 feet, and 31 feet for a major thoroughfare, except that streets serving lots of one acre or larger may, with approval of the Council, be constructed with a minimum roadway width of 20 feet, when such roadway is a private road.
B.	The minimum roadway width for alleys shall be 20 feet.
5.	Major Thoroughfares.  When a new subdivision, except where justified by limiting conditions, involves frontage on a heavy traffic way, limited access way, freeway or parkway, the street layout shall provide motor access to such frontage by one of the following means:
A.	A parallel street supplying frontage for lots backing onto the traffic way.
B.	A series of cul-de-sacs or short loops entered from and planned at right angles to such a parallel street, with their terminal lots backing onto the highway.
C.	An access drive separated by a planting strip from the highway to which a motor access from the drive is provided at points suitably spaced.
D.	A service drive or alley at the rear of lots.
Where any one of the above mentioned arrangements is used, deed covenants or other means should prevent any private residential driveways from having direct access to the traffic way.
6.	Cul-de-Sac and Dead-End Streets.  Except in cases where unusual topographic conditions may make it advisable to modify these provisions, the following shall apply to cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets:
A.	Maximum length of 500 feet.
B.	Vehicular turnaround at the closed end of a street having a minimum radius of 50 feet and a roadway having a minimum radius of 40 feet to the exterior curb line.
C.	In the case of temporarily dead-ended streets, which are stub streets designed to provide future connection with unsubdivided areas adjoining, the Commission may require a temporary easement for a turnaround of the nature indicated above, or an appropriate area for a back-around, or a roadway at least 27 feet in width of not excessive length to connect the temporary dead-end with an existing street.
7.	Street Grades.
A.	Streets shall be so arranged that grades shall not exceed six percent for major thoroughfares and ten percent for minor streets.  The Commission may permit variation from these grades where it deems modification advisable to adjust to topographic situations.  
B.	Gutter grades on paved gutters shall not be less than one-tenth percent (0.1%).
C.	All changes in street grades shall be connected by a vertical curve of reasonable length to assure adequate visibility.
D.	In approaching intersections, there should be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade generally not exceeding four percent and for a distance of generally not less than 100 feet from the nearest line of the intersecting street.  The grade within the intersection should be as level as possible, permitting proper drainage.
E.	All streets and alleys within the platted area which are dedicated for public use shall be brought to the grade approved by the Council and after receiving the report and recommendations of the City Engineer. 
8.	Intersections.
A.	Street intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least 25 feet. 
B.	Streets should be laid out to intersect at right angles, and may be curved approaching the intersection in order to bring this about; no street shall intersect any other street at an angle of less than 60 degrees.
C.	The design of the intersection should be such that a clear sight distance will be maintained for 50 feet at the roadway centerline, with no obstruction to sight within the triangle formed by these points.
9.	Street Names and House Numbers.  Streets that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the name of the existing streets.  The proposed names of new streets shall be shown on the final plat and such names shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street names.  Street names shall be decided in accordance with Chapter 139 of this Code of Ordinances.  The City Engineer shall determine house numbers.
10.	Deed.  A deed to the City shall be given for all streets before the same will be accepted for City maintenance.
11.	Railroads.  If a railroad is involved, the subdivision plat should:
A.	Be so arranged as to permit, where necessary, future grade separations at highway crossings of the railroad.
B.	Border the railroad with a parallel street at a sufficient distance from it to permit deep lots to go back onto the railroad; or form a buffer for park, commercial or industrial use.
C.	Provide cul-de-sac at right angles to the railroad so as to permit lots to back thereonto.
170.10	BLOCKS.  
1.	Length.  No block shall be longer than 1,320 feet between street lines.  An easement near the center of the block not less than 10 feet wide for a crosswalk may be required on blocks that are over 750 feet in length.  
2.	Width.  The width of blocks, except for special reasons, shall not be less than 200 feet between street lines and not more than 350 feet.
3.	Block Corner Radius.  At street intersections, block corners shall be rounded with a radius of not less than 25 feet in residential districts, 25 feet in all remaining districts; or 50 feet to 100 feet depending on street width and traffic along major thoroughfares, unless at any one intersection a curve radius has been previously established, then such radius shall be used as standard.
170.11	LOTS.
1.	The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and the character of surrounding development.
2.	The width and area of all lots shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which located.  However, no residential lot shall be less than 70 feet in width at the building line, or less than 100 feet in depth, or less than 8,500 square feet in area.  The requirements listed in this section are intended as written to provide a developer with flexibility in determining lot size, to provide comfortable yard and green space for residents, and no such lot shall be less than 8,500 square feet.
3.	For the purpose of complying with minimum health standards, the following minimum lot sizes shall be observed:
A.	Lots which cannot be reasonably served by an existing public sanitary sewer system and public water mains shall meet regulations as defined in the Monona County Zoning and Sanitation code.
B.	Lots, which are not within a reasonable distance of a public sanitary sewer system but are connected to a public water supply main shall have a minimum width of 80 feet and an area of 10,000 square feet, except where other lot sizes are specified by the Zoning Ordinance.
4.	Corner lots shall have extra width of 75 feet in order to permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets.
5.	Double frontage lots other than corner lots shall be prohibited except where such lots back onto a major street or highway or except in the case of large commercial or industrial lots.
6.	In all lots so far as possible, the side lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines except where a variation of this rule will provide a better street and lot layout.
170.12	CHARACTER OF DEVELOPMENT.  The Commission and Council may require that certain minimum regulations regarding type and character of development be incorporated in the owner’s declaration of plat.  Such regulations shall be intended to protect the character and development of the platted subdivision, as well as that of the surrounding development.
170.13	UTILITY EASEMENTS REQUIRED.  Where alleys are not provided in the plat, easements of not less than ten feet in width shall be granted to the City by the owner on each side of all rear and where necessary side lot lines for public utility easements.  Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots when necessary for the extensions of main sewers or other utilities.  No buildings or structures will be permitted on easements.
170.14	INSTALLATION, CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.  The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements required by this chapter.  All required improvements shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of the Council and to its satisfaction.
170.15	GRADING.  All streets and alleys within the platted area which are dedicated for public use shall be brought to the grade approved by the Council after receiving the report and recommendations of the City Engineer.
170.16	CURB AND GUTTER.  Curb and gutter shall be installed on all roadways in the plat being dedicated for public use and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete in accordance with designs and specifications approved by the Council and at grades established by the City Engineer.
170.17	SURFACING.  All roadways dedicated for public use shall be surfaced from curb to curb.  Surfacing shall be asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete in accordance with designs and specifications approved by the Council, and at grades established by the City Engineer.
170.18	SIDEWALKS.  Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets being dedicated for public use.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width and shall be constructed of Portland concrete cement in accordance with designs and specifications approved by the Council, and at grades established by the City Engineer.  
170.19	WATER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.  Where a public water main is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such water main and provide a water connection for each lot in accordance with standards, procedures and supervision of the City and the Department of Natural Resources.  In addition to providing a water connection for each lot, the subdivider is also required to run the water main to the boundaries of the subdivision unless this requirement is waived by the Council.
170.20	SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
1.	Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect or provide for the connection with such sanitary sewer, and shall provide within the subdivision the sanitary sewer system required to make the sewer accessible to each lot in the subdivision.  In addition to making the sanitary sewer accessible to each lot the subdivider is also required to run the sanitary sewer line to the boundaries of the subdivision unless this requirement is waived by the Council.  Sewer systems shall be approved by the Council and the Iowa Department of Natural Resources and the construction subject to the supervision of the City Engineer. 
2.	Where sanitary sewers are not available, other facilities, as approved by the Council and Board of Health of the State must be provided for the adequate disposal of sanitary wastes.
3.	Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of storm water subject to the approval of the Council and to the supervision of the City Engineer. 
170.21	ELECTRIC AND GAS.  Electric and gas connections will be provided for each lot in accordance with standards and procedures of the City.  Electricity and gas will be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision by the subdivider unless this requirement is waived by the Council.
170.22	STREET LIGHTS.  All street lights and fixtures will be installed in accordance with standards and procedures of the City.  
170.23	SEEDING.  Developers of any subdivision for which the final plat is approved by the Council shall be required to seed any dedicated street right-of-way and all undeveloped lots within thirty (30) days of the street and public utilities being installed.  Said seeding is to be rye or brome grasses or oats or other type of seed as approved by the City Engineer. 
170.24	MANDATORY RESIDENT INSPECTION BY THE CITY ENGINEER OR AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE.
1.	The City Engineer or authorized representative shall provide resident inspection in behalf of the subdivider, the cost of such inspection to be paid by the subdivider to the City prior to final acceptance of required improvements.
2.	“Resident inspection” means either the City Engineer or a full-time construction inspector, appointed by the City Engineer, who shall be on site and perform inspection duties during, but not limited to, the following stages of construction:
A.	The construction of all underground or concealed work, including water mains, sanitary and storm sewers and water and sanitary sewer service lines.
B.	Installation and placement of all concrete pavement for streets and sidewalks.
C.	Performance of all quality control tests, including pressure and bacterial tests for water mains, infiltration/exfiltration test for sanitary sewer lines and manholes, lamping and/or closed circuit television tests for sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer lines, utility trench compaction tests, embankment and fill compaction tests, pavement subgrade compaction tests, concrete strength tests and such other tests as be deemed necessary by the City Engineer or authorized representative.
3.	The foregoing mandatory resident inspection provisions shall not in any way limit the responsibility of the subdivider for all construction, and the subdivider shall otherwise be fully responsible for the staking and location of required improvements which are the subject of inspection.
 

