TITLE I ADMINISTRATION
1
CHAPTER ONE - CITY CHAPTER
CHAPTER TWO - CITY COUNCIL
CHAPTER THREE - ELECTIONS
CHAPTER FOUR - FIRE DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER FIVE - OFFICERS
CHAPTER SIX - PARK & RECREATION COMMISSION
CHAPTER SEVEN - PUBLIC LIBRARY
CHAPTER EIGHT - AIRPORT AUTHORITY
CHAPTER NINE - INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CHAPTER TEN - AMORTIZATION PERIOD – DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENTS
CHAPTER ELEVEN - URBAN REVITALIZATION PLAN
CHAPTER TWELVE - URBAN RENEWAL AREA
CHAPTER THIRTEEN - CODE ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER FOURTEEN - CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER FIFTEEN - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
CHAPTER SIXTEEN - INTERNATIONAL FRIENDSHIP COMMISSION
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN - TREE COMMISSION
CHAPTER 1 CITY CHARTER
2
1.101 PURPOSE
1.102 CHARTER
1.103 FORM OF GOVERNMENT
1.104 POWERS AND DUTIES
1.105 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL
1.106 TERM OF MAYOR
1.107 COPIES ON FILE
1.101 PURPOSE. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide
for a charter embodying the form of government existing on July 19,
1973.
1.102 CHARTER. This ordinance may be cited as the Charter of
the City of Winterset, Iowa.
1.103 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City
of Winterset, Iowa, is the Mayor-Council form of government.
1.104 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Council and Mayor and other City
officers have such powers and shall perform such duties as are
authorized or required by state law and by the ordinances,
resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City of Winterset, Iowa.
1.105 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council shall consist
of five members, three members of which shall be elected at large,
one Council member elected from the North Ward and one Council
Member elected from the South Ward. Commencing on January 2, 1984,
the two Council Members elected at large, who receive the highest
number of votes in the 1983 regular City election, will serve a
four-year term. The other Council Member elected at large in the
1983 regular City election will serve a two-year term commencing
January 2, 1984. The Council Member elected from the North Ward in
the 1983 regular City election will serve a four-year term
commencing January 2, 1984. The Council Member elected from the
South Ward in the 1983 regular City election shall serve a two-year
term commencing January 2, 1984. Terms commencing on and after
January 2, 1986 shall be four-years.
1.106 TERM OF MAYOR. The Mayor is elected for a term of two
years.
1.107 COPIES ON FILE. The City Clerk shall keep an official
copy of this Charter on file with the official records of the City
Clerk, shall immediately file a copy with the Secretary of State
and shall keep copies of the Charter available at the City Clerk’s
office for public inspection.
CHAPTER 2 CITY COUNCIL
3
1.201 REGULAR MEETINGS
1.202 SPECIAL MEETINGS
1.203 ABSENT MEMBERS
1.204 COMPENSATION
1.201 REGULAR MEETINGS. The regular meeting of the City
Council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month at
the hour of 7:00 P.M. in the Council chambers in the City Hall. If
the City Hall cannot be used, the regular meetings may be held at
any place mentioned in the notice of meeting.
1.202 SPECIAL MEETINGS. The Mayor or any three members of the
City Council may call a special meeting of the Council at any time.
Notice thereof shall be given by regular mail to each Council Member
at least two days prior to the date of the meeting.
1.203 ABSENT MEMBERS. Any Member of the City Council shall
notify the Mayor or City Clerk if the Member will be absent from the
Council meeting.
1.204 COMPENSATION. Each council member shall receive as
compensation the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00) for each regular or
special meeting of the council attended. In addition, when a
council member attends a meeting of an agency, board or commission
as the appointed representative of the City, the member shall
receive sixty dollars ($60.00) for each such meeting attended.
CHAPTER 3 ELECTIONS
4
1.301 QUALIFIED VOTER
1.302 REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTION
1.303 COUNCIL MEMBERS
1.304 MAYOR
1.305 TERMS
1.306 MAYOR APPOINTMENT
1.307 COUNCIL APPOINTMENTS
1.308 NORTH WARD
1.309 SOUTH WARD
1.310 NORTH WARD PRECINCTS
1.311 SOUTH WARD PRECINCTS
1.312 RUNOFF ELECTIONS
1.301 QUALIFIED VOTER. Any person residing in the City of
Winterset, Iowa at the time of any municipal election for the City
of Winterset who would be a qualified voter under the laws of the
State of Iowa shall be deemed a qualified voter of this City.
1.302 REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTION. The regular municipal
election of the City shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday of November, in each odd numbered year, commencing in
the year 1973.
1.303 COUNCIL MEMBER. The qualified electors of the City ward
having the Council Member whose term expires that year shall at the
regular municipal election elect by a majority of votes one Council
Member for that ward. The elected Council Member shall at the time
of election be a resident of the ward, a qualified elector therein,
and shall be an elector and a resident in such ward during the term
of office. The qualified electors of the City shall also at the
regular municipal election elect, by a majority of votes, Council
Members at large whose term expires that year. The elected Council
Members shall be a resident and qualified elector of the City at the
time of election and during their term of office.
1.304 MAYOR. The qualified electors of the City shall at the
regular municipal election elect a Mayor by majority of votes. The
Mayor shall be a resident and qualified elector of the City at the
time of election and during the term of office.
1.305 TERMS. The term of the Mayor shall be two years. The
term of the Council Members shall be four years. Elective officers
shall elected to succeed officers whose terms expire at noon of the
second secular day in January following the regular municipal
election; and, all officers shall hold office until their successors
are elected and qualified.
CHAPTER 3 ELECTIONS
5
1.306 MAYOR APPOINTMENT. The Mayor shall appoint the Chief of
Police.
1.307 COUNCIL APPOINTMENTS. The City Council shall appoint a
City Administrator and a City Attorney, who shall qualify and give
bond as provided by the laws of the State of Iowa and the ordinances
of the City.
CHAPTER 3 ELECTIONS
6
1.308 NORTH WARD ALSO KNOWN AS FIRST PRECINCT. The North Ward
is hereby established to include all that portion of the City lying
North of a line described as commencing on Court Avenue at the East
city limits, thence west along Court Avenue, following the city
limits line along and north of Court Avenue, to the intersection of
Court Avenue and Tenth Street, thence north along Tenth Street to
the intersection of Tenth Street and Green Street, thence west along
Green Street to the intersection of Green Street and Eighth Avenue,
thence south along Eighth Avenue to the intersection of Eighth
Avenue and Jefferson Street, thence west along Jefferson Street to
the intersection of Jefferson Street and Sixteenth Avenue, thence
South along Sixteenth Avenue to the city limits line, thence
following the city limits line to the south, west and south to
Summit Street.
1.309 SOUTH WARD ALSO KNOWN AS SECOND PRECINCT. The South
Ward is hereby established to include all that portion of the City
lying South of a line described as commencing on Court Avenue at the
East city limits, thence west along Court Avenue, following the city
limits line along and north of Court Avenue, to the intersection of
Court Avenue and Tenth Street, thence north along Tenth Street to
the intersection of Tenth Street and Green Street, thence west along
Green Street to the intersection of Green Street and Eighth Avenue,
thence south along Eighth Avenue to the intersection of Eighth
Avenue and Jefferson Street, thence west along Jefferson Street to
the intersection of Jefferson Street and Sixteenth Avenue, thence
South along Sixteenth Avenue to the city limits line, thence
following the city limits line to the south, west and south to
Summit Street.
1.310 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION. In lieu of nomination for the
City elective offices by primary election under the provisions of
Iowa Code Section 376.6 or by runoff election under the provisions
of Iowa Code Section 376.9, all candidates for elective City offices
shall be nominated by Petition as provided by Iowa Code Chapter 45,
as that Code Chapter now or hereafter provides.
CHAPTER 3 ELECTIONS
7
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 4 FIRE DEPARTMENT
8
1.401 Establishment and purpose
1.402 Fire Chief
1.403 Fire Chief duties
1.404 Firefighters
1.405 Firefighter duties
1.406 Worker's compensation and hospitalization insurance
1.407 Liability insurance
1.408 Fires and other emergencies outside city limits
1.409 Winterset Fire Fighters Association
1.401 Establishment purpose and name. A fire department is
hereby established to prevent and extinguish fire and to protect
lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and
fire safety, and to respond to other emergencies as enumerated in
the department’s standard operating guidelines.
The name of the department shall be the Winterset Fire Department.
1.402 Fire Chief. The City Council may authorize the
department personnel to nominate by vote a qualified candidate for
fire chief. The City Council shall appoint the Fire Chief for a term
of two (2) years or to fill a vacancy.
The City Council may remove, suspend or demote the Fire Chief for
neglect of duty, disobedience, misconduct or failure to properly
perform the duties of Fire Chief by written order setting out the
reasons for removal which shall be filed with the City
Administrator, and shall, upon request in writing filed by the Fire
Chief with the City Administrator, hold a hearing on the proposed
action.
CHAPTER 4 FIRE DEPARTMENT
9
1.403 Fire Chief duties. The Fire Chief shall manage the fire
department. The Chief shall assist the City Administrator in
preparing an annual budget for approval by the City Council. The
Chief shall command all operations of the Department, ensure
training, and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of
all vehicles and equipment of the department. Subject to Council
approval, the Fire Chief shall establish and maintain departmental
personnel policies and standard operating guidelines to carry out
the requirements of the department. The Fire Chief shall provide
all personnel with a written copy of these policies and procedures.
The Fire Chief shall appoint personnel, fill vacancies among them,
and may discharge them in accordance with the department’s personnel
policies and procedures. The Fire Chief shall keep a record of the
names, ages and residences of personnel and be responsible for their
training and supervision, and shall maintain attendance records for
activities. The Fire Chief shall investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of each fire by which property has been destroyed or
damaged or which results in bodily injury or death to any person.
Whenever death, serious bodily injury or property damage in excess
of one million dollars ($1,000,000) has occurred as a result of
fire, or if arson is suspected, the Fire Chief shall notify the
state fire marshal’s division immediately. The Fire Chief shall
report other fire incidents within ten (10) days following each
month to the state fire marshal in accordance with law. The Chief
has the authority to enter and inspect any building or premises in
the performance of duties and shall make written orders to correct
any conditions that are likely to cause fire or endanger other
buildings and property.
CHAPTER 4 FIRE DEPARTMENT
10
1.404 Firefighters. The Fire Chief shall appoint and dismiss
firefighters in accordance with the department’s personnel
procedures. Volunteer personnel of the department shall be employees
of the City of Winterset. Prior to appointment and every 2 years
thereafter all personnel must pass a medical physical examination
compensated by the City.
The Department, in accordance with the department’s personnel
procedures, may establish and create officer positions in addition
to the position of Chief. The officers of the Department, other than
the Chief, shall be elected by a vote of the Fire Department
personnel.
1.405 Firefighter duties. When called by the Chief, personnel
shall report for duty immediately in the manner directed by the
Chief. They shall be subject to call out at any time. They shall
obey strictly the commands of others who have been appointed by the
Chief to be in command temporarily. Personnel shall report for
training as ordered by the Chief and as required by State of Iowa
Minimum Training Standards.
1.406 Worker's compensation insurance. The City shall
contract to insure against liability for worker's compensation and
against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters. All department
personnel shall be covered by the insurance contract.
1.407 Liability insurance. The City shall contract to insure
against liability of the personnel of the Department for injuries,
death, or property damage arising out of and resulting from the
performance of departmental duties.
1.408 Fires and other emergencies outside city limits. The
Department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside
the city limits in accordance with the Department’s standard
operating guidelines, contracts, mutual aid and other agreements.
1.409 Firefighters' association. The City recognizes
the Winterset Fire Fighters Association, Inc., a nonprofit
corporation established by the firefighters as a partner in
promoting the welfare of firefighters, fire prevention activities,
the enhancement of emergency response capabilities for the city and
surrounding areas and the performance of civic, social and fund
raising activities as specified in the corporation’s articles of
incorporation.
CHAPTER 4 FIRE DEPARTMENT
11
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 5 OFFICERS
12
1.501 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
1.502 ATTORNEY
1.503 STREET COMMISSIONER
1.504 SALARIES
1.505 MAYOR’S SALARY
1.506 BONDS
1.507 EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS
1.508 REMOVAL OF APPOINTEES
1.501 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
A. Appointment. The City Administrator is to be
appointed by a majority vote of the entire Council. The person so
appointed shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council and
shall be subject to removal by a majority vote of the entire
Council.
B. Compensation. The City Administrator shall receive
compensation, as the Council shall fix from time to time by
resolution.
C. Duties. The duties of the City Administrator shall be as
follows:
1. Shall be directly responsible to the Mayor and City
Council for the Administration of municipal affairs. All
departmental administration requiring attention of the
Council shall be brought before the Council by the
Administrator. All Council involvement in departmental
administration initiated by the Council must be
coordinated through the Administrator.
2. Supervise and direct the official duties of various
officials, departments and employees of the City,
specifically including the street, sewer, building &
zoning inspection, and administration departments; and
shall supervise and direct the police department as the
Mayor may at any time delegate in writing.
3. Responsible for the administration of all ordinances,
resolutions and Council policies.
4. Supervise all accounting practices and procedures.
5. Serve as City Clerk and City Treasurer and perform all
the duties of these positions as required by State Law or
ordinance. These duties shall include the following:
a) Oaths. Administer oaths of office to any City officer
who is required to give an oath.
b) Secretary. Attend all meetings of the Council and its
committees; record and preserve a correct record of
the proceedings of such meetings and publish the
Council proceedings immediately after each regular or
special meeting, in the manner required by law;
CHAPTER 5 OFFICERS
13
publish all ordinances immediately after passage by
Council and approval by the Mayor or as otherwise
provided by law; keep an ordinance book,
authenticating each ordinance and certifying as to the
time and manner of passage, approval, and publication;
and keep a resolution book, properly indexed. All
minute, ordinance and resolution books are permanent
records.
c) Custody of funds of the treasury.
1. Immediately upon receipt of moneys to be held in the custody
of the treasurer and belonging to the municipality deposit the
same in banks selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding
the monetary limits authorized by the Council.
2. File the Council’s depository declaration with the County and
State Treasurer.
3. Reconcile the bank statements with the City books and certify
monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of
each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
4. Invest all idle funds and other funds as directed by the
Council in accordance with law and make reports to the State
Auditor as required by law.
5. Act as treasurer of all Boards & Commissions.
d) Debt Service.
1. Sign all evidence of indebtedness, coupons, or certificates as
required by law of a City Clerk or Treasurer.
2. Keep a register of all bonds and warrants outstanding and
record all payments made of interest and principal thereon.
e) Records.
1. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
records or documents in which the municipality is a party in
interest unless otherwise specifically directed by law or
ordinance. File and preserve all receipts, vouchers, and
other documents kept, or that may be required to be kept,
necessary to prove the validity of every transaction and the
identity of every person having any beneficial relation
thereto. Upon order of the Council, destroy all vouchers and
minor records when over ten years old, except the permanent
records specified for retention by law.
2. Copies of records. Furnish upon request to any municipal
officer a copy of any record, paper or public document under
the Clerk’s control when it may be necessary to such officer
in the discharge of his duty, and furnish a copy to any
citizen when requested upon payment of the allowable charge
set in the law or resolution of Council.
f) Seal. Affix the seal of the corporation to those
public documents or instruments which by law or
CHAPTER 5 OFFICERS
14
ordinance are required to be attested by the affixing
of the seal, or as directed by the Mayor or Council.
g) Petitions and Communications. Keep and file by number
and date all communications and petitions directed to
the Council or to the City generally. He shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken on the
matters presented in such communications and
petitions.
h) Licenses and Permits. Issue all licenses and permits
authorized by the Council, and keep a record thereof
which shall show the date, number, and to who issued,
and for what purpose.
i) Appointments. Keep a record of all appointments;
notify all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council
to office of such appointments and the time of taking
office.
j) Elections. Perform all duties required of clerks by
the election laws of the State, receive and forward
nomination petitions, certify the calling of elections
and perform those duties that the County commissioner
of elections might delegate for the conduct of City
elections.
6. Prepare the City’s annual operating budget.
7. Supervise and coordinate the City’s administrative
policies and procedures, including personnel policies and
purchasing procedures.
8. Continuous study and review of the City’s operating
procedures, organizations and facilities and recommending
such fiscal and other policies to the Council as may be
necessary to improve the City government.
9. Inform the Mayor and Council of the progress of programs
and the status of City policies.
10. Advise the Mayor and Council of the financial condition
and future needs of the City and make such
recommendations as may be deemed advisable.
11. Attend all Council meetings unless excused by the Mayor.
12. Coordinate the preparation of ordinances, resolutions,
and contracts with the City Attorney and consult with
the City Attorney on legal matters.
CHAPTER 5 OFFICERS
15
13. Supervise and coordinate the construction, improvement,
repair, maintenance and management of all City property,
capital improvements and undertakings of the City,
including the making and preservation of all surveys,
maps, plan drawings, specifications and cost estimates
for capital improvements, except those properties under
control of the Utility Board of Trustees.
14. Employ and remove City employees for all City
departments, except the Police, Park & Recreation,
Utility Board and Public Library Departments, pursuant
to the hiring and termination criteria approved by the
City Council. These duties shall include the Police
Department whenever the Mayor has delegated the
supervision and direction of the Police Department to
the City Administrator pursuant to subparagraph 2
hereof.
15. Supervise the accounting, collection and administrative
services of the Board of Trustees of the Electric Power
Plant and Waterworks and to act as the Council’s liaison
with the Board of Trustees.
16. Cooperate and advise in the management of any
administrative agency, including the Park & Recreation
Board and the Library Board of Trustees, and to act as
the Council’s liaison with these administrative
agencies.
17. Study possible joint arrangements with municipal boards
and commissions, make recommendations concerning such
arrangements as mutually acceptable, and coordinate
these arrangements as agreed upon.
18. Act on behalf of the City in the exercise and execution
of all policies and programs in which the City is
involved on a joint basis with any other governmental
subdivision, including any subdivision of the state or
federal government.
19. Assist the Mayor in any of his or her duties as
requested by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.
20. Perform such other duties as may be directed by the
Council.
CHAPTER 5 OFFICERS
16
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 5 OFFICERS
17
1.502 ATTORNEY The City shall have a position of City Attorney
to provide legal representation to the City in all matters
requiring such representation or as directed by the City Council,
which duties shall include, but not limited to, the duty to defend
and prosecute all suits which the City is a party; to prosecute all
appeals where the interest of the City requires such appeals; to
prosecute suits for the violations of any ordinance when so
requested to do so by the Mayor, City Council or any Committee or
Board responsible for the oversight of such ordinance; to give
advice to the City Council or to any Committee or Board of the City
on legal questions relating to the affairs of the City; to draw all
contracts to which the City is a party; and, execute such documents
legal proceedings for any cause in any Court involving the City.
The person appointed as City Attorney shall be currently admitted
to the practice of law in the courts of the State of Iowa as
provided by law and shall be a member in good standing with the
Iowa State Bar Association. A person is not qualified for City
Attorney while the person’s license to practice law in this or any
other state is suspended or revoked. The City Attorney shall be a
part-time position which the person serving as the City Attorney
may engage in the private practice of law. The City Council shall
appoint the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Council. The compensation of the City
Attorney shall be established by the City Council.
1.503 STREET COMMISSIONER. The Street Commissioner shall
perform all duties required by the City Administrator and shall make
all ordinary repairs on the streets and see that the same are kept
in a safe condition for public travel.
1.504 SALARIES. The compensation of the City Administrator,
Chief of Police and Street Commissioner shall be determined by
resolution and not by ordinance.
1.505 MAYOR’S SALARY. The Mayor shall receive as compensation
a salary of Four Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($4,500.00) per annum
payable as other usual payments for salaried employees. In
addition, the Mayor may receive an expense allowance in an amount
determined by the Council
CHAPTER 5 OFFICERS
18
1.506 BONDS. All bonds required by any ordinance of the City
shall be substantially in the form required by the statues of the
State of Iowa. The following officers of the City, before assuming
the duties of their respective offices, shall give bond as provided
by the laws of the State of Iowa in the amounts as follows:
The Mayor in the penal sum of $2,500.00;
The City Administrator in the penal sum of $15,000.00;
1.507 EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS. The Mayor shall sign on behalf
of the City all contracts made between the City and another party in
all cases where contracts are authorized and directed by the
Council, except cases where some other person or committee is
authorized or directed so to do, and it shall be his/her duty to
enforce the faithful performance of all such contracts. In all
cases where contracts are executed, either by the Mayor, a committee
or other person authorized, it shall be the duty of the officer,
committee or person executing such contract on the part of the City,
to immediately file such contract with the City Administrator and
deliver to the other contracting party a copy thereof.
1.508. REMOVAL OF APPOINTEES.
a. All persons appointed to any City office
including any board or commission shall be subject to
removal as hereafter provided when any of the following
occurs:
i. The appointee fails to attend four (4)
consecutive meetings, whether regular or special,
of the Board or Commission to which appointment
has been made; or
ii. The appointee attends less than seventy (70)
percent of the regular or special meetings of the
Board or Commission held during any one (1)
calendar year.
b. Attendance at any meeting shall be determined by the
meeting minutes as recorded or approved by the board or
commission.
c. The Secretary or Chairman of each city board or
commission shall report to the City Administrator
whenever any appointee has failed to meet the minimum
attendance requirements of subparagraph a. above. The
City Administrator shall forward the report to the
officer or body making the appointment.
CHAPTER 5 OFFICERS
19
d. The officer or body making the appointment shall then
cause to be issued a written removal order giving the
reasons therefore and referring to this Code Section. A
copy of the removal order shall be filed with the City
Administrator. The removal order shall be mailed by
certified mail through the United States Postal Service
to the appointee at the appointee's last known address.
The removal shall be final unless the appointee, within
thirty (30) days of the date of mailing the removal
order, requests a hearing before the council on all
issues connected with the removal. The hearing request
shall be made in writing filed with the City
Administrator. The hearing shall be public unless the
appointee requests a closed hearing in conformance with
Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa. The hearing shall be
held within thirty (30) days of the date the request is
filed unless the appointee and council agree upon a later
date. After the hearing, the council may either reaffirm
or rescind the removal order. The Council action on the
appeal shall be deemed final unless the appointee, within
thirty (30) days of the date of the Council's action on
the removal, appeals the removal to the Iowa District
Court in the manner provided by law.
1.509 EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY. The following positions
within the City are hereby deemed to be essential employees
who must establish legal settlement within the County of
Madison in the State of Iowa commencing on or before the first
anniversary date of the first date of employment with the
City. The essential City employees are defined to be the City
Administrator, Assistant City Administrator, all sworn peace
officers of the City Police Department, and the employees
within the Street Department. The term “legal settlement”
shall mean having a continuous and permanent residency within
Madison County, Iowa.
CHAPTER 6 PARK & RECREATION BOARD
20
1.601 PARK & RECREATION BOARD CREATED
1.602 BOARD ORGANIZATION
1.603 DUTIES OF THE BOARD
1.604 REPORTS
1.605 RULES
1.606 PENALTIES
1.601 PARK & RECREATION BOARD CREATED. A Park & Recreation
Board is hereby created to advise the Council on the needed
facilities to provide open space such as parks, playgrounds and
community facilities for other forms of recreation. It shall also
plan and oversee City programs, and encourage other programs, for
the leisure time of the City’s residents of all ages.
1.602 BOARD ORGANIZATION. The Board shall consist of five (5)
members. The Board shall have at least three (3) members who reside
within the corporate limits of the City and two members who may
reside outside the corporate limits of the City, but shall reside
within the Winterset Community School District. Members shall serve
without compensation but may receive their actual expenses.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of vacancy and such
appointment shall be in the same manner as original appointments.
The Board shall select its Chairperson as soon as practicable each
calendar year. The board shall meet monthly
1.603 DUTIES OF THE BOARD. In addition to its duty to make a
plan for recreation and for the facilities for recreation and to
update and revise these plans as required, the Board shall have
authority over the properties and personnel devoted to Parks &
Recreation, subject to the limitation on expenditures for salaries
and supplies, contracts and capital outlays set forth in the annual
budget provided by the Council for Park & Recreation operations.
The Board shall cooperate with the City Administrator in the
allotment of time of City employees for the Park & Recreation
purposes. The Board shall cause to be ordered supplies by the
procedures established by the Council for all departments of the
City, and payments shall be made by the City Administrator on the
basis of invoices submitted and approved by the Board. The Board
shall have the authority to employ a Park & Recreation Director,
whose employment and salary shall be subject to, and conditioned
upon, the approval of the Council.
1.604 REPORTS. The Board shall make written reports to the
Council of its activities from time to time as it deems advisable or
upon the request of the Council. Its revenues and expenditures
shall be reported monthly by the City Administrator in the manner of
other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to
each Board Member and in the City Administrator’s report to the
Council.
CHAPTER 6 PARK & RECREATION BOARD
21
1.605 RULES. The Board shall have power to make rules and
regulations for the use of Park or other recreational facilities or
for the conduct of recreation programs, subject to the approval of
the rules and regulations by the Council. Such rules shall be
either posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to
provide adequate notice to the using public.
1.606 PENALTIES. Violation by any person of a Board rule
which has been approved by the Council may be cause for denial of
use of a facility or participation in a program, but such denial
which extends more than one (1) day may be appealed to the Board and
then to the Council. The hearing before the Council shall be in
accordance with the procedures adopted by the Council.
CHAPTER 6 PARK & RECREATION BOARD
22
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 6 PARK & RECREATION BOARD
23
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 7 PUBLIC LIBRARY
24
1.701 PURPOSE
1.702 PUBLIC LIBRARY
1.703 LIBRARY TRUSTEES
1.704 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES
1.705 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD
1.706 POWERS AND DUTIES
1.707 POWER TO CONTRACT WITH OTHERS FOR THE USE OF THE LIBRARY
1.708 NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY
1.709 LIBRARY ACCOUNT
1.710 ANNUAL REPORT
1.701 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for
the establishment of a Public Library for the City, and for the
creation and appointment of the City Library Board of Trustees and
to specify that Board’s powers and duties.
1.702 PUBLIC LIBRARY. There is hereby established a Public
Library for the City, to be known as “The Winterset Public Library”.
1.703 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the
Winterset Public Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
shall consist of seven members. All Board Members are to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
1.704 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES. The Board shall have at
least five (5) members who reside within the corporate limits of the
City and may have two (2) members who reside outside the corporate
limits of the City, but who shall reside within the boundaries of
the Winterset Community School district. All Members shall be at
least Nineteen (19) years of age.
1.705 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
a. Terms of Office. All appointments to the Board shall
be for six (6) years, except to fill vacancies. Each
term shall commence on July 1. Appointment shall be made
every two (2) years of one-third of the Board Members, as
nearly as possible, in order to stagger the terms.
b. Vacancies. The position of any trustee shall be
vacant if the Member no longer resides in the City or if
the Member is absent for six (6) consecutive regular
meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or
temporary absence from the City. Vacancies on the Board
shall be filled by the appointments made by the Mayor,
with the approval of the Council, and each newly
appointed trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for
which the appointed is made.
c. Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation
for their services.
CHAPTER 7 PUBLIC LIBRARY
25
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 7 PUBLIC LIBRARY
26
1.706 POWER AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the
following powers and duties:
a. To meet and elect from its Members a president,
secretary and such other officers as it deems to be
necessary. The City Administrator shall serve as the
Board Treasurer, but shall not be a Member of the Board.
b. To have charge, control and supervision of the
Public Library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms
containing the same.
c. To direct and control all the affairs of the
Library.
d. To employ a librarian and such assistants and other
employees as may be necessary for the proper management
of the Library, and to fix their compensation; provided,
however, that prior to such employees shall have been
fixed and approved by a majority of the Members of the
Board voting in favor thereof.
e. To remove by a two-thirds vote of the Board the
librarian to provide procedures for the removal of
assistants or employees for misdemeanors, incompetence or
inattention to duty, subject, however, to the provisions
of Chapter 70 of the Code of Iowa.
f. To select, or to authorize the librarian to select,
and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines,
periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other library
materials, furniture, fixtures, stationary and supplies
for the Library within the budgetary limit set by the
Board and the City Council.
g. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents
of the City and to fix charges therefore.
h. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with the ordinances and
other laws, for the care, use, government and management
of the Library and the business of the Board, fixing and
enforcing penalties for violations.
i. To control the expenditure of funds appropriated
for Library purposes by the Council and of moneys
available by gift or otherwise.
CHAPTER 7 PUBLIC LIBRARY
27
j. To accept gifts of real property or personal
property and devises or bequests, including trust funds;
to take the title to said property in the name of the
City; and, to expend the funds received by them for such
gifts for the improvement of the Library in accordance
with the approved budget.
k. To keep a record of its proceedings.
l. To have authority to make agreements with the local
County Historical Associations, when such exist, to set
apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as
may come into the possession of the association. The
Board is further authorized to purchase necessary
receptacles and materials for the preservation and
protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a
historical and educational nature and pay for the same
out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
1.707 POWER TO CONTRACT WITH OTHERS FOR THE USE OF THE
LIBRARY.
a. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other
City, School District, private or semi-private
organization, institution of higher learning, township,
County, or with the Trustees of any County Library
District for the use of the Library by the respective
residents.
b. Termination. Such contract may be terminated at
any time by mutual consent of the contracting parties.
1.708 NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY. The Board may authorize the
use of the Library by nonresidents in accordance with regulations
established from time to time by the Board.
1.709 LIBRARY BUDGET. The Council shall include in the annual
City budget an appropriation for the operation and maintenance of
the Library. The Board shall annually submit to the City
Administrator a proposed budget.
1.710 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall make a report to the
City Council immediately after the close of the municipal fiscal
year. This report shall contain statement of the condition of the
Library, the number of books added thereto, the number circulated,
the amount of the fines collected, and the amount of money expended
in the maintenance of the Library during the year, together with
such further information as may be required by the Council.
CHAPTER 7 PUBLIC LIBRARY
28
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 8 AIRPORT AUTHORITY
29
1.801 AIRPORT AUTHORITY
1.802 ANNUAL TAX LEVY
1.803 APPOINTMENT TO AIRPORT AUTHORITY BOARD
1.801 AIRPORT AUTHORITY. The City of Winterset does hereby
create, ratify and confirm its membership and participation in the
airport authority organized under Iowa Code Chapter 330A to be known
hereafter as the Winterset Airport Authority.
1.802 ANNUAL TAX LEVY. A tax not to exceed 27 cents per
$1,000 assessed valuation shall be levied annually for a period not
to exceed forty (40) years beginning in fiscal year 2015-16. Such
levy shall be collected in the manner of other taxes and shall be
allocated and paid to the Winterset Airport Authority for the
exclusive and proper use of said authority, including but not
limited to, the purchase of land, and the acquiring, establishing,
constructing, enlarging, operating and maintaining of aviation
facilities.
1.803 APPOINTMENT TO AIRPORT AUTHORITY BOARD. The City of
Winterset shall appoint five (5) board Members to the Board of the
Winterset Airport Authority as provided by Iowa Code Section 330A.5.
The Board shall have at least three (3) members who reside within
the corporate limits of the City and may have two (2) members who
reside outside the corporate limits of the City, but who shall
reside within Madison County, Iowa. The City Council shall appoint
the members of the Board. The length and other conditions on the
term of office of the Board members shall be as provided in Iowa
Code Chapter 330A.
To establish staggered Board terms, the initial terms of
office for the Board Members under City appointment shall be for two
Board Members chosen by lot to have terms of office expiring on
December 1, 2016 and three Board Members chosen by lot to have terms
of office expiring on December 1, 2018.
CHAPTER 8 AIRPORT AUTHORITY
30
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 8 AIRPORT AUTHORITY
31
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 9 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
32
1.901 PURPOSE
1.902 TAX EXEMPTION AUTHORIZED
1.903 SCHEDULE OF EXEMPTION
1.904 APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION
1.901 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to authorize
partial property tax exemption for industrial property on which
improvements have been made, in accordance with the provisions of
427B of the Code of Iowa.
1.902 TAX EXEMPTION AUTHORIZED. The City of Winterset hereby
provides for a partial tax exemption from property taxation of the
actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction
of industrial real estate and the acquisition of or improvement to
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Iowa
Code Section 427A.1 (1) (e), as now or hereafter amended, within the
City of Winterset, Iowa. This provision shall be subject to the
definitions and requirements set forth in Chapter 427B of the Code
of Iowa.
1.903 SCHEDULE OF EXEMPTION. The actual value added to
industrial real estate for the reasons specified in 1.902 above is
eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period
of 5 years. “Actual value added” means the actual value as
determined by the Assessor as of January 1st of each year for which
the exemption is received. The amount of actual value added which
is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
(a) for the first year - 75%
(b) for the second year - 60%
(c) for the third year - 45%
(d) for the fourth year - 30%
(e) for the fifth year - 15%
1.904 APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION. An application for
Exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the local
Assessor by February 1st of the assessment year in which the value
added is first assessed for taxation, for each project resulting in
actual value added for which an exemption is claimed. Application
of Exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of
Revenue of the State of Iowa, supplying all information deemed
necessary by said Director.
CHAPTER 9 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
33
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 10 AMORTIZATION PERIOD – DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENT
34
1.1001 PURPOSE
1.1002 TEN YEAR AMORTIZATION PERIOD
1.1003 FIVE YEAR AMORTIZATION PERIOD
1.1004 THREE YEAR AMORTIZATION PERIOD
1.1001 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish
a period of amortization for public improvements for which there are
special assessment conditional deficiencies. Said period of
amortization is based on the useful life of the public improvement,
but not to exceed a ten-year period.
1.1002 TEN-YEAR AMORTIZATION PERIOD. The period of
amortization for public improvement projects for opening,
establishing or grading streets, for the construction of portland
cement concrete or asphalt concrete street improvements, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, pedestrian underpasses and
overpasses, sewage pumping stations, disposal or treatment plants,
drainage conduits, channels and levees, street lighting, parking
facilities and appurtenant facilities, is hereby established as ten
(10) years, to be calculated commencing from the date of adopting by
the City Council of the resolution accepting the completed public
improvements.
1.1003 FIVE-YEAR AMORTIZATION PERIOD. The period of
amortization for public improvements for construction or
reconstruction of sidewalks is established at five (5) years, to be
calculated commencing from the date the completed project is
accepted by the City Council.
1.1004 THREE-YEAR AMORTIZATION PERIOD. The period of
amortization for public improvements for the repair of street
grading, for street surfacing with oil and gravel, or for the
removal of diseased or dead trees is established at three (3) years,
to be calculated commencing from the date of acceptance of the
completed project by the City Council.
CHAPTER 10 AMORTIZATION PERIOD – DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENT
35
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 10 AMORTIZATION PERIOD – DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENT
36
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 11 URBAN REVITALIZATION PLAN
37
1.1101 URBAN REVITALIZATION AREA
1.1102 URBAN REVITALIZATION PLAN
1.1101 Urban Revitalization Area. The entire area within the
corporate boundaries of the City of Winterset, Iowa, except that
area located within the Cedar Woods Urban Revitalization Area, as
established and existing between July 1, 1988 and December 31, 2018
be and is hereby declared to be an urban revitalization area
pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 404.
1.1102 Urban Revitalization Plan. The Urban Revitalization
Plan for the City of Winterset, Iowa, dated November 4, 2013, on
file in the Office of the City Administrator, be and is hereby
declared to be the Urban Revitalization Plan for that area of the
City of Winterset, Iowa designated in Section 1.1101.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
38
1.1201 PURPOSE
1.1202 DEFINITIONS
1.1203 PROVISIONS FOR DIVISION OF TAXES LEVIED ON TAXABLE
PROPERTY IN THE URBAN RENEWAL AREA
1.1204 GENERAL POLICY ON FINANCING PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
RELATED TO LOW INCOME HOUSING AND RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT
1.1205 PROCEDURES FOR OBTAINING TAX INCREMENT FINANCING OF
RESIDENTIAL INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS
1.1206 CITY PARTICIPATION FACTORS
1.1207 BOND ISSUANCE FACTORS
1.1201 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for
the division of taxes levied on the taxable property in designated
Urban Renewal Areas of the City of Winterset, Iowa, each year by and
for the benefit of the state, city, county, school districts or
other taxing districts after the effective date of this Chapter in
order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest
on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds
proposed to be issued by the City of Winterset to finance projects
in such area.
1.1202 DEFINITIONS. For use within this Chapter the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
“City” shall mean the City of Winterset, Iowa.
“County” shall mean Madison County, Iowa.
“Urban Renewal Area” shall mean the urban renewal areas as
described in the following listed ordinances:
1. Winterset Urban Renewal Area, as designated in Ordinance No.
378, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on
taxable property in the Winterset Urban Renewal Area of the City of
Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa,
adopted on June 19, 1989.
2. 1991 Addition to the Winterset Urban Renewal Area, as
designated in Ordinance No. 400, an ordinance providing for the
division of taxes levied on taxable property in the 1991 Addition to
the Winterset Urban Renewal Area of the City of Winterset, Iowa,
pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted on December
16, 1991.
3. West Court Urban Renewal Area , as designated in Ordinance No.
447, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on
taxable property in the West Court Urban Renewal Area of the City of
Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa,
adopted March 25, 1997.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
39
4. 1997 Addition to the Winterset Urban Renewal Area, as
designated in Ordinance No. 456, an ordinance providing for the
division of taxes levied on taxable property in the 1997 Addition to
the Winterset Urban Renewal Area of the City of Winterset, Iowa,
pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted January 19,
1998.
5. 1998 Addition to the Winterset Urban Renewal Area, as
designated in Ordinance No. 460, an ordinance providing for the
division of taxes levied on taxable property in the 1998 Addition to
the Winterset Urban Renewal Area of the City of Winterset, Iowa,
pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted July 6,
1998.
6. West End Townhomes Urban Renewal Area, as designated in
Ordinance No. 483, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes
levied on taxable property in the West End Townhomes Urban Renewal
Area of the City of Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section 403.19 of
the Code of Iowa, adopted August 7, 2000.
7. Corkrean & Watts Addition Urban Renewal Area, as designated in
Ordinance No. 510, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes
levied on taxable property in the Corkrean & Watts Addition Urban
Renewal Area of the City of Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted June 16, 2003.
8. Crystal Falls Addition Urban Renewal Area, as designated in
Ordinance No. 511, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes
levied on taxable property in the Crystal Falls Addition Urban
Renewal Area of the City of Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted July 7, 2003.
9. 2006 Addition to the Corkrean & Watts Addition Urban Renewal
Area, as designated in Ordinance No. 544, an ordinance providing for
the division of taxes levied on taxable property in the 2006
Addition to the Corkrean & Watts Addition Urban Renewal Area of the
City of Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of
Iowa, adopted October 16, 2006.
10. Arbor Park Urban Renewal Area, as designated in Ordinance No.
545, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on
taxable property in the Arbor Park Urban Renewal Area of the City of
Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa,
adopted October 16, 2006.
11. Cedar Woods Urban Renewal Area, as designated in Ordinance No.
547, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on
taxable property in the Cedar Woods Urban Renewal Area of the City
of Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa,
adopted November 20, 2006.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
40
12. North Stone Village Urban Renewal Area, as designated in
Ordinance No. 552, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes
levied on taxable property in the North Stone Village Urban Renewal
Area of the City of Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section 403.19 of
the Code of Iowa, adopted June 18, 2007.
13. Nelson Acres Urban Renewal Area, as designated in Ordinance
No. 571, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on
taxable property in the Nelson Acres Urban Renewal Area of the City
of Winterset, Iowa, pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa,
adopted March 7, 2011.
14. 2015 Addition to the Arbor Park Urban Renewal Area, as
designated in Ordinance No. 594, an ordinance providing for the
division of taxes levied on taxable property in the 2015 Addition to
the Arbor Park Urban Renewal Area of the City of Winterset, Iowa,
pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted May 15,
2015.
15. North Stone Urban Renewal Area #2, as designated in Ordinance
No. 601, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on
taxable property in the North Stone Urban Renewal Area #2, pursuant
to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted June 20, 2016.
16. 2017 Birchwood Estates Housing Urban Renewal Area #2, as
designated in Ordinance No. 613, an ordinance providing for the
division of taxes levied on taxable property in the 2017 Birchwood
Estates Housing Urban Renewal Area #2, pursuant to Section 403.19 of
the Code of Iowa, adopted August 21, 2017.
17. 2017 Casper Commercial Urban Renewal Area, as designated in
Ordinance No. 614, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes
levied on taxable property in the 2017 Casper Commercial Urban
Renewal Area #2, pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa,
adopted August 21, 2017.
18. 2017 Stover Addition Urban Renewal Area (Plat 1), as
designated in Ordinance No. 622, an ordinance providing for the
division of taxes levied on taxable property in the 2017 Stover
Addition Urban Renewal Area (Plat 1), pursuant to Section 403.19 of
the Code of Iowa, adopted March 5, 2018.
19. 2017 Arbor Park Urban Renewal Area #3, as designated in
Ordinance No. 623, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes
levied on taxable property in the 2017 Arbor Park Urban Renewal Area
#3, pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted March 5,
2018.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
41
20. 2017 Corkrean & Watts Addition Urban Renewal Area #2 (Plat 6),
as designated in Ordinance No. 624, an ordinance providing for the
division of taxes levied on taxable property in the 2017 Corkrean &
Watts Addition Urban Renewal Area #2 (Plat 6), pursuant to Section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted March 5, 2018.
21. 2017 North Stone Urban Renewal Area #3, as designated in
Ordinance No. 625, an ordinance providing for the division of taxes
levied on taxable property in the 2017 North Stone Urban Renewal
Area #3 pursuant to Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, adopted
March 5, 2018.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
42
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
43
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
44
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
45
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
46
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
47
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
48
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
49
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
50
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
51
1.1203. PROVISIONS FOR DIVISION OF TAXES LEVIED ON TAXABLE
PROPERTY IN THE URBAN RENEWAL AREA. After the initial
effective date of this Chapter, the taxes levied on the
taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area each year by and
for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the County and
any school district or other taxing district in which the
Urban Renewal Area is located, shall be divided as follows:
(a) that portion of the taxes which would be produced by
the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for
each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban
Renewal Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 1988 for Area #1 and as of January 1, 1990 for
Area #2, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid
into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes
by or for said taxing district into which all other
property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating
taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not
include the territory in the Urban Renewal Area on the
initial effective date of this Chapter, but to which the
territory has been annexed or otherwise included after
the effective date, the assessment roll as of January 1,
1988 for Area #1 and as of January 1, 1990 for Area #2,
shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of
the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area on the
effective date.
(b) that portion of the taxes each year in excess of
such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be
paid into a special fund of the City to pay the principal
of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or
otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of
Section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the
City to finance or refinance in whole or in part,
projects in the Urban Renewal Area, except that taxes for
the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district
shall be collected against all taxable property within
the taxing district without limitation by the provisions
of this ordinance. Unless and until the total assessed
valuation of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal
Area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in such area as shown by the assessment roll
referred to in subsection (a) of this section, all of the
taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in
the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said
taxing districts in the same manner as all other property
taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and
bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all
money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
52
property in the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same
manner as taxes on all other property.
(c) the portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b) of
this section and the special fund into which that portion
shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the City for
the payment of the principal and interest on loans,
advances, bonds issued under the authority of Section
403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by
the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the Urban Renewal Area.
d) as used in this section, the word "taxes" includes,
but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis
upon land or real property.
1.1204. GENERAL POLICY ON FINANCING PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
RELATED TO LOW INCOME HOUSING AND RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. The
City policy with respect to any urban renewal area within the City
established upon the determination that the area is an economic
development area shall be that a division of revenue as provided in
Iowa Code Section 403.19 shall not be allowed for the purpose of
providing or aiding in the provision of public improvements related
to housing and residential development unless the City is assured
the project will include assistance for low and moderate income
family housing. Subject to the foregoing, the City policy is to
offer on a case-by-case basis the use of Tax Increment Financing to
Subdivider’s as a means to finance the installation of public
infrastructure improvements within residential subdivisions being
developed in the City in either the R-1 or R-2 Residential Zoning
Classifications. Tax Increment Financing (T.I.F.) funds shall only
be used to install public infrastructure improvements and extensions
such as sanitary sewers, water mains, streets, and storm sewers
which are to be dedicated to the public upon final acceptance by the
City of the Subdivision Plat in accordance with Chapter 10 of Title
IV of this Municipal Code. The City debt obligation represented by
the Tax Increment Financing Bond will NOT be backed by the full
faith and credit of the City.
The City policy is that any residential development which occurs
within any economic development area that has been designated as a
Tax Increment Financing district; has received the benefit of the
City participation through Tax Increment Financing; and, has Tax
Increment debt outstanding requiring the payment of taxes to service
the debt, will not be eligible for tax abatement as may otherwise be
available through the City's Urban Revitalization Plan.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
53
The City policy is to participate through Tax Increment Financing in
any residential subdivision project with the Subdivider in a fair
and equal manner, provided the Subdivider meets all criteria, and
otherwise complies with, all federal, state and local laws and
regulations affecting the project.
The City policy is that the division of revenue under Iowa Code
Chapter 403 for each residential project under this Code Chapter
shall be limited to tax collections for ten (10) fiscal years
beginning with the second fiscal year after the year in which the
City first certifies to the County Auditor the amount of any loans,
advances, indebtedness, or bonds which qualify for payment from the
division of the revenue in connection with the residential project.
However, with the approval of the governing bodies of all other
affected taxing districts, the City may extend the division of
revenue under Iowa Code Section 403.19 for up to five (5) years if
necessary to adequately fund the project.
1.1205. PROCEDURES FOR OBTAINING TAX INCREMENT FINANCING OF
RESIDENTIAL INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS. Any Subdivider seeking the
City participation through Tax Increment Financing in the cost of
public improvements within a residential subdivision shall file with
the City Administrator a written application containing or providing
the following:
a. The preliminary subdivision plat complying with the
requirements of Chapter 10 of Title IV of this Code as
approved by the City Planning and Zoning Commission.
b. A legal description of the real estate to be
developed.
c. A description of the planned public improvements with
construction plans including costs estimates prepared by
a registered engineer.
d. The projected amount of financial assistance being
requested through the use of Tax Increment Financing to
finance the proposed public improvements and to provide
benefit for low and moderate income housing in accordance
with City policy. This estimate shall also include the
City's legal and administrative fees and costs described
in subparagraph 1.1206(c) below.
e. The number of residential lots to be improved and
sold in the Subdivision including the sale price for each
lot.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
54
f. A statement signed by the Subdivider establishing the
maximum sale price for each lot in the Subdivision.
Until the lot is improved with the construction of a
residential dwelling unit, this stated price shall fix
the highest amount that the Subdivider, their successors
and assigns may sell or transfer such lot. This maximum
lot price shall be in effect during the term the Tax
Increment Financing Bond is outstanding.
g. A statement itemizing the total development cost
including all legal, engineering and administrative fees
per lot within the subdivision.
h. A written, unconditional commitment from a financial
institution ready, willing, and able to buy the Tax
Increment Financing Bond once issued by the City for this
residential project.
1.1206. CITY PARTICIPATION FACTORS. The City determination
as to whether or not to participate in a proposed residential
subdivision project shall be governed by these factors:
a. The source for low and moderate-income family
housing assistance shall be one or more of the following:
i. The Tax Increment Financing bond proceeds;
ii. The lump sum payment from the Subdivider or
the Subdivider's financial institution tendered to
the City upon issuance of the Tax Increment
Financing bond;
iii. The periodic payments from the Subdivider to
the City in a stipulated amount of money and term
of payment, which sum shall be unconditionally
guaranteed by the Subdivider's financial
institution; or,
iv. The annual distributions from the Tax
Increment Financing revenues pursuant to Iowa Code
Section 403.19 pertaining to this Urban Renewal
Area.
b. The amount of the Tax Increment Financing Bond
shall be limited to a sum equal to seventy percent (70%)
of the costs of the infrastructure improvements; all the
legal and administrative costs incurred by the City for
this project; and, any funds to be dedicated for low and
moderate-income housing assistance.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
55
c. The City shall be reimbursed from the bond proceeds
for its legal and administrative costs incurred or
anticipated in the future relating to the residential
project such as the costs of amending the Urban Renewal
Plan to include the subdivision as an Urban Renewal Area,
bond issuance costs, and fees of the City Attorney and
City Engineer.
d. The City participation through Tax Increment
Financing in any project will be contingent upon the
City's review of the City's Debt Limit Capacity; review
of the City current and future debt obligations (which
count towards that debt limit); and, consideration of the
effect the proposed participation will have on that debt
limit in the foreseeable future.
e. The policy exceptions, if any, requested by the
Subdivider, including any reduction in the amount of
funds to be provided for low and moderate-income housing
assistance.
f. The City participation may be subject to such terms
and conditions as deemed necessary or appropriate by the
City for the residential project. In addition, the City
participation may be revoked or rescinded by the City
prior to the issuance of the Tax Incremental Financing
bonds for noncompliance by the Subdivider with federal,
state, or local laws and regulations affecting the
residential project or for failing to act timely on
matters material to the residential project or for
failing to abide by any agreements or understandings with
the City.
1.1207. BOND ISSUANCE FACTORS. The City policy on the Tax
Increment Financing Bonds is as follows:
a. The City is to issue, either directly to the
Subdivider or to a financial institution provided by the
Subdivider, the tax increment revenue bonds payable
solely from incremental property tax revenues produced
from the Subdivider's residential subdivision. This bond
will be a "pure" tax increment revenue bond and will not
be a general obligation of the City.
b. The City will receive the bond proceeds and be
responsible for the disbursement of these funds.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
56
c. The City will disburse bond funds directly to the
contractor(s) installing the public improvements in the
residential subdivision in an amount equal to ninety-five
percent (95%) of the registered engineer's certified pay
estimate for the construction services being rendered.
The final disbursement including the retainage shall be
upon the registered engineer's certification of
construction completion and compliance with City
construction specifications and of acceptance of the
public improvement as part of the subdivision by the City
in accordance with Chapter 10 of Title IV of this Code.
d. Any surplus bond funds, remaining after full payment
of the actual costs, shall be deposited into the City
debt service fund for retirement of the Tax Increment
Bond.
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
57
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 12 URBAN RENEWAL AREA
58
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 13 CODE ENFORCEMENT
59
1.1301 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
1.1302 APPLICABLE CODE SECTIONS
1.1303 CRIMINAL PENALTIES
1.1304 APPLICABLE CODE SECTIONS
1.1301 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS. Except as is expressly
provided in Code Section 1.1302 below, any person including
corporations or other entities who violate any provisions of this
City Code, as now or hereafter enacted or amended, commits a
municipal infraction under Iowa Code Section 364.22 and shall have
civil judgment against them not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the first offense; not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each repeat offense; and, any or all
additional relief provided by Iowa Code Section 364.22 for any
offense. This Section shall not apply to any violation which is
also a felony or misdemeanor by state law. Each day that a
violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the violator is
separate offense. This judgment against the violator does not
preclude the City from the criminal prosecution of a violation of
this City Code as now or hereafter enacted or from seeking
alternative relief to the civil penalty from the Court either in the
same action or other separate action.
1.1302 APPLICABLE CODE SECTIONS. Section 1.1301 of this
Code shall not apply to the following provisions of this City Code:
TITLE CHAPTER SECTIONS
Title I Chapters 1-12 all
Title V Chapter 1 5.102 – 5.131
5.135 – 5.146
Title V Chapter 2 all
1.1303 CRIMINAL PENALTIES. Except as is expressly provided in
Code Section 1304 below, any person including corporations or other
entities who violate any provision of this City Code as now or
hereafter enacted or amended shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
Simple Misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with Iowa Code
Section 903.1(a) for Simple Misdemeanors, but said person shall not
be subject to the possibility of imprisonment under this City Code.
In the event the violation of this City Code is a Scheduled
violation, the person shall be fined in accordance with the
associated Scheduled Fine as expressly provided for by Code Section
1.1305. In the event the violation of this City Code is an
Unscheduled violation, the person shall be fined no more than the
maximum amount allowed as provided by law, but no less than Sixtyfive
Dollars ($65.00).
CHAPTER 13 CODE ENFORCEMENT
60
1.1304 APPLICABLE CODE SECTIONS. Section 1.1303 of this Code
shall not apply to the following provisions of this City Code:
TITLE CHAPTER SECTIONS
Title I Chapters 1 - 5 all
Title I Chapter 6 1.601–1.605
Title I Chapters 7 – 12 all
Title V Chapter 1 5.102–5.131
Title V Chapter 1 5.135–5.146
Title V Chapter 2 all
Title V Chapter 3 all
1.1305 IOWA CODE CHAPTER INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE. Pursuant
to Iowa Code Section 380.10 the City of Winterset does hereby
establish, declare and adopt by reference the following sections
from Iowa Code Chapter 805 whose subject matter concerns citations
in lieu of arrest to be applied within the City of Winterset, Iowa:
Municipal Iowa
Code Section Code Section Subject Matter
1.805.8 805.8 Scheduled Violations
1.805.8A 805.8A Motor Vehicle and
Transportation Scheduled
Violations
CHAPTER 14 CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT
61
1.1401 PURPOSE
1.1402 POLICE RESIDENCY
1.1401 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide
rules for the administration of the City Police Department.
1.1402 POLICE RESIDENCY. All sworn peace officers of the
City Police Department, except the Chief of Police and Assistant
Chief of Police, shall have and maintain their primary place of
residence within forty-five (45) minutes travel time of the
Winterset city limits as soon as practicable after their date of
employment, but in no event later than one year from their date of
employment. An employee’s primary place of residence shall mean the
place where the employee actually lives and which the employee
declares to be the employee’s home with the intent to remain there
indefinitely. Travel time shall be determined by the Chief of the
Department, or designee of the Chief of the Department, by using the
most direct route, under normal driving conditions and traveling
within the speed limits.
CHAPTER 14 CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT
62
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 15 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
63
1.1501 TAX IMPOSED
1.1502 DEFINITION
1.1503 COLLECTION AND USE
1.1501 TAX IMPOSED. A hotel and motel tax at a rate of seven
percent (7%) shall be imposed upon the gross receipts from the
renting of sleeping rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in a
hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, mobile home
which is tangible personal property, or tourist court, or in any
place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient
guests for rent, whether with or without meals; except the guests of
a religious institution if the property is exempt under Iowa Code
Section 427.1, subsection 8,and the purpose of renting is to provide
a place for a religious retreat or function and not a place for
transient guests generally.
1.1502 DEFINITIONS. "Renting" and "Rent" shall include any
kind of direct or indirect charge for such sleeping rooms,
apartments, or sleeping quarter, or their use. However, the tax
shall not apply to the gross receipts from the renting of a sleeping
room, apartment, or sleeping quarters while rented by the same
person for a period of more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days.
1.1503 COLLECTION AND USE. The tax imposed by this Chapter
shall be remitted by the person or company responsible for the same
to the Iowa Director of Revenue and Finance in the manner provided
by the laws of the State of Iowa. All revenues received by the City
from the imposition of the hotel and motel tax shall be used in
accordance with the provisions of the laws of the State of Iowa.
CHAPTER 15 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
64
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 16 INTERNATIONAL FRIENDSHIP COMMISSION
65
1.1601 INTERNATIONAL FRIENDSHIP COMMISSION
1.1602 COMMISSION ORGANIZATION
1.1603 COMMISSION POWERS AND DUTIES
1.1604 COMMISSION REPORTS
1.1601 INTERNATIONAL FRIENDSHIP COMMISSION. A department of the
City of Winterset, Iowa be and is hereby created to be known as the
International Friendship Commission to advise and assist the city
council on all matters pertaining to the coordination and
facilitation of relationships with citizens and communities in other
countries around the world; the development of programs to enable
and encourage such relationships; and, to develop positive
relationships with other city governments in these countries.
1.1602 COMMISSION ORGANIZATION. The Commission shall consist
of five (5) members. The Members shall have at least three (3)
members who reside within the corporate limits of the City and may
have two (2) members who reside outside the corporate limits of the
City, but who shall reside within Madison County, Iowa.
1.1603 COMMISSION POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall
have the responsibility to plan, coordinate and facilitate all
visits between citizens of this community and the citizens of other
similar cities from other countries; to encourage positive relations
between this city and other similar cities from other countries;
and, to develop any necessary programs to encourage and promote such
activities. The Commission shall have the authority to create and
submit to the City Council for approval in the same manner as other
City departments an annual budget for its activities; to generate
revenues and expend funds in the same manner as other City
departments; and, to employ a director whose employment, salary and
duties shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. In
addition, the Commission shall have the responsibility to promptly
report all receipts and expenditures and submit any invoices
evidencing these transactions to the City Administrator and to be
guided by the City Administrator in all matters involving the
receipt and expenditure of its funds.
1.1604 COMMISSION REPORTS. The Commission shall submit to the
City Administrator directed to the City Council such written reports
of its activities as the Commission deems advisable from time to
time or such reports upon the request of the City Council.
CHAPTER 17 TREE COMMISSION
66
1.1701 Tree Commission Created
1.1702 Tree Commission Organization
1.1703 Tree Commission Authority
1.1704 Duties of the Tree Commission
1.1701 TREE COMMISSION CREATED. A Tree Commission is hereby
created and established for the City of Winterset.
1.1702 TREE COMMISSION ORGANIZATION. The Tree Commission
shall consist of five members, all citizens of the City, appointed
by the Mayor with approval of the City Council for staggered threeyear
terms. Each term shall commence on January 1st. Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments.
Members shall serve without compensation, but may receive
reimbursement for any actual expenses. The Tree Commission shall
select its chairperson each January. The Tree Commission shall meet
monthly or as frequently as may be required. The Director of the
Park and Recreation Board, or his/hers designee, shall serve as an
additional member of the Tree Commission in an ex officio capacity
with no voting privileges.
1.1703 TREE COMMISSION AUTHORITY. The Tree Commission shall
have the authority to establish guidelines for the care,
preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal, or disposal
of trees and other landscape plantings within street rights-of-ways,
parks and public places to ensure safety and to preserve and enhance
the aesthetics of such public places. Such guidelines developed by
the Tree Commission shall be subject to approval by the City Council
and shall constitute the official guidelines for the City. The
Tree Commission, when requested by the Council or as needed, shall
review and update these guidelines and make findings and
recommendations to the Council for consideration. The Tree
Commission shall serve as the appeal board if disputes arise
regarding the applicability of the guidelines to a particular tree
situation. Any aggrieved party who disputes the applicability of the
guidelines may appeal the decision to the Tree Commission.
CHAPTER 17 TREE COMMISSION
67
1.1704 DUTIES OF THE TREE COMMISSION. The Tree Commission
shall serve as an advisory resource for City officials, staff, and
the community at large, by providing information, education,
recommendations and support to promote practices which will lead to
a healthy urban forest (both public and private) and desirable
public landscaping throughout the City. The Tree Commission may
coordinate such activities as an educational programs for the
community, residential tree program, conducting tree inventories in
community, tree planting day, seeking grants or donations, and
maintaining a list of desirable and undesirable trees for City
street rights-of-ways, parks and public places.
TITLE II BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION
68
CHAPTER ONE - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CHAPTER TWO - DITCHES AND DRAINS
CHAPTER THREE - REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
TITLE II BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION
69
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 1 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
70
2.101 LICENSE REQUIRED
2.102 DEFINITIONS
2.103 EXEMPTIONS
2.104 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
2.105 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
2.106 FEES FOR RESIDENTS AND NONRESIDENTS
2.107 PROHIBITIONS
2.108 DISPLAY OF LICENSE
2.109 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE
2.110 REVOCATION OF LICENSE
2.111 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE
2.112 PENALTY
2.113 EXEMPTION FOR COVERED BRIDGE FESTIVAL SELLING
2.114 EXEMPTION FOR SPECIAL COMMUNITY EVENTS
2.101 LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling,
soliciting, or in the business of a transient merchant in this City
without first obtaining a license as herein provided shall be in
violation of the chapter.
2.102 DEFINITIONS. For use within this chapter the following
terms are defined:
a. “Peddler” is any person carrying goods or
merchandise who sells or offers for sale such goods or
merchandise to the general public for immediate delivery.
Not included are persons who sells or offers for sale
goods or merchandise to local merchants or retailers who
will retail the products to the general public.
b. “Solicitor” is any person who solicits or attempts
to solicit from the general public order for goods or
merchandise to be delivered at a future date. Not
included are persons who solicit or attempts to solicit
orders from merchants or retailers who will retail the
product to the general public.
c. “Transient merchant” is any person who engages in a
temporary or itinerant merchandising business and who may
in the course of such business hire, lease, or occupy any
building or land.
CHAPTER 1 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
71
2.103 EXEMPTIONS. Farmers or gardeners selling their
produce, newspaper carriers, students engaged in activities
authorized or sponsored by their school, religious, charitable and
nonprofit organizations shall be excluded from the application of
this chapter.
2.104 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application in writing
shall be filed with the City Administrator for license under this
chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name,
permanent and local address and business address, if any. The
application also shall set forth the applicant’s employer, if any,
and the employer’s address, the nature of the applicant’s business,
the last three places of such business, and the length of time
sought to be covered by the license. In the case of the transient
merchant, the applicant shall in addition provide the following
information:
a. A copy of the applicant’s sales tax permit with the
State of Iowa;
b. A list of all cities and counties which have
granted the applicant a permit within the past year;
c. Proof of ownership of the premises where the
business is to be operated or, proof of the lease
agreement with the owner of the premises, if applicable;
and
d. Proof of liability insurance in an amount of at
least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) for any
one occurrence covering all business invitees; and
e. A sketch of the premises showing the exact location
of the structure on the premises and showing the location
and size of the off-street parking areas, if applicable;
and,
f. Proof of proper fire extinguisher apparatus for the
premises, if applicable.
All transient merchants shall provide at least two (2) off-street
parking spaces for its business invitees. All transient merchants
shall be located in Commercial Zoning Districts only.
CHAPTER 1 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
72
2.105 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. If the City Administrator finds
the application is made out in conformance with Section 2.104 of
this chapter and the facts stated therein are correct, the City
Administrator shall issue a license and charge a fee therefore as
set forth in this chapter.
2.106 FEES FOR RESIDENTS AND NONRESIDENTS. Every licensee who
is a resident of Winterset, Iowa shall pay a license fee of $100 per
year. Every licensee who is not a resident of Winterset, Iowa,
shall pay the following fee before a license shall be issued:
a. For one day or any part thereof $25.00 per day;
b. For one week $150.00 per week.
2.107 PROHIBITIONS. No person shall engage or attempt to
engage in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a transient
merchant at any time on any City owned property or City right-ofway,
except as may be allowed by this chapter.
2.108 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each solicitor, peddler, and
transient merchant shall at all times while doing business in this
City, keep in their possession the license provided for in Section
2.105 of this chapter, and shall upon request exhibit the license as
evidence that they have complied with all requirements of this
chapter.
2.109 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the
provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation.
2.110 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. The City Administrator may
revoke any license issued under this chapter where the licensee in
the application for the license or in the course of conducting his
business has made fraudulent or incorrect statements or has violated
this chapter or has otherwise conducted his business in an unlawful
manner.
CHAPTER 1 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
73
2.111 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE. All licenses granted under this
ordinance shall expire at 6:00 p.m. of the last day for which the
license is issued.
2.112 PENALTY. Anyone violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a simple misdemeanor
punishable as provided by law. Each day that a violation continues
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
2.113 EXEMPTION FOR COVERED BRIDGE FESTIVAL SELLING. The
Winterset Chamber of Commerce, either directly or through its
Covered Bridge Festival Committee, shall file with the City
Administrator a list of sellers of items which are approved by the
Covered Bridge Festival Committee as part of the Madison County
Covered Bridge Festival. The sellers set forth on this list shall
be exempt from this chapter during the Covered Bridge Festival.
2.114 EXEMPTION FOR SPECIAL COMMUNITY EVENTS.
a. General Conditions. The Mayor and/or City Council are
authorized to appoint a Committee responsible for the
planning and organization and conduct of special community
events involving the assemblage of large number of people
and the sale of goods and/or services by peddlers or
transient merchants to the assemblage. These special
community events include the Des Moines Register Annual
Great Bicycle Ride Across Iowa (RAGBRAI) which could
involve accommodating an assembly of ten thousand (10,000)
persons or more or any other event whose size raises public
health and safety concerns. These special community events
shall be allowed provided that all of the following occur:
1. The special events committee applies for and
obtains from the Mayor, if necessary, the special
street designation authorized by Municipal Code
Section 6.404 for the special event.
2. The special events committee files with the
City Administrator a list of peddlers and/or
transient merchants and the item or items of goods
and/or services being sold by each vendor during
the special event. The peddlers and/or transient
merchants named on this list and who have the
approval of the special events committee shall be
exempt from the Chapter during the special year.
CHAPTER 1 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
74
3. The special events committee files with the
City Administrator a site plan showing or depicting
the location of the temporary stands, if any,
authorized for the sale of goods and/or services
during the special event.
4. The special events committee files with the
City Administrator a schedule of fees charged by
the committee to each listed peddler and/or
transient merchant categorized as to food and nonfood
vendors.
5. The special events committee shall require
each permittee to have liability insurance coverage
for the special event insuring the public against
loss for any
6. Accident or occurrence caused by the permittee
in the amount of One Hundred Thousand Dollars
(100,000.00).
7. The special events committee and/or the City
is authorized to revoke any permit at any time in
the event the permittee is not in compliance with
this Code Section.
b. Special event peddler and transient merchant duties.
1. No person subject to this Chapter shall
provide or sell goods and/or services including
food and beverages to the public during a
designated special event subject to the provisions
of this Code Section unless the person has first
obtained a Special Events Permit from the special
events committee appointed by the Mayor and/or City
Council as provided by this Code Section and no
person subject to this Chapter shall continue to
provide or sell goods and/or services including
food and beverages to the pubic after the special
events permit has been revoked by the special
events committee and/or the City.
CHAPTER 1 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
75
2. No person subject to this Chapter shall
provide or sell goods and/or services including
food and beverages to the public during a
designated special event except at a location
determined by the special events committee and
shall sell only those goods and/or services
specifically authorized by the special events
committee.
3. No person subject to this Chapter shall
provide or sell food and/or beverages to the public
during a designated special event unless the
permittee complies with the Iowa Department of
Health Rules and Regulations governing the sale of
food and/or beverages for consumption on the
premises.
4. Each permittee is required to be able to show
proof of liability insurance coverage to any City
Official upon demand. The failure to show such
proof of insurance shall cause the immediate
revocation of the special events permit without
further notice.
c. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the action of the
special events committee or of the City shall have the
right to appeal that action to the Mayor. The appeal
must be filed with the City Administrator in writing
within seven (7) days of the date of the action
aggrieved. The appeal must state each and every ground
for the appeal and provide a current mailing address and
daytime telephone number. The Mayor shall set a date of
hearing on the appeal which is to be within two (2) weeks
of the date of the appeal and notify the aggrieved party
of the time and date of the appeal hearing. The
aggrieved party may, but need not, appear at the hearing.
The Mayor shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner
and shall consider all relevant evidence. The Mayor
shall within three (3) days of the appeal hearing enter a
“Formal Decision” on the appeal. This decision shall be
final in all respects unless the aggrieved party files a
petition for writ of Certiorari with the Iowa District
Court for Madison County. The action of the special
events committee or of the City shall not be stayed
during the pendency of the appeal.
CHAPTER 1 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
76
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 2 DITCHES AND DRAINS
77
2.201 DITCHES AND DRAINS IN STREETS
2.202 METHOD OF DIGGING
2.203 BARRICADES AT NIGHT
2.204 REFILLING
2.205 COVERING
2.206 RESTORING PAVEMENT
2.207 COMPLETION OF WORK
2.208 RESTORING DRAINS, SEWER AND WATER PIPES
2.209 DUTY TO COMPLY
2.201 DITCHES AND DRAINS IN STREETS. No person shall dig any
ditches or make any drains in any of the streets or alleys of the
city except in compliance with the provision of this chapter.
2.202 METHOD OF DIGGING. Ditches and drains and other
excavations shall be so constructed as to leave at least one third
of the traveled part of the street or alley open to public travel
during the progress of the work. The dirt from the excavation or
ditch shall be neatly and compactly piled by the side thereof in
such manner as to interfere as little as possible with the public
use of the highway.
2.203 BARRICADES AT NIGHT. All ditches or excavations left
unfilled during the night shall be securely covered or shall be
surrounded with a barricade at least three feet high; and in either
case the location of such excavation shall be indicated during the
hours of darkness by flashing lights at the ends and along the
course thereof.
2.204 REFILLING. In filling excavations and ditches made in
the streets and alleys of the city, the dirt shall be thoroughly and
compactly filled as to prevent settling to any material extent. If
the same settles after being filled, the parties making or causing
the same to be made, upon oral notice from the City shall promptly
refill the same. In all cases, ditches or excavations shall be so
filled and finished so as to leave them substantially level with the
surrounding surface. Surplus dirt shall be removed from the street
or alley.
2.205 COVERING. Excavations made to be covered, and not
filled, shall have covers provided of sufficient strength to sustain
all reasonable weight coming thereon in the ordinary use of the
highway.
CHAPTER 2 DITCHES AND DRAINS
78
2.206 RESTORING PAVEMENT. Whenever any excavation is made in
any paved or permanently improved street or alley, the excavation
shall be filled as provided in this chapter and the permanent
improvement replaced under the supervision of the Street
Commissioner in a manner as near as possible to the condition of the
original improvement. The street or alley must pass inspection by
the street commissioner.
2.207 COMPLETION OF WORK. All excavations made and digging
done hereunder shall be completed, and the street or alley restored
to its original condition as nearly as may be, with as little delay
as possible after the commencement of the work.
2.208 RESTORING DRAINS, SEWERS AND WATER PIPES. Any sidewalk,
drain, sewer pipe, water main, or any connections thereto, injured
or disturbed by the digging or excavating shall be restored to its
original condition by the person doing the digging or excavating or
causing the same to be done as soon as possible after the injury is
done or discovered. This provision shall apply to such injuries or
defects caused by the digging or excavating, but not developing or
becoming apparent until after the completion of the work. Such
repairs, if needed, shall be made promptly upon oral notice from the
Street Commissioner.
2.209 DUTY TO COMPLY. The duty of complying with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby imposed upon the person doing
the actual work of digging and excavating, and also upon the person
whose account or for whose benefit the same is done.
CHAPTER 2 DITCHES AND DRAINS
79
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
80
2.301 DEFINITIONS
2.302 LICENSE REQUIRED
2.303 LICENSE CRITERIA
2.304 LICENSE ISSUANCE
2.305 LICENSE FEE
2.306 SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS
2.307 DISPLAY OF LICENSE
2.308 SALE OF TRANSFER OF LICENSE
2.309 LICENSE RENEWALS
2.310 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE
2.311 RECORDS REQUIRED
2.312 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN RECORDS
2.313 IDENTIFICATION TAGS
2.314 PROHIBITED ACTS
2.315 SEARCH FOR STOLEN PROPERTY
2.301 DEFINITIONS. The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Negative police report means a report or review compiled by the chief
of police or his or her designee which discloses a criminal record of
a felony or any conviction under this division two or more times in a
calendar year or a conviction under Iowa Code Chapter 714.
Pawnbroker means every person who makes loans or advancements upon
pawn, pledge or deposit of personal property or who receives actual
possession of personal property as security for loans, with or without
a mortgage or bill of sale thereon, or who by advertisement, sign or
otherwise holds himself or herself out as a pawnbroker.
Positive police report means a report or review compiled by the chief
of police or his or her designee which does not disclose a criminal
record of a felony or any conviction under this division two or more
times, in a calendar year, or a conviction under Iowa Code Chapter
714.
2.302. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall engage in the pawn
business without first obtaining a pawnbroker license.
All applicants for such licenses shall apply in writing to the office
of the City Administrator.
All license applications shall contain the following information;
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
81
The full name, residential address, business address, date of birth
and social security number of the applicants and, where the applicant
is a corporation or partnership, of the officers or partners;
The name and address of the owner of the business’ premises;
The business, occupation or employment of the applicant, including
location thereof, for the two years immediately preceding the date of
application; and
The arrest record of the applicant and whether the applicant has ever
been convicted of any crime, except simple misdemeanor traffic
violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so
convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in
which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the
conviction was obtained, and the sentence imposed as a result of such
conviction.
2.303. LICENSE CRITERIA. Upon receipt of a pawnbroker license
application, the City Administrator shall cause to be forwarded a copy
of the application to the Chief of Police or his or her designee who
shall review the application. The applicant shall furnish such
evidence as may reasonably be required in support of the statements
set forth in the application. The Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall report to the City Administrator within thirty (30)
days of receipt of the application considering but not limited to the
criteria of whether:
The applicant or his or her agent or employee charged with receiving
or distributing property has been convicted of a felony, However, if
the conviction of a felony occurred more than five years before the
application for a pawnbroker license and if such person’s rights of
citizenship have been restored by the governor, such conviction shall
not be a bar to obtaining a pawnbroker license;
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
82
The applicant has truthfully reported all relevant facts within the
pawnbroker application; and
The applicant has such financial standing and good reputation to
indicate that he or she will comply with all the laws of the state and
the city.
2.304. LICENSE ISSUANCE. (a) Upon receipt of a positive
police report and the appropriate fees, the City Administrator shall
approve the application if the applicant has fully complied with all
of the requirements of this division, and the City Administrator shall
thereupon issue a pawnbroker license to the applicant and forward a
copy of such to the Chief of Police. The license shall expire on
December 31 next after the date of issuance. The license shall state
the name and place of residence of the person licensed, the business
to be transacted and the place where it is to be carried on, and the
date of issuance and expiration of the license.
If the City Administrator determines that the applicant for a new or
renewal license has not fully complied with all of the requirements of
this division or that a negative police report is returned or that the
applicant has falsified his or her application, the City Administrator
shall, after consultation with the legal department, advise the City
Council of the basis for questioning the applicant’s qualifications,
and the procedures for notice and hearing as set forth in Section
3.110 of this Chapter shall apply.
2.305. LICENSE FEE. An applicant for a pawnbroker license shall
submit a fee of $ 125.00 to the City Administrator at the time of
filing the application.
2.306. SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any person
conducting several or separate pawn broking businesses shall pay the
license fee and procure a license for each place, and any violations
in one licensed premises shall be deemed violations in all premises
licensed by the pawnbroker.
2.307. DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Every licensed pawnbroker shall
display his or her license conspicuously in the business so that it
may be readily observed by all persons entering the premises.
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
83
2.308. SALE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE. No pawnbroker license shall
be sold or transferred. The purchaser of any pawnbroker business or
of the majority of the stock of any corporation operating a pawnbroker
business shall make application for and obtain a new license before
operating such business at the location for which the license has been
issued.
2.309. LICENSE RENEWALS. Every licensed pawnbroker shall apply
for a license annually by application as if for an original license.
There shall be no automatic renewal. Such application shall be filed
and the fee paid not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the
expiration of the current license.
2.310 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Grounds. A pawnbroker license may be denied, suspended or revoked for
any violation of this Chapter, including but not limited to the
failure to comply with new or renewal application procedures, a
negative police report, falsification of a new or renewal application,
or for the failure to maintain records in conformity with the
requirements enumerated under Section 3.111 of this Chapter.
Proceedings. The City Administrator shall, upon receipt of
information alleging that grounds exist to deny, suspend or revoke the
pawnbroker license of any applicant or license under this Chapter,
report the circumstances to the City Council, which in such case shall
cause a notice to be sent by ordinary mail to the applicant or
licensee. The notice shall state that a denial, suspension, or
revocation hearing has been set before the City Council; the grounds
for the proposed denial, suspension or revocation; the date and time
of the hearing; and the place where the hearing will be conducted.
Upon such hearing, if the City Council shall determine that one or
more of the grounds do exist, it may deny an application or suspend or
revoke an existing license. A suspension shall constitute a minimum
period of fourteen (14) calendar days to a maximum period of thirty
(30) calendar days during which period the licensee may not conduct
any business except for redemptions and shall conspicuously post a
sign stating the terms of the suspension at the entrance of the
licensed premises. Such a sign shall be supplied by and posted by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee. If the license is revoked, no
pawnbroker license shall issue to that licensee for a period of one
year.
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
84
2.311. RECORDS REQUIRED. The police department shall furnish
pawn log sheets to every pawnbroker licensee who shall accurately and
legibly enter in ink in the English language the following information
at the time of purchase or receipt of any property:
The date and hour of the transaction;
The amount paid, advanced or loaned for the article;
A detailed and accurate description of the article;
When applicable, the model number and/or serial number; and
The name and address of the person from whom the property is purchased
or received and his or her date of birth, driver’s license number,
identification number from this state or social security number, sex,
age, height, race and type of photo identification presented.
It shall not be deemed compliance with this section if the licensee or
the licensee’s agent or employee lists his or her own name as the
person selling or transferring the article.
When the pawn log sheets are complete or upon demand from Chief of
Police or his or her designee, the licensee shall surrender the
original sheets to the Chief of Police or his or her designee who
shall provide a copy of the sheets to the City. The licensee shall
also maintain a record of the name of the property and residential
address of any person redeeming an article of property, the date of
such transaction and a description of the article redeemed. If
property is disposed of other than by redemption, the licensee shall
record a description of the property, how disposed, and the name and
address of the person to whom the article was transferred. Such
redemption or sales records shall be maintained by the licensee for
one year from the date of the transaction and shall be at all times
open to examination and recordation by the Chief of Police or his or
her designee.
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
85
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
86
2.312. FAILURE TO MAINTAIN RECORDS. No person licensed under
this Chapter or his or her agents or employees shall fail to maintain,
shall fail to surrender or shall falsify, delete, alter, destroy or
otherwise destroy any records required by this Chapter.
2.313. IDENTIFICATION TAGS. The person licensed as a pawnbroker,
his or her agents or employees shall also legibly record the date and
hour the property was purchased or received on the property, or such
information shall be securely affixed to the property. Such
information must conform to the information recorded pursuant to
Section 3.111 of this Chapter.
2.314. PROHIBITED ACTS. No pawnbroker, his or her agents, or
employees purchasing or receiving any article of property shall:
Receive any property without first viewing a form of identification
containing a photograph of the person identified.
Melt, alter, destroy, sell, redeem, remove from the licensed premises
or otherwise dispose of such article, within fifteen (15) days after
the receipt and report of any property is made as required by Section
3.111 of this Chapter, except upon written permission from the Chief
of Police or his or her designee.
Purchase or receipt any property from any person under the age of
eighteen (18) without his or her parent or guardian being present at
the time of the transaction and without receiving the parent’s or
guardian’s written consent, a copy of which must be submitted along
with the records required by Section 3.111 of this Chapter.
Purchase or receive any property or surrender any property from 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and 6:00 p.m. Saturday
through 8:00 a.m. Monday.
Conceal, secrete, or destroy for the purpose of concealing any article
purchased or received for the purpose of preventing identification.
Deface, alter or remove any serial number or identifying marks from an
article in his or her possession.
Take possession of defaced or altered property as described in
subsection (6) of this Section.
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
87
2.315. SEARCH FOR STOLEN PROPERTY. Whenever the Chief of Police
or his or her designee has reason to believe that any pawnbroker, his
or her agents, or employees has possession of any stolen property on
the licensed premises, he or she shall have the right and duty to
enter and search the premises of such person for the purpose of
discovering stolen property.
No such licensee, his or her agents, or employees shall refuse, resist
or attempt to prevent the Chief of Police or his or her designee, with
or without warrant, from examining the licensed premises for the
purpose of discovering stolen property or any violation of this
Chapter.
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
88
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION & LICENSING OF PAWNSHOPS
89
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
TITLE III - HEALTH SAFETY & WELFARE
90
CHAPTER ONE - CURFEW
CHAPTER TWO - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
CHAPTER THREE - STREET TREES
CHAPTER FOUR - MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER FIVE - NUISANCES
CHAPTER SIX - SNOW AND ICE ON SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER SEVEN - WATER RESERVOIR
CHAPTER EIGHT - PROVISIONS FOR THE DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTE
CHAPTER NINE - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CHAPTER TEN - REGULATING CONDUCT IN PUBLIC ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER ELEVEN - FALSE REPORTS AND ALARMS
CHAPTER TWELVE - OPEN BURNING
CHAPTER THIRTEEN - LICENSE FOR KEEPING DOG
CHAPTER FOURTEEN - FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 1 CURFEW
91
3.101 PURPOSE
3.102 DEFINITIONS
3.103 OFFENSES
3.104 DEFENSES
3.105 ENFORCEMENT
3.106 PENALTIES
3.101 PURPOSE. The Council determines that a curfew for minors is
necessary to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the City and specifically to achieve the following purpose.
a. Reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of
the adults responsible for the minors.
b. Protect the public from the illegal acts of minors
committed individually and in groups and/or gangs after the
curfew hour.
c. Protect minors from improper influences and criminal
activity by individuals and groups and/or gangs that
prevail in public places after the curfew hour.
3.102 DEFINITIONS. In this Chapter:
(1) CURFEW HOURS:
(a) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and
(b) 1:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
(2) EMERGENCY means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.
(3) ESTABLISHMENT means any privately-owned place of business operated for
a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any
place of amusement or entertainment.
(4) GUARDIAN means:
a. a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the
person of a minor; or
b. a public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by a court.
CHAPTER 1 CURFEW
92
(5) KNOWINGLY means knowledge that a responsible adult should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor who is in that
responsible adult's custody. It is intended to continue to hold the
neglectful or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable
community standard of adult responsibility through an objective test. It
shall, therefore, be no defense that a responsible adult for a minor was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the
minor.
(6) MINOR means any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
(7) NON-SECURED CUSTODY means custody in an unlocked multipurpose area such
as a lobby, office or interrogation room which is not designed, set aside or
used as a secure detention area and the person in custody is not physically
secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically
accompanied by a peace officer or a person employed by the facility where the
person in custody is being held; and, the use of the area is limited to
providing non-secure custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate
juvenile facility or to a court, for contacting of and release to the
person's parents, guardian or other responsible adult, or for other
administrative purposes; but not longer than six (6) hours without the oral
or written order of a judge or magistrate authorizing the continued
detention. A judge shall not extend the period of time in excess of six (6)
hours beyond the initial six (6) hour holding period.
(8) OPERATOR means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.
(9) PARENT means a person who is:
a. a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of
another person; or
b. at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
(10) PUBLIC PLACE means any place to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
(11) REMAIN means to:
a. Linger or stay; or
b. Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.
CHAPTER 1 CURFEW
93
(12) RESPONSIBILITY ADULT means an adult specifically authorized by law or
specifically authorized by a parent or guardian to have custody or control of
a minor.
(13) SERIOUS BODILY INJURY means bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(14) UNEMANCIPATED means unmarried and/or still under the custody or control
of a responsible adult.
3.103 OFFENSES
a. A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
city during curfew hours.
b. A parent or guardian or responsible adult of a minor
commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by
insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the city
curfew hours.
c. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment
commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to
remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew
hours.
3.104 DEFENSES.
It is a defense to prosecution under Section 3.103 that the minor was:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
b. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or
guardian without any detour or stop;
c. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
d. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning
home from an employment activity without any detour or stop;
e. Involved in an emergency;
f. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
CHAPTER 1 CURFEW
94
g. Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the
City of Winterset, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or
returning home from without any detour or stop an official
school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the City of Winterset, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility
for the minor;
h. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion,
freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
i. Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed;
It is a defense to prosecution under Section 3.103 that the owner, operator,
or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that
a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours
and refused to leave.
3.105 ENFORCEMENT. Before taking any enforcement action under this
Chapter, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or take
the person into custody under this Chapter unless the officer reasonably
believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and
other circumstances, the defenses in Section 3.104 are not present.
After a minor is taken into custody, the peace officer shall notify the
parent, guardian or other responsible adult for the minor as soon as
reasonably possible. The minor shall be released to this responsible adult
for the minor upon the promise of such adult to produce the minor in court at
such time as the court may direct. If a minor is issued a citation to appear
for a violation of this Chapter, a peace officer shall notify the responsible
adult for the minor, if known, within twenty-four hours of the violation.
3.106 PENALTIES. A person who violates a provision of this Chapter is
guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable upon conviction as provided by law.
When required by Section 232.8 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, the
Magistrate Court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates
Section 3.103 (a) of this Chapter and shall refer the minor to juvenile
court.
A person who violates a provision of this Chapter shall be deemed to have
committed a Municipal Infraction punishable upon conviction as provided by
Iowa Code Section 364.22, as amended.
CHAPTER 2 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
95
3.201 DEFINITIONS
3.202 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED
3.203 KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED
3.204 DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED
3.205 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS
3.206 KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED
3.207 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF VICIOUS ANIMALS
3.208 ANIMAL SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
3.209 RIGHT TO KILL ANIMALS
3.210 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE BY ANIMALS
3.211 PENALTY
3.201 DEFINITIONS
1. "Animal" means every wild, tame or domestic member of the animal kingdom
other than the genus and species Homo Sapiens.
2. "Dog" shall mean and include members of the canine species, male or
female, whether neutered or not.
3. "At large" shall mean any licensed or unlicensed animal found off the
premises of its owner and not restrained within a motor vehicle, housed in a
veterinary hospital or kennel, or on a leash held by a competent person and
obedient to that person's command.
4. "Dangerous animal" means (a) any animal which is not naturally tame or
gentle, and which is of a wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of
killing, inflicting serious injury upon, or causing disease among human
beings or domestic animals and having known tendencies as a species to do so;
(b) any animals declared to be dangerous by the Madison County Board of
Health or the City Council; and (c) the following animals which shall be
deemed to be dangerous animals per se:
(1) wolves and coyotes;
(2) badgers, wolverines, weasels, mink, and other mustelids (except
ferrets);
(3) bears;
(4) all apes including chimpanzees, baboons and macaques;
(5) monkeys, except the squirrel monkey;
(6) elephants;
(7) wild boar;
(8) black widow spiders and scorpions;
(9) snakes which are naturally venomous and poisonous;
(10) all cats, except domestic cats (Carnivora of the family
Felidae including, but not limited to, lions, cougars,
tigers, jaguars, leopards, lynx, bobcats, etc.);
(11) raccoons, opossums, and skunks;
(12) alligators and crocodiles.
CHAPTER 2 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
96
5. "Horse" shall mean a large solid-hoofed herbivorous mammal (Equus
caballus).
6. "Health department" shall mean the Madison County Board of Health
and its officers, employees and agents.
7. "License" shall mean the tag issued to owners of dogs pursuant to
state law.
8. "Kennel" shall mean any premises on which four (4) or more dogs, or
four (4) or more cats six (6) months old or older are kept or raised
solely for the bona fide purposes of sale and which are kept under
constant restraint.
9. "Owner" or "owner of an animal" shall mean any person or persons,
firm, association or corporation, owning, keeping, sheltering or
harboring an animal.
10. "Person" shall mean any individual, association, partnership, or
corporation, and includes any officer, employee, or agency thereof.
11. "Pet shop" shall mean any person, partnership or corporation
engaged in the business of breeding, buying or selling or boarding
animals of any species, except the operation of a kennel or
agricultural or wild-life pursuits.
12. "Riding school or Horse stable" shall mean any person, partnership
or corporation engaged in the business of teaching persons to ride
horses, or providing horses to ride for a fee.
13. "Meaning of certain words" shall mean words used in the singular
include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular; and the
masculine gender shall include the feminine and the feminine gender
shall include the masculine gender as the context may indicate.
14. "Vicious animal" shall mean any animal, except for the dangerous
animals per se as defined above, while running at large that has
attacked or bitten any person without provocation; or, any animal that
has exhibited vicious propensities in present or past conduct such as
(a) biting a person or persons on two separate occasions within a
twelve (12) month period, (b) biting a person once causing injuries
above the shoulders of person, (c) could not be controlled or
restrained by the owner at the time of the bite to prevent or avoid the
occurrence, (d) has attacked or bitten any domestic animal or fowl on
two separate occasions within a twelve (12) month period, or (e) which
has been found to possess such a vicious propensity by the City Council
after hearing; or, the Pit Bull dog as defined by this Chapter.
CHAPTER 2 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
97
15. "Pit bull dog" shall mean:
(a) the Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog;
(b) the American pit bull terrier breed of dog;
(c) the American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog;
(d) dogs of mixed breed or of other breeds than listed above which
breed or mixed breed is known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull
terriers.
(e) any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominantly of the breeds of Staffordshire bull terrier, American pit
bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, any other breed commonly
known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers or a combination
of any of these breeds.
3.202 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for the owner
of any animal including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, cattle, horses,
swine, sheep, fowl, or any animal defined as dangerous or vicious by this
Chapter to allow such animal to run at large within the corporate limits of
the City. The term "allow" shall mean to permit to run at large or to neglect
to restrain or prevent the animal from running at large.
3.203 KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person shall keep,
shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act as a custodian
whether temporary or otherwise for such animal, or keep such animal for any
other purpose or in any other capacity within the corporate limits of the
City, except as may be provided by Section 3.204.
3.204 DANGEROUS ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS. The prohibition of Section 3.203
shall not apply to the keeping of dangerous animals in the following
circumstances:
(1) the keeping of dangerous animals in a public zoo, bonafide
educational or medical institution, humane society, or museum where
they are kept as live specimens for the public to view, or for the
purpose of instruction, research or study.
(2) the keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a
circus, carnival, exhibit or show where such circus, carnival, exhibit
or show is of a traveling nature, is displayed before large assemblages
of people, and maintains any and all required federal and state
licenses.
(3) the keeping of dangerous animals in a bonafide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment.
(4) the keeping of dangerous animals by a wildlife rescue organization
with appropriate permit from the Iowa Conservation Commission.
(5) any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the
possession of the Iowa Conservation Commission pursuant to Iowa Code
Chapters 109 and 109A.
CHAPTER 2 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
98
3.205 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS
In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large, such animal may, in
the sole discretion of the Mayor or his designees, be destroyed if it cannot
be confined or captured. The City shall be under no duty to attempt the
confinement or capture of a dangerous animal found at large, nor shall the
City have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
Upon the complaint of a person that a person is keeping, sheltering or
harboring a dangerous animal premises in the corporate limits of the City,
the police shall cause the matter to be investigated. If after investigation
the police reasonably believe the facts indicate a dangerous animal per se is
being
kept, sheltered or harbored within the city, then the police shall
immediately cause said animal to be seized. An animal so seized shall be
impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the impoundment
period the person keeping, sheltering or harboring such dangerous animal per
se has not appealed the seizure to the City Council, then the police shall
cause the animal to be disposed of by sale, permanently place such animal
with an organization or group allowed under this Chapter to possess such
dangerous animals, or destroy such animal in a humane manner. In the event
of an appeal the animal shall remain in impoundment until final disposition
of the appeal.
Upon the complaint of any person that a dangerous animal other than a
dangerous animal per se is being kept, sheltered or harbored within the
corporate limits of the City, then the police shall cause the matter to be
investigated. If after investigation, the police reasonably believe the
facts indicate such a dangerous animal is being kept, sheltered or harbored
within the City, then the police shall order such animal to be removed by its
owner from the corporate limits of the City, or to permanently place such
animal with an organization or group allowed under this Chapter to possess
such dangerous animals, or to destroy such dangerous animal within three (3)
days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be contained in a notice
to remove dangerous animals, which notice shall be given in writing to the
person keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous animal. The Notice
shall be personally served upon such person or by certified mail. Such order
and notice to remove dangerous animal shall not be required where such
dangerous animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any
person. In such case, the police shall cause the animal to either be
immediately seized and impounded or destroyed if seizure and impoundment in
the reasonable judgment of the police are not possible without risk of
serious physical harm or death to any person.
CHAPTER 2 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
99
The police order to remove a dangerous animal or the police seizure of a
dangerous animal may be appealed to the City Council. The police order shall
be stayed pending City Council decision on the appeal. The Appeal shall be
filed in writing with the Office of the City Administrator within three (3)
days of the receipt of the police order or of the police seizure. Failure to
timely file such written appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to
appeal and the police order or seizure shall be then deemed final for all
purposes. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for appeal. The
hearing shall be held as expeditiously as reasonably possible. The appellant
shall be entitled to at least one (1) day notice of the date of hearing. The
City Council may prescribe rules for the conduct of such hearings. Following
the hearing, the City Council may affirm or reverse the police order or
seizure. The City Council shall cause notice of its decision to be served
upon the appellant either by personal service or by certified mail. The City
Council decision shall be deemed final for all purposes three (3) days after
the appellant's receipt of the notice of decision.
The person keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous animal subject to
police order shall comply with the police order on or before the time the
police order becomes final. If the person has not timely complied with the
police order, then the police or their designee is authorized to seize and
impound such dangerous animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a
period of seven (7) days. At the end of the impoundment period, the police
shall cause the animal to be disposed of by sale, permanently place such
animal with an organization or group allowed under this Chapter to possess
such dangerous animal, or destroy such dangerous animal in a humane manner.
Any person who fails to timely comply with a police order shall be guilty of
a simple misdemeanor.
3.206 KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person shall keep
shelter or harbor for any reason within the corporate limits of the City, a
vicious animal as defined by this Chapter.
3.207 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF VICIOUS ANIMALS.
In the event that a vicious animal as defined in this chapter is found at
large, such animal may, in the sole discretion of the Mayor, or the Mayor's
designee or designees, be either captured and impounded or be destroyed in
accordance with the procedures under this Chapter. The City shall be under
no duty to first attempt the capture and impoundment of a vicious animal as
defined in this Chapter prior to its destruction nor shall the City have a
duty to notify any person of the vicious animal being at large prior to
either its capture and impoundment or its destruction.
CHAPTER 2 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
100
The police either upon receipt of a complaint or upon their own action may
initiate proceedings as hereafter provided to determine whether or not an
animal being kept, sheltered or harbored within the corporate limits of the
City is a vicious animal as defined by this Chapter. The police shall file a
complaint with the office of the City Administrator. The complaint shall
include a description of the animal and the name and last known post office
address of the person believed to be keeping, sheltering or harboring the
animal. The City Administrator shall set a time and date of hearing on the
complaint and shall cause a Notice of Hearing to be served upon the person
described in the complaint. The person shall be served not less than two (2)
days prior to the date of the hearing. Service shall be made either in the
manner of an original notice as provided by the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure
or by personal service upon the person named in the complaint. The Notice
shall describe the general nature of the proceeding and the possible
resulting actions. The hearing shall be conducted by the Mayor who shall be
responsible for the determination of the validity of the complaint.
If the Mayor upon hearing concludes the animal is a vicious animal as defined
by this Chapter, then the Mayor shall order the person owning, keeping,
sheltering or harboring the animal to remove the vicious animal from the
corporate limits of the City or to destroy the vicious animal in a humane
manner. This order shall be served upon the person or entity against whom
issued in the same manner as provided for service of the Notice of Hearing.
Unless appealed as hereafter provided, the order of the Mayor shall be deemed
final for all purposes three (3) days after the order is served as provided
by subparagraph (3) above.
The person or entity against whom the order of the Mayor is issued shall have
the right to appeal the order to the City Council. The order shall be stayed
pending City Council action on the appeal. The appeal shall be filed in
writing with the Office of the City Administrator within three (3) days of
the date of the service of the order as above provided. Failure to timely
file such written appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right of appeal and
the order of the Mayor shall be then deemed final for all purposes. The
notice of appeal shall state the grounds for appeal. The hearing shall be
held as expeditiously as reasonably possible. The appellant shall be
entitled to at least one (1) day notice of the date of hearing. The City
Council may prescribe rules for the conduct of such hearings. Following the
hearing, the City Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Mayor. The
City Council shall cause notice of its decision to be served upon the
appellant either in the manner of an original notice, by personal service or
by certified mail. The City Council decision shall be deemed final for all
purposes three (3) days after the appellant's receipt of the City Council
notice of decision.
CHAPTER 2 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
101
If the City Council affirms the Mayor, then the notice of decision shall
order the person or entity owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring such
vicious animal to remove such animal from the corporate limits of the City or
to destroy the animal in a humane manner.
The person or entity owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring the vicious
animal shall comply with the order of the City Council on or before the date
the order becomes final. In the event the person or entity does not timely
comply with the order, then the police or their designee is authorized to
seize and impound such vicious animal. The vicious animal shall be impounded
for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the impoundment period the
person or entity against whom the order has been entered has not petitioned
the Iowa District Court for Madison County for further review of the order,
the police or their designee shall then cause the vicious animal to be
destroyed in a humane manner.
The failure to comply with a final order issued pursuant to this Section
shall constitute a simple misdemeanor.
3.208 ANIMAL SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT. Any animal, including dangerous
or vicious animals as defined by this Chapter, found at large in violation of
Section 3.203 of this Chapter or any animal including dangerous or vicious
animals as defined by this Chapter reasonably believed to have either
attacked or bitten any person whether at large or not may be seized by the
police or their designee and impounded by them. All animals reasonably
believed to have either attacked or bitten any person upon seizure shall be
subject to quarantine in a veterinary clinic under contract with the City to
provide such service for a sufficient period determined by the City
Veterinarian to assure the animal is not infected with rabies or similar
disease. The animal shall be released to its owner when the City
veterinarian certifies the animal is not infected with rabies or similar
disease. All persons owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring such
impounded and/or quarantined animal may recover the animal only after payment
to the City of the fees and costs established by this Chapter. If such
animal(s) are not claimed and all fees and costs paid within five (5) days of
the date of the initial impoundment of the animal or within five (5) days
after the date upon which the City Veterinarian certifies the quarantined
animal to be disease-free, then the animal shall be disposed of in a humane
manner. Should the disposal be by sale, then the sale proceeds belong to the
City. The sale may be in any reasonable manner. The impoundment fee owed to
the City shall be ten dollars ($10.00) . The quarantine fee owed to the City
shall be ten dollars ($10.00) . In addition to the foregoing fees, the owner
in order to recover the animal from impoundment and/or quarantine shall first
reimburse the City for the actual veterinary costs incurred by the City
during the impoundment and/or quarantine period of the animal.
CHAPTER 2 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
102
3.209 RIGHT TO KILL ANIMALS. In lieu of impounding as provided by this
Chapter, the City shall have the right to kill any animal including any
licensed or unlicensed dog when such animal is caught in the act of worrying,
chasing, maiming or killing any domestic animal or fowl or when such animal
is attacking or attempting to bite a person.
3.210 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE BY ANIMALS. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of an animal including dogs to allow or permit such animal to cause
annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by howling, yelping,
barking which is disruptive, bothersome, or vexatious or persistently
irritating acts or behaviors.
3.211 PENALTY. A police officer, or other enforcement official
authorized by the City, upon determining that probable cause exists that an
owner as defined in this Chapter has violated any provision of this Chapter,
may issue a written summons to the owner(s) for such violation(s). The
summons shall include the owner(s) name and last known address, the date and
approximate time of the violation(s), the location of the violation(s), a
brief and concise description of the violation(s), the Code Section(s)
violated, and the number or name of the police officer or other City
enforcement official issuing the summons. The owner within thirty (30) days
of the date the summons is issued shall pay to the City a fine of Twenty-five
Dollars ($25.00) for all first offense violations of this Chapter; a fine of
Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for all second offense violations of this Chapter;
and, a fine of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for all third and subsequent
violations of this Chapter. The payment of the fine to the City within
thirty (30) days of the date the summons is issued shall be deemed an
admission of the violation and no other costs or charges other than the fine
shall be collected. Violations which are not paid within thirty (30) days of
the date the summons is issued shall be deemed denied by the owner(s). In
this event the City may thereupon charge the owner(s) by the same or a
similar written summons before the Magistrate Court in the same manner and
procedure as traffic violations under Iowa Code Chapter 805 including the
assessment of court costs as provided by that Iowa Code Chapter. All fines
shall be increased by Five Dollars ($5.00) if not paid within thirty (30)
days of the date of the initial summons being issued by the City. In
determining if a violation charged is a second or subsequent offense for
purposes of sentencing under this Chapter, the Court shall consider a summons
issued for a violation of this Chapter as being one (1) violation for
purposes of sentencing; each previous summons for a violation on which
conviction, or admission of violation, was entered prior to the date of the
current violation charged shall be considered and counted as a separate
previous offense; and, any conviction, or admission of violation, entered
more than six (6) years prior to the date of the current violation charged
shall not be considered and counted as a separate previous offense under this
Chapter. In addition, any violation of this Chapter, or any provision
thereof, shall be a municipal infraction subject to the provisions of Iowa
Code Section 364.22, as amended.
CHAPTER 2 STREET TREES
103
3.301 DEFINITIONS
3.302 PERMIT TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREES
3.303 APPLICATIONS FOR PERMIT
3.304 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
3.305 APPEALS
3.306 MAINTENANCE OF STREET TREES
3.307 REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED STREET TREES
3.308 NOTICE TO REMOVE
3.309 WRITTEN COMPLAINT
3.310 PROTECTION OF STREET TREES
3.311 PENALTY
3.301. DEFINITIONS. In this Chapter the following terms
shall have the meanings described below unless the context
otherwise indicates:
(1) "Property owner" means the holder of legal title of record,
or the contract purchaser, if there is one.
(2) "Street trees" mean trees located between the street
property line, otherwise known as the right-of-way line, and the
street curb or street surface of all streets, avenues or public
right-of-ways within the City.
(3) "Street parking" means the portion of the street right-ofway
between the property line (usually the outside edge of the
public sidewalk) and the edge of the curb and/or driving surface
of the public street.
(4) "Cul-de-sac island" means the open land area located in the
center of a hard-surfaced street turn-around.
(5) "Flowers" means the annual and perennial plants that consist
of a shortened axis bearing modified leaves.
(6) "Shrubs" means a low growing, woody plant or bush.
3.302. PERMIT TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREES. No person shall
plant, move or remove any tree in any street parking, cul-de-sac
island, parking, or public-owned place in the City nor cause such
action to be done by others without first obtaining a written
permit from the City Administrator or designee. A permit shall
not be required for planting flowers in the street parking or culde-
sac islands provided the flowers not have a maximum height
greater than 30 inches within 35 feet of a street intersection.
CHAPTER 2 STREET TREES
104
3.303. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. An application for a permit
to plant, move or remove any tree in any street parking, cul-desac
island or other public-owned place shall be on forms supplied
by the City and shall be accompanied by a plan or drawing which
shall accurately show:
(1) the location of the applicant's adjoining property.
(2) the tree species and location of each tree proposed to
be planted and of each tree already existing in the street
parking or other public owned area within twenty-five (25)
feet of the proposed tree planting.
(3) the location of any public utility fixture such as
utility poles, wires and accessories, or traffic control
devices, or mail boxes or other appurtenances located upon
the street parking.
3.304. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. The City Administrator, or designee,
shall issue a permit to plant, move or remove a street tree after
review and consideration of the application. Any such permit
shall expire within 120 days after issuance of the permit.
All permits to plant trees shall be issued upon the express
condition that the permit may be revoked at any time, and any
trees planted pursuant to said permit may be removed by the City.
3.305. STREET TREE PLANTING STANDARDS. The following standards
shall govern the planting of street trees:
(1) No tree may be planted which would cause a public
danger or nuisance.
(2) No tree may be planted within three feet of a sidewalk
or other impervious surface such as the curb and gutter or
the street surface.
(3) No tree or shrub that will grow above 30 inches in
height shall be planted on a corner lot where two street
intersect for a distance of 35 feet in any direction from
the point of intersection at the curb line.
(4) No tree shall be planted within 15 lateral feet of an
overhead utility line, within 3 feet of any buried utility
line, within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, within 5 feet of a
driveway and 25 feet of a traffic control sign.
CHAPTER 2 STREET TREES
105
(5) No tree shall be planted if the tree species is not
included on the list of permitted tree species developed by
the Winterset Tree Commission.
(6) No tree shall be planted without first calling Iowa
One Call and complying with the procedures for locating
underground utilities.
(7) In cases of damage to utility lines, any street tree
planted in the right-of-way may be trimmed or removed in
order to repair the utility line.
3.306. MAINTENANCE OF STREET TREES. It shall be the duty
of the abutting property owners or resident to keep all trees
pruned and trimmed so that the lowest branches are not less than
eight (8) feet above the public sidewalk. The abutting property
owner shall be responsible to prune and trim branches that
overhang or come in contact with their residential home or
commercial building. The property owner shall also remove all
damaged and broken tree limbs that overhang private property, and
to remove tree limbs that are or may become dangerous or a
potential nuisance to abutting real and personal property.
The City shall maintain that portion of a street tree that
overhangs the public street or alley, and shall remove branches
and limbs that interfere with the visions of drivers approaching
any intersection, street, alley or traffic control sign.
3.307. REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED STREET TREES. The
property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or
dead wood on the publicly owned property or right of way.
However, the property owner may voluntarily do so upon issuance
of the permit issued in accordance with this Chapter.
3.308. NOTICE TO REMOVE. The abutting property owner may
be ordered to remove at their expense any tree or shrub which was
planted in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. Such
property owner shall be served with a written notice served in
the manner of an original notice, by personal service or by
certified mail to the last known post office address. If such
property owner fails to comply with the notice within thirty (30)
days of the date of service of the notice, the City may cause the
tree or shrub to be removed and the cost of removal may be
assessed against the abutting property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax.
CHAPTER 2 STREET TREES
106
3.309. WRITTEN COMPLAINT. Any person having cause to
believe that any tree or shrub is infected with Dutch Elm disease
or other infectious tree disease may file a written complaint
with the City Administrator, which complaint shall set forth the
location and description of such tree or shrub. Upon filing of
the complaint, the City Administrator shall cause a specimen of
such tree or shrub to be tested by such technological facilities
or testing procedures as the City Administrator may select. Such
test may also be carried out without the filing of a complaint
upon the initiative or request of any city employee or of the
City Council. In the event testing discloses the tree or shrub is
infected with Dutch Elm disease or other infectious tree disease,
the City Administrator shall proceed to initiate removal of said
tree or shrub using the provisions of this Chapter.
3.310. PROTECTION OF STREET TREES. No person shall
willfully break, deface, kill, damage or destroy any street tree
in any street parking, park or other public-owned place in the
City unless authorized by permit issued in accordance with this
Chapter.
3.311. PENALTY. Any person violating any provision of this
Chapter shall upon conviction be guilty of a simple misdemeanor
punishable as provided by law. Any tree planted in violation of
the provisions of this Chapter may be removed by the City or may
be ordered to be removed by the abutting property owner.
3.312. REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED TREES FROM PRIVATE
PROPERTY. Action commenced by the City for the removal of dead
or diseased trees and dead wood from private property is
regulated by Chapter 5 of Title III of this Code.
3.313. APPEALS. Any action of the City Administrator pursuant
to this Chapter may be appealed to the Tree Commission pursuant to the
provisions of Section 1.1703 of this Code.
CHAPTER 4 MISDEMEANORS
107
3.401 BARBED WIRE
3.402 DUMPING ON STREETS
3.403 FIRES
3.404 ILLEGAL CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR
3.405 INTOXICATION
3.406 FIREARMS
3.407 HUNTING OR FIREARMS IN PARK
3.408 SLING SHOTS
3.409 DISORDERLY CONDUCT
3.410 DAMAGE TO FIRE HOSE
3.411 POSTING NOTICES
3.412 DESTRUCTION OF NOTICES
3.413 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OFFICIALS
3.414 ADVERTISING OR MARKING ON SIDEWALK
3.415 DRAINAGE ON SIDEWALK
3.416 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
3.417 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK
3.418 DAMAGE TO PAVEMENT
3.419 DAMAGE TO PAVEMENT BY CHEMICALS AND MACHINERY
3.420 MINORS RESTRICTED
3.421 CLOSING HOURS OF CITY PUBLIC PLACES, INCLUDING
THE CITY PARKS, THE WATER RESERVOIR AND THE CITY SWIMMING
POOL
3.422 RESTRICTIONS TO MOTORCYCLES IN PUBLIC PLACES
3.423 LITTERING
3.424 LOITERING
3.425 INJURIES TO GRAVESTONES
3.426 URINATION IN PUBLIC
3.427 SMOKING AND TOBACCO VIOLATIONS
3.428 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER AND TENANT TO MAINTAIN PARKING AREA
3.401 BARBED WIRE. Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall
construct or cause to be constructed any barbed wire fence and no person
shall use any barbed wire for the purpose of repairing or rebuilding any
fence. This section shall not apply to the following:
a. Animals restrained by the owners thereof pursuant to
Chapter 188 of the Code of Iowa; and,
b. Fences in which the barbed wire is six (6) feet or more
from the ground level. Where words and phrases used in
this chapter are defined by the laws of the State of Iowa,
such definitions shall apply to this chapter.
3.402 DUMPING ON STREETS. No person shall dump or deposit on the
street rights of way or alleys of the City any manure, rubbish, refuse, yard
waste or other debris or junk.
CHAPTER 4 MISDEMEANORS
108
3.403 FIRES. No person shall build any fire out of doors for the
purpose of burning rubbish, refuse or garbage.
3.404 ILLEGAL CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR.
a. No person shall use or consume any alcoholic liquors, wine or
beer upon the public streets or highways or in any public place,
except premises covered by a liquor control license. "Public
place" means any place, building, or conveyance to which the
public has or is permitted access.
b. Beer containing less than five percent of alcohol by weight
may be used or consumed by persons who have attained the legal
drinking age while upon or in City-owned park and recreation
facilities and the City Reservoir property, but not while upon or
in any vehicle, boat, animal, or animal drawn vehicle, and
subject to such limitations, exclusions and regulations as may be
enacted by the Winterset Park and Recreation Board pursuant to
the rule making authority granted said Board by Section 1.605 of
the Winterset Municipal Code.
3.405 INTOXICATION. No person shall be intoxicated or simulate
intoxication in any public place. "Public place" means any place, building
or conveyance to which the public has or is permitted access. When a peace
officer arrests or cites a person on a charge under this section, the peace
officer shall follow the procedures prescribed under Iowa Code Section
123.46(3).
3.406 FIREARMS. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm of any
kind or description within any Residential, Commercial or Industrial Zoning
District within the City without the prior permission of the Mayor.
3.407 HUNTING OR FIREARMS IN PARK. No person shall hunt or trap any game or
discharge any firearm of any kind or description in any City Park or cemetery
within the City without the prior permission of the Mayor.
3.408 SLING SHOTS. No person shall shoot or throw any shot, stone,
arrow or other hard substance by or with any rubber band, sling, BB gun, air
gun, gas powered gun, bow or other means or apparatus within any Residential,
Commercial or Industrial Zoning District within the City.
3.409 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. A person commits a simple misdemeanor when
the person does any of the following:
1. Engages in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or
near any lawful assembly of persons; provided that participants in athletic
contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that
sport.
2. Makes loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
CHAPTER 4 MISDEMEANORS
109
3. Directs abusive epithets or makes any threatening gesture which the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
4. Without lawful authority or color of authority, the person disturbs
any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the
meeting or assembly.
5. By words or action, initiates or circulates a report or warning of
fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such
warning to be baseless.
6. Knowingly and publicly uses the flag of the United States in such a
manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States,
with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or
encourage another to commit a public offense.
7. Without authority or justification, the person obstructs any
street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or
hinder its lawful use by others.
3.410 DAMAGE TO FIRE HOSE. No person shall drive any vehicle upon or
across any fire hose or in any other manner interfere with or damage any fire
equipment.
3.411 POSTING OF NOTICES. Except as may be allowed under Sections
3.414 or 3.416 of this Chapter, no person shall fix any poster, written
notice or advertisement to any property without the consent of the owner or
to any property owned by the City.
3.412 DESTRUCTION OF NOTICES. No person shall disfigure or tear down
any advertisements, notices or ordinance posted by order of the City.
3.413 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OFFICIALS. No person shall hinder or
obstruct the making or repairing of any improvements or works of any kind
ordered by the City or otherwise interferes or obstructs any City employee in
the performance of their official duties.
3.414 ADVERTISING OR MARKING ON STREETS AND SIDEWALK. No person shall
place or allow any advertising matter or signage or otherwise mark or write
upon the streets and sidewalks of the City, except that in the City Downtown
Commercial (DC) Zoning District one (1) temporary, portable sign advertising
the adjacent business may be placed by the merchant on the public sidewalk
immediately adjoining the merchant’s business premises. Any such sign shall
not exceed eight (8) square feet per side in total area and shall be
permitted on the public sidewalk only during the hours when the adjacent
merchant’s business is operating and open to the public.
CHAPTER 4 MISDEMEANORS
110
3.415 DRAINAGE ON SIDEWALK. No person shall construct any downspouts,
gutters or drains from any building or yard so as to discharge any water upon
any sidewalk. All such downspouts, gutters or drains shall carry water into
the street, gutters and storm sewers.
3.416 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS. No person shall place or
cause to be placed or otherwise allow any substance or material upon any
street, sidewalk or alley so as to obstruct the same. The merchants in the
Downtown Commercial Zoning District may use the sidewalk next to their place
of business for one (1) temporary, portable business sign as provided in
Section 3.414 above and for the temporary displays of goods, wares or
merchandise provided that a minimum five (5) foot width of unobstructed
sidewalk be maintained and provided that no such temporary sign or display
shall unduly restrict the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
3.417 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK. No person shall drive any motor vehicle
upon any public sidewalk except at driveway entrances to private property.
3.418 DAMAGE TO PAVEMENT. No person shall operate or drive upon the
paved streets of the city any vehicle which uses lugs, spikes, flanges, ribs,
or rims upon the wheel or wheels which come in contact with the street
pavement.
3.419 DAMAGE TO PAVEMENT BY CHEMICALS AND MACHINERY. No person shall
operate or cause to be operated any machinery upon the paved streets of the
City, the use of which might be injurious or detrimental to the street
pavement and no person shall deposit or place upon the paved streets of the
city any chemical which might be injurious or detrimental to the street
pavement or place or deposit any oil or gasoline, or permit the same to drip
or escape from any vehicle, tank or receptacle, upon any street.
3.420 MINORS RESTRICTED. Minors are prohibited from entering any place
of business where the sale for consumption on the premises of beer or
alcoholic beverages, constitute more than 50% of the gross business
transacted therein. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or manager
of such business, his agent or employee, or the parent or guardian of any
minor knowingly to allow or permit a minor to enter such place of business.
3.421 CLOSING HOURS OF CITY PUBLIC PLACES, INCLUDING THE CITY PARKS,
THE WATER RESERVOIR, AND THE CITY SWIMMING POOL. No person shall enter upon
or remain in the following public places owned by or under the jurisdiction
of the City of Winterset, Iowa, between the designated hours specified below:
CHAPTER 4 MISDEMEANORS
111
PLACE CLOSING HOURS
a. CITY PARKS, except persons camping in
the City Park in the areas designated for
public camping by the Park & Recreation
Commission.
from 10:30 P.M. to 6:00 A.M.
b. WATER RESERVOIR from 11:30 P.M. to 6:00 A.M.
c. SWIMMING POOL, TENNIS COURT from 11:30 P.M. to 6:00 A.M.
3.422 RESTRICTIONS ON MOTOR VEHICLES IN PUBLIC PLACES. No person shall
operate any motor vehicle including any motorcycle or motorbike upon any
public place owned by or under the jurisdiction of the City of Winterset,
Iowa except upon hard surface roads or designated public parking areas that
have been provided for such motor vehicular traffic. "Public place" as used
in this section includes, but is not limited to, the City parks and
recreational facilities and the water reservoir.
3.423 LITTERING. No person shall place, cause to be placed, throw or
deposit onto or in any publicly owned property or public right of way of the
City of Winterset, Iowa, any cans, bottles, garbage, rubbish, litter or other
debris. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the
motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists
as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually caused the litter.
3.424 LOITERING. It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate,
stand, loaf or loiter upon any street, alley, bridge or crossing so as to
obstruct the same, hinder or prevent persons passing or attempting or
desiring to pass thereon; or to congregate, stand loaf or loiter in or in
front of any hall, lobby, doorway, passage or entrance of any public
building, theater, hotel, eating house, lodging house, office building,
store, shop, office or factory or other like building so as to obstruct the
same, hinder or prevent persons walking along or into or out of the same or
attempting or desiring to do so; or, by sitting upon or leaning upon or
against any railing or other barrier about any area, entrance, basement or
window to obstruct the light or prevent passage for persons or tenants
occupying the building to which such area, entrance, basement or window
belongs.
CHAPTER 4 MISDEMEANORS
112
3.425 INJURY TO GRAVESTONES. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, vault,
monument, gravestone or other structure placed in any public or private
cemetery or any fences, railing or other work for the protection or
ornamentation of said cemetery or of any tomb, vault, monument or gravestone,
or other structure aforesaid, on any cemetery lot within any such cemetery,
or to willfully destroy, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub, plant or lawn
within the limits of said cemetery, or to willfully throw or leave any
rubbish, refuse, garbage, waste, litter or foreign substance within the
limits of said cemetery, or to drive any vehicle or bicycle at an unusual and
forbidden speed over the Avenues or roads within said cemetery, or to drive
any vehicle or bicycle outside of said avenues and roads, and over the grass,
graves or other property of said cemetery.
3.426 URINATION IN PUBLIC. No person shall urinate or defecate on any
street, alley or sidewalk or on any portion of any private property visible
by the public from any street, alley or sidewalk.
3.427 Pursuant to Iowa Code Section 380.10 the City of Winterset does
hereby establish, declare and adopt by reference the following sections from
Iowa Code chapter 142B and 453A whose subject matter concerns smoking in
public places and tobacco violations to be applied within the City of
Winterset, Iowa:
MUNICIPAL IOWA
CODE SECTION CODE SECTION SUBJECT MATTER
3.426 142B.2 SMOKING VIOLATIONS
3.427 453A.2 TOBACCO VIOLATIONS
3.428 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER AND TENANT TO MAINTAIN PARKING
AREA. No person owning or occupying property adjoining a street right of way
shall allow the area of the street right of way between the property line of
the adjoining property to the edge of the traveled portion of the street to
be unkept including allowing the vegetation (including grass) to become more
than eight (8) inches in height.
CHAPTER 5 NUISANCES
113
3.501 NUISANCES PROHIBITED
3.502 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE
3.503 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE
3.504 CONTENTS OF NOTICE TO ABATE
3.505 METHOD OF SERVICE
3.506 REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL
3.507 ABATEMENT
3.508 COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT
3.509 PENALTY
3.501 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance
is prohibited.
3.502 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health,
indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property is a nuisance. Nuisance shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
a. The dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or other
vegetation so as to constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
b. Junk motor vehicles and junk machinery to include any motor
vehicle or piece of machinery stored within the corporate limits
of the City which has any of the following characteristics:
i. Broken or cracked windshield, window, headlight or
tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass;
ii. Broken or loose fender, door bumper, hood, hood
ornament, door handle, window handle, running board,
steering wheel, trunk top, trunk handle, radio aerial, tail
pipe or decorative piece;
iii. Which has become the habitat of rats, mice, or
snakes, or any other vermin or insects;
iv. Which contains gasoline or any other flammable fuel;
v. Which has become defective or obsolete in any way so
as to constitute a threat to the public health and safety.
c. Dead or diseased trees and dead wood located on private
property
3.503 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE. Whenever a nuisance is found to exist,
a notice shall be served by the City upon the owner, agent, or occupant of
the property on which the nuisance is located or upon the person causing or
maintaining the nuisance ordering the abatement of the nuisance.
CHAPTER 5 NUISANCES
114
3.504 CONTENTS OF NOTICE TO ABATE. The notice to abate shall contain:
(a) an order to abate the nuisance;
(b) location of nuisance, if stationary;
(c) description of what constitutes the nuisance;
(d) statement of action or actions necessary to abate the
nuisance;
CHAPTER 5 NUISANCES
115
(e) statement that the person may appeal the order of abatement
by requesting a hearing within seven (7) calendar days in
accordance with Section 3.506;
(f) statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and
no appeal of the order is made within the time prescribed, the
City may abate the nuisance and assess the cost against such
person.
3.505 METHOD OF SERVICE. The notice to abate shall be served by the
City Administrator or designees upon the named person either by mailing by
certified mail or by serving the notice in person. Proof of service shall be
made by filing in the City Administrator's office a copy of the notice with
the notation thereon indicating the date of mailing or the date of personal
service.
3.506 REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL.
(a) Any persons ordered to abate a nuisance may appeal the order
of abatement to the Mayor to determine whether a nuisance exists.
The appeal shall be in writing, shall request a hearing before
the Mayor and be filed with the City Administrator's office
within seven (7) calendar days of the date of the service of the
notice to abate. If not timely appealed, it will be conclusively
presumed that the nuisance exists and the order of abatement is
then deemed final. The appeal hearing must be held within a
reasonable time after the appeal is filed.
(b) Following the hearing, the Mayor shall render a written
decision as to whether a nuisance exists. If the Mayor finds that
a nuisance exists, the Mayor shall affirm the order of abatement.
The Mayor's decision may allow additional time, which must be
reasonable under the circumstances, to correct the nuisance. The
Mayor's decision for purposes of appeal shall be deemed final
upon its filing with the City Administrator's office.
(c) The interested parties may appeal within thirty (30) calendar
days the Mayor's decision by petition filed with the Iowa
District Court. Any appeal to the Iowa District Court shall not
stay the effect of the final order of abatement.
3.507 ABATEMENT. If the person so notified neglects or fails to abate
the nuisance as directed, the City Administrator may cause the nuisance to be
abated and shall keep an accurate account of the expenses incurred.
CHAPTER 5 NUISANCES
116
3.508 COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT. The City Administrator shall
mail a statement of the total cost to the person failing to abide by the
notice to abate and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid
within one month, the City Administrator shall certify the cost to the County
Auditor and it shall then be collected with and in the same manner as general
property taxes.
3.509 PENALTY. Any person who has or maintains a nuisance in violation
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a simple misdemeanor
punishable as provided by law. Each day of the continuance of such violation
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
CHAPTER 6 SNOW AND ICE ON SIDEWALKS
117
3.601 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER AND TENANT
3.602 REMOVAL BY CITY
3.603 COLLECTION OF COST
3.601 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER AND TENANT. No person shall allow any
snow or ice to remain upon any sidewalk adjacent to, or abutting upon, any
property owned or leased by said person after twenty-four (24) hours
following the snow or ice having ceased falling or accumulating thereon.
3.602 REMOVAL BY THE CITY. If any person permits snow or ice which has
accumulated to remain upon sidewalks in violation of Section 3.601 above, the
Street Commissioner may without notice to the owner or tenant, remove the
snow or ice from said sidewalks. The Street Commissioner shall keep an
accurate account of expenses incurred in removing said snow or ice and shall
provide said account to the City Administrator.
3.603 COLLECTION OF COST. The City Administrator shall mail a
statement of the costs incurred by the City for removing said snow or ice to
the owner and, if applicable, the tenant failing to remove said snow or ice
accumulation. If the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within
thirty (30) days from the date of the same was mailed, the City Administrator
shall certify the costs to the Madison County Auditor and the same shall be
assessed against the adjacent or abutting property and collected in the same
manner as a property tax.
CHAPTER 7 WATER RESERVOIR
118
3.701 SHOOTING BLINDS
3.702 NUISANCE
3.703 FIREARMS
3.704 BOATS AND CANOES
3.701 SHOOTING BLINDS. No person shall erect, maintain or use any
shooting blind for use in the shooting of ducks, geese, or other fowl at the
water reservoir except during the period when the shooting of ducks, geese, or
other fowl is permitted by state or federal regulations. Such blinds may be
erected within thirty (30) days of the beginning of the hunting season and
shall be removed not later than thirty (30) days after the close of such
hunting season.
3.702 NUISANCE. The maintenance of any shooting blind or other
structure of any kind on city property at the water reservoir in violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated
by the City as provided by this City Code.
3.703 FIREARMS. No person shall shoot or discharge any firearms of any
kind on city property at the water reservoir, except that it shall be
permissible to shoot or discharge a shotgun on said property while engaging
in hunting or shooting of ducks, geese, or other fowl during the hunting
seasons permitted by state and federal regulations.
3.704 BOATS AND CANOES. No gasoline powered boats or canoes shall
operate on the water reservoir. Boats or canoes with electric trolling
motors will be permitted.
CHAPTER 8 PROVISIONS FOR THE DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTE
119
3.801 DEFINITIONS
3.802 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED
3.801 DEFINITIONS. "Yard waste" means organic debris "e.g. grass
clippings, leaves, tree limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc." which is
produced as part of yard and garden development and maintenance.
3.802 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED. All yard waste shall be
separated by the owner or occupant of all premises within the City from all
other garbage and refuse accumulated on the premises and shall be compost on
the premises or placed in degradable bags, containers or packages and set out
for collection by the refuse hauler retained by the owner or occupant or for
removal by the owner or occupant in the manner provided by law.
CHAPTER 9 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
120
3.901 PURPOSE
3.902 LEGISLATIVE INTENT
3.903 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED
3.904 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED
3.905 DETERMINING FACTORS
3.906 PERSONS DEFINED
3.907 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
3.908 MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE OF DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA
3.909 PENALTIES
3.910 NUISANCE
3.901 PURPOSE. The purpose of this ordinance is to prohibit the use,
possession with intent to use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia
as defined herein.
3.902 LEGISLATIVE INTENT. It is the purpose and intent of this City
Council to promote the health, safety, and morals of the citizens of
Winterset, Iowa. The use or administration of controlled substances is
clearly illegal. The banning of all objects in close connection and adopted
for the use of controlled substances should also be controlled because of the
lack of social or practical purposes of such objects or paraphernalia,
whether the use be by adults or minors. It is also strong public policy to
protect children from the unsupervised exposure and familiarity of drug
paraphernalia. In addition to education about the items in school and at
home, it is also essential to discourage open use, possession, manufacture,
and commerce of these drug related items.
3.903 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED. The term "controlled substance"
as used in this Chapter shall be defined as the term "controlled substance"
as defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 204 of the Iowa
Code, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
3.904 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED. The term "drug paraphernalia" as
used in this chapter shall mean all equipment, products and materials of any
kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, concealing, containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 204 of the Iowa
Code. It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived.
CHAPTER 9 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
121
2. Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
3. Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant that is a
controlled substance.
4. Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed
for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity
of controlled substances.
5. Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6. Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
7. Separators - Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use,
or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining marijuana.
8. Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, container, spoons and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
9. Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
10. Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11. Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used,
intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body.
12. Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
a. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads,
or punctured metals bowls;
b. Water pipes;
c. Carburetion tubes and devices;
CHAPTER 9 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
122
d. Smoking and carburetion masks;
e. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials,
such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;
f. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
g. Chamber pipes;
h. Carburetor pipes;
i. Electric pipes;
j. Air driven pipes;
k. Chillums;
l. Bongs;
m. Ice pipes and chillers
3.905. DETERMINING FACTORS. In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the following
factors should be considered in addition to all other logically relevant
factors:
1. Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
2. Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone
in control of the object under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
3. Proximity to Violation. The proximity of the object in time and space, to
a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 204 of
the Iowa Code.
4. Proximity to Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
5. Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
6. Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 204
of the Iowa Code.
CHAPTER 9 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
123
7. Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control
of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances
Act, Chapter 204 of the Iowa Code, should not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use, or designed for use, as drug paraphernalia.
8. Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning to its use.
9. Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use.
10. Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
11. Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
12. Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, anyone in control of
the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
13. Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
14. Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
15. Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
3.906. PERSON DEFINED. "Person", as used in this article, shall mean an
individual corporation, business, trust, estate, partnership or association,
or any other legal entity.
3.907. POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. It is unlawful for any person
to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 204 of the Iowa Code.
CHAPTER 9 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
124
3.908. MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with the intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or
knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 204 of the Iowa Code.
3.909. PENALTIES. Any person, violating any provisions of this Chapter
shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be
imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. Each day a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.
3.910. NUISANCE. In addition to the above, or in lieu thereof,
violation of this Chapter shall constitute a nuisance which may be abated in
the manner provided in Iowa Code 364.12(3)(h) by injunction in the Iowa
District Court or in the manner set forth in Chapter 5 of Title III of this
City Code.
CHAPTER 10 REGULATING CONDUCT IN PUBLIC ESTABLISHMENTS
125
3.1001 PURPOSE
3.1002 DEFINITIONS
3.1003 EXPOSURE RESTRICTIONS
3.1004 DANCING
3.1001 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the public
conduct of persons while present in public establishments.
3.1002 DEFINITIONS. The term "public establishment" as used in this
Chapter shall mean a place of business or other activity accessible or
visible to members of the community that is located within the City of
Winterset, Iowa
3.1003 EXPOSURE RESTRICTIONS. No person who is acting as a waiter,
waitress, host, hostess, dancer or entertainer or who is a business invitee
on or about the premises of a public establishment whether or not the public
establishment is licensed in the State of Iowa to sell beer, wine or liquor
in order to amuse or entertain other persons in the establishment shall:
a. Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum,
anus region, or pubic hair region; or,
b. Expose or wear any device, costume or covering which gives
the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, perineum, anus region, or pubic hair region; or,
c. Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the
nipple.
Under this Section, a person shall be deemed a waiter, waitress, host,
hostess, dancer, or entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without
regard to whether or not such person is paid any compensation by the owner
and/or operator of the public establishment or their agent or employee or by
any invitee or occupant of the public establishment and shall not be deemed a
waiter, waitress, host, hostess, dancer, or entertainer if such person's
performance is by recorded visual image rather than by live performance.
3.1004 DANCING. Dancing is authorized in connection with the operation
of a beer, wine or liquor business provided that:
a. The floor space used for dancing purposes contains at least
one hundred (100) square feet which shall be of the same general
floor level as the place where the beer, wine or liquor is
dispensed; and,
b. The space to be used for dancing shall be in the same room
as, or in a room adjacent to and opening directly from the place
where beer, wine and liquor is dispensed; and,
CHAPTER 10 REGULATING CONDUCT IN PUBLIC ESTABLISHMENTS
126
c. The floor space shall not be obstructed or crossed in any
part or portion by partitions or other obstructions of any kind
except necessary structural posts, pillars or similar supports.
CHAPTER 11 FALSE REPORTS AND ALARMS
127
3.1101 FALSE REPORTS TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
3.1102 DEFINITIONS
3.1103 TESTING
3.1104 FEES FOR FALSE ALARMS
3.1105 DISCONNECTION OF ALARM SYSTEM-EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS
3.1106 EVIDENCE OF FALSE ALARMS
3.1101 FALSE REPORTS TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
A person who reports or causes to be reported false information to the Fire
Department or Law Enforcement authority, knowing that the information is
false, or who reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the
same did not occur, commits a simple misdemeanor punishable upon conviction
as provided by law.
3.1102 DEFINITIONS
"Alarm System" means an assembly of equipment and devices or a single device
such as a solid-state unit that uses a electrical energy to signal the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which Police
Department or Fire Department is expected to respond. In this Chapter the
term "alarm system" includes, but is not limited to the terms "automatic
holdup alarm system", "burglar alarm system", "holdup alarm system", and
"manual hold up alarm system", as those terms are defined in this Chapter.
"Automatic holdup alarm system" means an alarm in which the signal
transmission is initiated by the action of the perpetrator.
"Burglar alarm system" refers to an alarm system signaling an entry or
attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
"False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, without an unlawful entry, or
through the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or such
person's employees or agents or other cause.
"holdup alarm system" refers to an alarm system signaling a robbery or
attempted robbery.
"Manual holdup alarm system" refers to an alarm system in which the signal
transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by
an observer of the attack.
"Police Chief" means the Chief of the City Police Department or a designated
representative.
CHAPTER 11 FALSE REPORTS AND ALARMS
128
"Fire Chief" means the Chief of the City Fire Department or a designated
representative.
"Subscriber" means a person who buys or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm
signaling system and contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor or
service the alarm device.
3.1103 TESTING
A. No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly
to the Police or Fire Departments shall be tested or demonstrated
without first notifying the Police Department.
B. No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the
Police or Fire Department will be tested to determine Police response
without first notifying the Police Department.
C. Any testing done without proper advance notification shall be
classified as a "false alarm" for purposes of this Chapter. All
notices shall be prior to the testing date unless the Police Chief
gives special permission otherwise. All notices shall include the
time, date, owner's or subscribers name, address and the name of the
representative responsible for the testing, and such person's employee
name, address and telephone number, if applicable.
3.1104 FEES FOR FALSE ALARMS. Any owner or lessee of any alarm system
who has more than three (3) false alarms in any one calendar year to which
the Police Department and/or Fire Department has responded shall be charged a
fee of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) for the fourth and each subsequent
violation occurring in the calendar year. Each calendar year shall be a new
period for purpose of the imposition of this fee.
3.1105 DISCONNECTION OF ALARM SYSTEM--EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS. The
Police Chief or Fire Chief is authorized to require the owner or lessee of
any alarm system directly connected to the departments to disconnect such
device until the device is working in a manner as will not cause a high
frequency of false alarms. The Police Chief or Fire Chief may require
disconnection if ten (10) false alarms are received in any twelve (12) month
period. The Police Chief or Fire Chief may, after giving written notice to
the subscriber, order disconnection of the alarm system from the Police
and/or Fire Departments.
CHAPTER 11 FALSE REPORTS AND ALARMS
129
3.1106 EVIDENCE OF FALSE ALARMS. The Police Chief or designated
representative shall determine in each instance whether or not an alarm given
to the Police and/or Fire Departments is a false alarm. The Police Chief
shall consider all relevant circumstances including evidence such as the
alarm being set off by the perpetrator who fled the scene leaving signs of
forced entry.
CHAPTER 12 OPEN BURNING
130
3.1201 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall ignite, cause to be
ignited, permit to be ignited, allow or maintain any open fire within the
City corporate limits except as provided in this Chapter.
3.1202 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Chapter, these words shall
have the following meanings:
1. “Persons” includes any individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
trust or any other organized group or association of any kind.
2. The terms “Combustible Material”, ”Flare Stacks”, “Landscape Waste”,
“Open Burning”, “Recreational Fires”, “Refuse”, “Rubbish”, “Residential
Waste”, “Compost”, “Garbage”, and “Yard Waste” shall have the same meaning in
this Chapter as these terms are defined and used in the Iowa Code and the
Iowa Administrative Code.
3.1203 EXCEPTION TO OPEN BURNING.
A. Open burning of the following types will be allowed provided the
burning complies with the State Fire Marshall guidelines:
1. Disaster Rubbish: The City may burn landscape waste as provided by Iowa
Code Chapter 455B during a declared disaster period when an officially
declared emergency exists.
2. Prescribed Agricultural Burns: The open burning of agricultural fields
will be allowed if necessary for the maintenance of native prairie grass.
“Agricultural Fields” for purposes of this Chapter means an open land area
more than fifty feet (50') from a building or wooded area.
3. Training Fires: Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and
training of public, institutional or industrial employees in the methods of
firefighting provided the training is conducted according to State Fire
Marshall guidelines.
4. Flare Stacks: Open burning or flaring of waste gas will be permitted
provided such open burning is conducted in compliance with the Iowa
Administrative Code.
5. The owner of a lot within the R-1 or R-2 residential zoning district
having an acreage of three (3) acres or more; or, the owner of a parcel
within CO-Conservation-Open Space Zoning District or the A-Agriculture Zoning
District may burn landscape waste originating on the premises, provided such
fires are located more than fifty feet (50’) from a building or wooded area,
and provided such fires comply with the Iowa Administrative Code including
the limits for emissions of visible air contaminants. Such a fire must be
consistently supervised by a competent person, are limited to the hours
between eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and twelve o’clock a.m. midnight, and must
be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free manner, when wind and weather
CHAPTER 12 OPEN BURNING
131
conditions minimizes adverse effects and do not create a health or visibility
hazard.
B. Recreational Fires: Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation
and ceremonies of the following types will be allowed, provided such
fires otherwise comply with this Chapter and with the Iowa
Administrative Code including the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants:
1. Ceremonial or Controlled Bonfires: Ceremonial or controlled bonfires will
be allowed upon issuance of a permit by the Fire Department, provided that
only firewood and kindling is burned.
2. Outdoor cooking in a barbecue grill is permitted if performed in a noncombustible
container constructed of steel, brick or masonry, or comparable
materials, provided that only gas grills or grills burning charcoal or
firewood are used.
3. Burning in an outdoor fireplace is permitted in a non-combustible
container constructed of steel, brick or masonry, or comparable materials,
provided that only firewood and kindling is burned.
4. Campfires are permitted in designated locations within established
campgrounds, public parks, and at the city reservoir, provided that only
firewood and kindling is burned.
C. Recreational fires shall further comply with the following
provisions:
1. Recreational fires will be limited to the hours between eight
o’clock (8:00) a.m. and twelve o’clock a.m. midnight of any
day.
2. Recreational fires shall be located at least 25 feet from the
nearest structure not on the same property.
3. No landscape waste, yard waste, rubbish or refuse may be
burned in a recreational fire.
4. Recreational fires must be constantly supervised by a
competent person until the fire is extinguished.
5. Recreational fires must be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free
manner, when wind and weather conditions minimize adverse
effects and do not create a health or visibility hazard.
CHAPTER 13 LICENSE FOR KEEPING A DOG
132
3.1301 LICENSE FOR KEEPING A DOG
Anyone keeping a dog more than 6 months of age within the City of Winterset shall
obtain a license from the City of Winterset for such dog. In order to license a
dog, the owner of the dog shall provide the City with a copy of a current rabies
vaccination certificate.
The license application shall be on such form as prescribed by the City Council;
shall state as to each dog the breed, sex, age, color, markings and name (if any),
the name and address of the dog’s owner(s) and shall be signed by the owner(s);
and, shall be filed with the Office of the City Administrator at City Hall.
The license fee shall be waived for a service dog which provides assistance to an
individual with a disability, for a search and rescue dog, for a dog used by a
governmental entity for law enforcement or public safety purposes, and for a dog
that has been retired from any of these aforementioned uses.
The license fee shall be waived for dogs kept in a state licensed animal rescue
shelter or kept by an individual who fosters dogs for a licensed animal rescue
shelter.
The annual license is waived for dogs kept in a state licensed commercial dog
breeder kennel located in an agricultural or commercial zoning district.
A license tag shall be securely attached to the collar of the dog at all times.
3.1302 LICENSE FEE. The annual license fee for keeping a dog is established
at $15 per dog.
The license fee shall be decreased by $5 if the dog has been spayed or neutered.
An applicant claiming that a dog has been spayed or neutered shall present as
evidence an appropriate certificate from a qualified veterinarian.
The dog license shall expire on December 31st each year. If the owner of the dog
does not renew the license within 1 month of the expiration date, or if a dog is
not licensed within 1 month of attaining 6 months of age, a late payment fee of $20
shall be added to the license fee.
The annual license fee is non-refundable. The fee for a license purchased during
the calendar year for less than a year-long time period shall be prorated on a
monthly basis.
3.1303 ANIMAL CARE. All owners of any animal shall comply with the following
standards of care.
CHAPTER 13 LICENSE FOR KEEPING A DOG
133
1. Every owner shall provide adequate food and water for each animal.
Adequate food shall be provided at intervals appropriate for the species, suitable
for the physical condition and age of the animal, served in a clean receptacle, and
sufficient to maintain an adequate level of nutrition for such animal. Every owner
shall provide access to a supply of clean, fresh, potable water.
2. Every owner shall provide adequate outdoor shelter for such animal when
it is kept outdoors, which shall mean a structurally sound, weather-proof,
ventilated shelter, which provides access to shade from direct sunlight and
protection from exposure to weather conditions. Adequate space shall be provided
which shall be appropriate for the particular species of animal.
3. Every owner shall provide adequate sanitation which shall mean periodic
cleaning or sanitizing housing facilities and any area where the animal is confined
or restrained to remove excreta and other waste materials and dirt, so as to
minimize vermin infestation, odors and disease hazards.
4. Every owner shall provide adequate veterinary care, including
immunizations as required by Iowa law.
5. A dog that is tethered shall be able to move about freely. The tether shall
be a minimum of ten linear feet in length and shall swivel on the end. Tow chains
shall not be used. A dog when tethered shall wear a collar, harness or similar
device that fits properly to prevent injury or obstruction of respiration. Choke,
pinch, prong, or other chain collars shall not be used on a dog that is tethered.
6. No person shall keep or maintain any animal subject to this Chapter in
unsanitary and unhealthy conditions, or to otherwise create conditions that
constitute a public or private nuisance. If such conditions exist, then the City
Administrator, or his designee, shall give written notice to the keeper of such
animal(s) of the violation(s) of this Chapter; such notice shall advise such keeper
of their opportunity for hearing before the Mayor to contest the violation(s),
which request for hearing must be filed in writing with the Office of the City
Administrator within three (3) days of the date of service of the notice; and,
shall advise the keeper of such animal(s) that their failure to timely appeal the
violation(s) of this Chapter to the Mayor will cause the Removal Order to become
final. Upon the Mayor’s hearing or after the running of the appeal period if no
hearing request is filed, the Mayor is authorized to order such numbers of dogs and
cats to be reduced at the dwelling unit and/or to order the conditions constituting
the nuisance to be timely abated. The notice prescribed above shall be served by
certified mail or by personal service upon the owner or keeper of the animals at
least seven (7) days before the date of the hearing. Any appeal of the Mayor’s
Order shall be within thirty (30) days of the Order to the Iowa District Court for
Madison County. This administrative procedure shall be an additional remedy for the
City and shall not be in lieu of the other penalties available to the City under
Section 3.1305.
3.1304. CLEANUP AFTER DOGS. Any person, who walks a dog or takes a dog upon
public property, public right-of-way, parks, school grounds, playgrounds, or the
private property of another person, shall clean up, remove and dispose of solid
waste excreted or deposited upon such public or private property by such animal.
This section does not apply to an animal under the direct control of a person with
disabilities, which animal is specially trained for the purpose of assisting such
person.
CHAPTER 13 LICENSE FOR KEEPING A DOG
134
3.1305 PENALTY. A police officer, or other enforcement official authorized
by the City, upon determining that probable cause exists that an owner as defined
in this Chapter has violated any provision of this Chapter, may issue a written
summons to the owner(s) for such violation(s). The summons shall include the
owner(s) name and last known address, the date and approximate time of the
violation(s), the location of the violation(s), a brief and concise description of
the violation(s), the Code Section(s) violated, and the number or name of the
police officer or other City enforcement official issuing the summons. The owner
within thirty (30) days of the date the summons is issued shall pay to the City a
fine of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00)for all first offense violations of this
Chapter; a fine of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for all second offense violations of this
Chapter; and, a fine of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for all third and subsequent
violations of this Chapter. The payment of the fine to the City within thirty (30)
days of the date the summons is issued shall be deemed an admission of the
violation and no other costs or charges other than the fine shall be collected.
Violations which are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date the summons is
issued shall be deemed denied by the owner(s). In this event the City may
thereupon charge the owner(s) by the same or a similar written summons before the
Magistrate Court in the same manner and procedure as traffic violations under Iowa
Code Chapter 805 including the assessment of court costs as provided by that Iowa
Code Chapter. All fines shall be increased by Five Dollars ($5.00) if not paid
within thirty (30) days of the date of the initial summons being issued by the
City. In determining if a violation charged is a second or subsequent offense for
purposes of sentencing under this Chapter, the Court shall consider a summons
issued for a violation of this Chapter as being one (1) violation for purposes of
sentencing; each previous summons for a violation on which conviction, or admission
of violation, was entered prior to the date of the current violation charged shall
be considered and counted as a separate previous offense; and, any conviction, or
admission of violation, entered more than six (6) years prior to the date of the
current violation charged shall not be considered and counted as a separate
previous offense under this Chapter. In addition, any violation of this Chapter,
or any provision thereof, shall be a municipal infraction subject to the provisions
of Iowa Code Section 364.22, as amended.
CHAPTER 14 FIREWORKS
135
3.1404 FIREWORKS. The use or explosion of fireworks within the City of
Winterset is subject to the following rules and restrictions.
3.1402. DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Code section, the definitions
enumerated in Iowa Code 727.2 are adopted. Such definitions are incorporated, as
though fully set forth herein, by this reference.
3.1403. DISCHARGING REQUIREMENTS.
A. No person under the age of 18 shall discharge a DOT 1.4 class consumer
firework without the direct supervision of his or her parent or legal
guardian.
B. A person shall only discharge a consumer fireworks device on real
property owned by them or on real property where the owner of the real
property has given consent to the discharge EXCEPT no consumer
fireworks may be discharged on real property within the Winterset
Downtown Commercial Zoning District, or within a one block radius
thereof. Novelties, including snakes, sparklers or caps, may be
discharged on public property so long as all trash, wrappers and wires
are disposed of properly.
C. Consumer fireworks shall not be discharged by any person showing
visible signs of, or who is determined to be, intoxicated; or by
persons under the influence of a drug or narcotic.
D. All persons discharging a consumer fireworks device assume all
responsibility for its operation and the consequences thereof. No
person shall discharge a consumer fireworks device in a reckless manner
or manner likely to cause death, injury, fire or property damage.
E. No person shall discharge a consumer fireworks device other than during
the following date and times:
1. July 1 through July 3 and July 5 through July 7 between the hours of
12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m.;
2. July 4 between the hours of 12:00 noon and 11:00 p.m.; and,
3. December 31 at 12:00 noon through and January 1 at 1:00 a.m.
F. It shall be unlawful to alter, remove or discharge components of a
consumer fireworks device from its intended method of discharging.
G. Sky lantern open flame devices are not permitted to be released within
the corporate limits of the city, except if tethered by a retrievable
and only for so long as the person discharging the device has control
over the sky lantern.
CHAPTER 14 FIREWORKS
136
3.1404. VIOLATIONS. All violations of any provision of this Code section
shall be deemed a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction. Violations may be
prosecuted as either a simple misdemeanor criminal offense or a municipal
infraction at the sole discretion of the Winterset Police Chief. Fines shall be
set by resolution of the City Council. All violations of the Code section shall be
reported to the State Fire Marshal.
TITLE IV PROPERTY
137
CHAPTER ONE - BUILDING CODE
CHAPTER TWO - ELECTRICAL CODE
CHAPTER THREE - PLUMBING CODE
CHAPTER FOUR - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
CHAPTER FIVE - MECHANICAL CODE
CHAPTER SIX - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
CHAPTER SEVEN - PERMIT FEES
CHAPTER EIGHT - ENERGY CODE
CHAPTER NINE - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CHAPTER TEN - SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER ELEVEN - SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER TWELVE - ZONING
CHAPTER THIRTEEN - AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
CHAPTER FOURTEEN - UNFAIR OR DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES
CHAPTER FIFTEEN - EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS FOR DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
CHAPTER SIXTEEN - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 1 BUILDING CODES
138
4.101 CODE ADOPTED
4.102 PENALTIES
4.103 SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS
4.101 CODE ADOPTED. CODES ADOPTED. The International Building Code,
2003 edition, (including Appendix Chapters B, C, E, H, I, & J), as published
by the International Code Council, be hereby established and adopted by
reference as the Building Code of the City of Winterset, Iowa.
The International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, 2003
edition, as published by the International Code Council, be hereby
established and adopted by reference as the Residential Building Code of the
City of Winterset, Iowa
4.102 PENALTIES. In addition to any other penalties provided by this
City Code, any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a municipal infraction with remedies to the City as provided by
this Code.
4.103 SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a Registered Design Professional as required under the Building
Code Section 106 for all construction other than one and two family dwelling
units.
CHAPTER 1 BUILDING CODES
139
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 2 ELECTRICAL CODE
140
4.201 CODE ADOPTED
4.202 ENFORCEMENT
4.203 DEFINITION
4.204 MODIFICATION
4.205 APPEALS
4.206 PENALTIES
4.201 CODE ADOPTED. The National Electrical Code, 2002 edition, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, be hereby established
and adopted by reference as the Electrical Code of the City of Winterset,
Iowa
4.202 ENFORCEMENT. The Code shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector, the Superintendent of the Electric Light and Power Plant, and
other designated City officials.
4.203 DEFINITION. Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the
Code, it shall be held to mean the City of Winterset, Iowa.
4.204 MODIFICATIONS. The Building Inspector shall have the power to
modify any of the provisions of the Code upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code,
provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the Building
Inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a
signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
4.205 APPEALS. Wherever the Building Inspector shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of this Code do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the Building Inspector to the
Board of Appeals within 14 days from the date of the decision appealed.
4.206 PENALTIES. In addition to any other penalties provided by this
Code, any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a municipal infraction with remedies to the City as provided by this Code.
CHAPTER 3 PLUMBING CODE
141
4.301 CODE ADOPTED
4.302 PENALTIES
4.301 CODE ADOPTED. The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2003 edition, as
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials, be hereby established and adopted by reference as the Plumbing
Code of the City of Winterset, Iowa.
4.302 PENALTIES. In addition to any other penalties provided by this
Code, any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a municipal infraction with remedies to the City as provided by this Code.
CHAPTER 4 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
142
4.401 CODE ADOPTED
4.402 PENALTIES
4.401 CODE ADOPTED. The International Fire Code, 2003 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be hereby established and
adopted by reference as the Fire Code of the City of Winterset, Iowa.
4.402 PENALTIES. In addition to any other penalties provided by this
Code, any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a municipal infraction with remedies to the to the City as provided by this
Code.
CHAPTER 5 MECHANICAL CODE
143
4.501 CODE ADOPTED
4.502 PENALTIES
4.501 CODE ADOPTED. The Uniform Mechanical Code, 2003 edition, as
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials, be hereby established and adopted by reference as the Mechanical
Code of the City of Winterset, Iowa.
4.502 PENALTIES. In addition to any other penalties provided by this
Code, any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a municipal infraction with remedies to the City as provided by this Code.
CHAPTER 5 MECHANICAL CODE
144
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 6 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDING CODE
145
4.601 CODE ADOPTED
4.602 PENALTIES
4.601 CODE ADOPTED. The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings, 1997 edition, as published by the International Conference of
Building Officials is adopted by this reference as the City code for the
abatement of dangerous buildings.
4.602 PENALTIES. In addition to any other penalties provided by this
Code, any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a municipal infraction with remedies to the City as provided by this Code.
CHAPTER 6 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDING CODE
146
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 7 PERMIT FEES
147
4.701 BUILDING PERMIT FEES
4.702 WRECKING, DEMOLITION AND MOVING OF BUILDINGS
4.703 MECHANICAL CODE PERMIT FEES
4.704 PLUMBING CODE PERMIT FEES
4.705 ELECTRICAL CODE PERMIT FEES
4.706 EXPIRATION OF PERMITS
4.701 BUILDING PERMIT FEES. Before receiving a building permit
to build or move a structure, the owner or his agent shall pay the
building permit fees specified herein; provided, however, that the
city, county, state or the U. S. Federal Government shall be exempt
from paying said fees. Said building permit fees shall be based on
valuation and shall be paid as provided in the schedule of building
permit fees as follows:
TOTAL VALUATION FEE
Up to and including $1,000 $25.00
Each additional $1,000 up to and including $50,000 $6.00 per $1,000
Each additional $1,000 from $50,001 up to and $4.00 per $1,000
including $100,000
Each additional $1,000 over $100,000 $2.00 per $1,000
4.702 WRECKING, DEMOLITION AND MOVING OF BUILDINGS. A $20.00
fee shall paid for wrecking or demolishing buildings within the City
or removal from the City.
4.703 MECHANICAL CODE PERMIT FEES. A $20.00 permit fee shall be
paid for the issuance of a permit for the installation of mechanical
heating, ventilation and cooling appliances.
4.704 PLUMBING CODE PERMIT FEES. A $20.00 permit fee shall be
paid for the issuance of a permit for all plumbing work, except a
permit fee of $5.00 shall be paid for the issuance of a permit to
replace a water heater that requires no other plumbing changes.
4.705 ELECTRICAL CODE PERMIT FEES. A $20.00 permit fee shall
be paid for the issuance of permit for all electric work.
4.706 EXPIRATION OF PERMITS. All permits, except demolition
permits shall expire 18 months from date of issuance. Demolition
permits shall expire 6 months from date of issuance.
CHAPTER 8 ENERGY CODE
148
4.801 ENERGY CODE
4.801 ENERGY CODE. Pursuant to Iowa Code Section 380.10, the City
of Winterset, Iowa does hereby establish, declare and adopt by
reference the International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council to be the Energy Code of
the City for regulating the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the
building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power systems in the City
of Winterset and providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefore; and, each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of such International Energy Conservation Code,
2000 Edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in
triplicate in the office of the City Administrator.
CHAPTER 8 ENERGY CODE
149
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 8 ENERGY CODE
150
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 9 PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION
151
4.901 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CREATED
4.902 TERM OF OFFICE AND COMPENSATION
4.903 POWERS
4.901 THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION shall be seven (7)
persons at least five (5) of whom shall reside within the City
corporate limits and two (2) of whom may reside within two (2) miles
of such corporate limits. The members shall be qualified by knowledge
and experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of City
planning and zoning, none of whom shall hold any elective position in
the City. All members shall be appointed by the City Council.
4.902. TERM OF OFFICE AND COMPENSATION. The term of office of
the members shall be four (4) years with the terms staggered so that
no more than four (4) members will be appointed in any one calendar
year. Any vacancy occurring on the Commission caused by resignation or
otherwise shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term. Each
Commission member shall be compensated for meeting attendance at a
rate to be fixed by Resolution of the City Council from time to time
and shall not need to be fixed by City Ordinance.
4.903 POWERS. The Commission shall have and possess the
following powers, and such other powers as may be incidental to the
successful carrying out of the powers vested in it herein or such as
may be expressly conferred upon it by law:
1. To make such surveys, studies, maps, plans or plats of the
whole or any portion of the city and of any land outside thereof,
which in the opinion of such Commission bears relation to a
comprehensive plan, and shall submit such plan to the council with its
studies and recommendation and it may publish the same.
2. To prepare a comprehensive zoning ordinance regarding the
height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures;
the percentage of ground that may be occupied; the size of yards,
courts, and other open spaces; the density of population; and the
location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade,
industry, residence, or other purposes and to this end shall prepare a
preliminary report and hold public meetings thereon and after such
hearings have been held, to submit its final report and
recommendations to the City Council.
CHAPTER 9 PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION
152
3. To recommend to the City Council, from time to time, as
conditions require amendments, supplements, changes or modifications
in the comprehensive zoning ordinance prepared by it.
4. To study future conditions.
5. To survey street and traffic problems.
6. To survey and study new subdivision.
CHAPTER 10 SUBDIVISION
153
4.1001 TITLE
4.1002 JURISDICTION AND PURPOSE
4.1003 DEFINITIONS
4.1004 PROCEDURE
4.1005 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
4.1006 LAND SUITABILITY
4.1007 IMPROVEMENTS
4.1008 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
4.1009 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS FOR MAJOR
SUBDDIVISIONS
4.1010 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
4.1011 VARIANCES
4.1012 FEES
4.1013 ENFORCEMENT
4.1014 COMMISSION REGULATIONS
4.1001 TITLE. These regulations shall be known as the
Subdivision Ordinance of Winterset, Iowa, and shall also be known as
Title IV, Chapter 10 of the Winterset Municipal Code of 1992.
4.1002 JURISDICTION AND PURPOSE. This Chapter governs the
subdivision of all lands within the corporate limits of the City and
in an area within two miles outside the corporate limits to the full
extent provided by Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa.
A. Exclusions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to:
1. Mortgages, easements or leases for a term not to exceed ten
years
2. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created
and the abutting lots are not reduced below the minimum sizes
required by this ordinance or the zoning ordinance.
B. Purpose: To provide for the health, safety and general welfare
of the city; to provide efficiency in the provision of
municipal infrastructure and to provide for the overall
quality of life.
4.1003 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Chapter, certain
terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense
shall include the future, the singular number shall include the
plural, and the plural the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory,
and the word "may" is permissive.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
154
Architect:
An architect is a registered architect authorized to
practice architecture as defined by the laws of the State
of Iowa.
Block:
An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely
bounded by streets, highways, parks, railroad or similar
fixed land division and/or exterior boundaries of the
subdivision.
Collector Streets:
Those streets which carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets and highways including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and
streets for circulation within such a development.
Commission:
The Planning and Zoning Commission of Winterset, Iowa.
Council:
The City Council of Winterset, Iowa.
Cul-de-sac:
A short, minor street having one end open to motor traffic;
the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular
turnaround.
District:
A section or sections of land area depicted on the Official
Zoning Map as provided by the zoning regulations governing
the use of buildings and land within the City.
Easement:
A grant by the property owner of the use, for a
specific purpose, of an area of land by the general public,
a corporation, or a certain person or persons, and within
the limits of which the land owner shall not erect any
permanent structures but shall have the right to make any
other use of the land subject to the terms of such easement
which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee.
Public utilities shall have the right to trim or remove
vegetation that interferes with the use of such easements.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
155
Engineer:
An Engineer is a Registered Engineer authorized to practice
engineering as defined by the laws of the State of Iowa.
Frontage Street:
A street that is parallel to and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare or highway; and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic,
with limited access to the major thoroughfare.
Loop Lane Street:
A short, minor one-way directional street within a
residential subdivision having one traffic lane and one
parking lane for vehicles which connects to a Collection
Street and which is dedicated to the City.
Lot:
A tract of land represented and identified by number or
letter designation on an official plat.
Maintenance Bond:
A surety bond or cash deposit (including Irrevocable bank
letter of credit) made payable to and held by the City in
an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements as
determined by the City sufficient to guarantee to the City
that the improvements have been constructed to the approved
plans and specifications of the City and are free from
inferior and/or defective workmanship or materials and to
maintain or keep these improvements in good repair and
condition for the term provided in this Chapter.
Performance Bond:
A surety bond, cash deposit or irrevocable bank letter of
credit made out to the City of Winterset in an amount equal
to the full cost of the improvements which are required by
this Chapter, said cost being estimated by the City
Engineer, and said surety bond or cash deposit being
legally sufficient to secure to the City that said
improvements will be constructed in accordance with this
Chapter and any attached conditions.
Plat:
A subdivision plat that meets the requirements of Chapter
409A of the Code of Iowa and this Chapter and has been
filed for record in the offices of the Recorder, Auditor,
and Assessor.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
156
Recreational Trail:
Any road, path, or way specifically designed to accommodate
recreational non-motorized travel, regardless of whether
such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of
recreational trails or are to be shared with other
transportation modes.
Roadway:
That portion of the street available for vehicular traffic,
and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of
curbs.
Street:
A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of
access to the abutting property.
Subdivider:
The term "subdivider" means any person, individual, firm,
partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or
any other group or combination action as a unit, dividing
or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a
subdivision as defined herein and includes any agent of the
subdivider.
Subdivision:
A tract of land divided into two or more lots each of
twenty acres or less in size.
Minor Subdivision:
A tract of land divided into four lots or less within a
five year period, and which division does not include or
require any new public streets or municipal infrastructure.
Major Subdivision:
The dividing of any tract which is not a Minor Subdivision
and which is prepared and reviewed according to the
preliminary and final plat procedures of this chapter.
Surveyor:
A registered land surveyor who engages in the practice of
land surveying pursuant to Chapter 114 of the Code of Iowa.
4.1004 PROCEDURE. In obtaining the final approval of a proposed
subdivision by the Commission and the Council, the subdivider shall
submit a preliminary plat and a final plat in accordance with the
following order and procedure:
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
157
A. The subdivider shall first arrange a meeting with the Zoning
Administrator for pre-application coordination as provided for in
4.1009,A.
B. The subdivider shall prepare and file with the Zoning
Administrator eight copies of a preliminary plat conforming in
detail to the requirements set forth in this Chapter. Eight
copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted for
subdivisions outside the corporate limits of the City.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith refer two copies to
the Commission. In the case of a subdivision outside the
corporate limits of the City, the County Zoning Administrator
shall refer two copies of the preliminary plat to the City
Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. The Zoning Administrator shall carefully examine said plat as
to its compliance with the laws and ordinances of the City, the
existing street system, good engineering practices, and shall as
soon as possible, submit his findings in duplicate to the
Commission. If deemed necessary, the Zoning Administrator may
refer the preliminary plat to a registered engineer and others as
necessary to the case for findings and recommendations.
E. After receiving the Zoning Administrator's report, the
Commission shall study the preliminary plat and other material
for conformity thereof to these regulations. The Commission may
confer with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the
kind and extent of such improvements to be made. The Commission
shall approve, approve conditionally or reject the preliminary
plat.
F. Before approving a preliminary plat, the Commission may, at
its discretion, hold a public hearing on the proposed plat, with
notification to those parties as determined by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
G. After the Commission approves a preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall complete the final plat and of any detailed
construction drawings and specifications for the improvements
required under this Chapter.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
158
H. Before submitting the final plat to the Commission for
approval, the subdivider shall furnish the Zoning Administrator
all plans and specifications required by Section 4.1008 of this
Chapter necessary for the construction of the improvements
required under this Chapter. These plans and specifications shall
be endorsed by a engineer certifying them to be in compliance
with all state and city regulations.
I. The final plat shall be filed in duplicate with the Zoning
Administrator. The final plat shall be accompanied by the
documents required by Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa and this
Chapter. In addition, the subdivider shall include either the
engineer's certificate that all improvements required by this
Chapter have been installed in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications or the bond required by Section 4.1006 of this
Chapter.
J. The Commission shall then consider the final plat and
accompanying documents. If the final plat is approved by the
Commission, the Commission shall submit their recommendations to
the Council together with a certified copy of a resolution
showing the action of the Commission.
K. The Council shall then consider the final plat and all matters
related thereto. In considering the final plat, the Council shall
assure that the proposed development conforms to the standards
and conditions of state and city law and to the city’s
Comprehensive Plan. The council shall approve, approve
conditionally or reject the final plat within ninety days after
receipt of the Plan commission’s resolution on the plat. If
approved, the Council shall cause the resolution approving the
plat to be certified as provided by law.
L. If the plat is approved by the Council, the subdivider shall
cause such plat to be recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder as provided in Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa and shall
file written evidence with the City Administrator’s office before
the city shall recognize the plat as being in full force and
effect.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
159
M. Plats In Unincorporated Areas. The provisions of this chapter
shall apply to all proposed plats within two miles of Winterset’s
city limits, as they existed at the time such plat is proposed.
In reviewing all such plats the city shall consider the plat’s
compliance with the city’s Comprehensive Plan and shall not
approve any such plat which is in substantial conflict with said
Comprehensive Plan. The city Planning Commission, with council
approval, may waive its right to review such plat if it
determines by specific written report that the nature of such
plat is such that city planning, growth or other city development
interests are clearly not affected by the proposed plat. If the
review of such plat under this chapter is waived by the Council,
the city shall notify the County Zoning Administrator in writing
of this action. No plat as defined by this chapter shall be
considered final and eligible for recording in the county
recorder’s Office unless it is accompanied by a resolution from
the City Council indicating city approval or conditional approval
or evidence of the city’s waiver of review.
4.1005 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The standards and details
of design herein contained are intended only as minimum requirements
so that the general arrangement and layout of a subdivision may be
adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances; however, in the design
and development of a plat, the subdivider should use standards
consistent with the site conditions to assure an economical, pleasant
and durable neighborhood.
A. BLOCKS
No block shall be longer than 1,320 feet.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
160
B. EASEMENTS
Ten (10) feet on each side of a lot line or twenty (20) total
feet shall be provided for along the rear or side of lot lines
for easements for utilities.
Whenever any stream or surface watercourse is located in an area
that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall whenever possible
not disturb the natural watercourse. In the event it is deemed
necessary by the subdivider to disturb or change the water course
in any way, then the subdivider shall comply with all federal,
state and local laws and regulations and shall at their expense
submit to the Commission for its approval a plan showing
compliance therewith. The subdivider shall dedicate to the City
an easement along each side of the stream or other drainage
course. Such easements shall be for the purpose of widening,
improving, maintaining or protecting the function of the stream
or watercourse. The width of such easement shall be consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan or County Drainage District Plan if
applicable. The minimum width of such easements shall include the
stream course and be not less than forty feet back from the top
of each stream bank, or forty feet each way from the center line
of a drainage way identified as such by the Plan commission.
C. LOTS
1. Corner lots shall be not less than twenty feet greater in
width than the minimum required interior lot width so as to
permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets.
All lots adjoining any public or private street shall have a
minimum thirty-foot setback line from the right of way.
2. Double frontage lots other than corner lots shall be
avoided.
3. Each lot shall be provided with access to a public
street.
4. Each lot shall be provided with not less than forty feet
(40’) of access frontage to a public street, except for
lots fronting on a cul-de-sac radius.
5. No lot shall be less in size or shape than that required
to provide an adequate building site in compliance with the
Chapter 12 of this Title.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
161
6. For the purpose of complying with minimum health
standards, the following minimum lot sizes shall be
observed:
Lots which cannot be reasonably served by an existing
public sanitary sewer system shall have a minimum width of
120 feet, measured at the setback line, and an area of not
less than 20,000 square feet or the minimum permitted by
the Chapter 12 of this Title, whichever is the larger.
However, in such cases the subdivider shall submit with the
preliminary plat soil percolation test results for each lot
showing each lot to be of sufficient size and otherwise
suitable for a septic tank system meeting state and county
sanitary codes.
7. Side lot lines where possible shall be at right angles
or radial to the street lines.
D. SURVEY MONUMENTS
Survey Monuments shall be placed at block corners, point of curves,
and change in direction along lot lines and at each lot corner in
accordance with city specifications.
E. STREETS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
1. Alleys
Alleys may be required in business areas and industrial
districts for adequate access to block interiors and for
off-street loading and parking purposes. A special
exception may be granted for alleys in residential areas.
Dead end alleys shall be provided with a means of turning
around at the dead end.
2. Circulation
The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within
the subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining
streets, thoroughfares or un-subdivided land as may be
required by the Commission. In a case where a street will
eventually be extended beyond the plat, but is temporarily
dead-ended, an interim turnaround shall be required by the
City.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
162
3. Comprehensive Plan
All proposed plats and subdivisions shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan.
4. Continuation of Existing Streets
Proposed streets shall provide for continuation or
completion of any existing streets (constructed or
recorded) to adjoining property at equal or greater width,
but not less than sixty-six (66) feet in width, and in
similar alignment, unless variations are recommended by the
Commission.
5. Cul-de-sac
Whenever a cul-de-sac is permitted, such street shall
comply with sound engineering design and planning standards
and be approved by the City. Cul-de-sac length shall be in
accord with the conditions of the topography, and the
permitted length shall be determined based on the
relationship to the location of planned future streets
shown in the Comprehensive Plan.
6. Dedication
Streets shall be dedicated to the city, and other land
incident to the subdivision shall be dedicated in the
manner prescribed by Chapters 409A and 354 of the Code of
Iowa.
7. Half Streets
Dedication of half streets is hereby prohibited.
8. Major Streets
When a new subdivision, except where justified by limiting
conditions, involves frontage on an arterial street or
state highway with an annual average daily traffic (AADT)
count of 10,000 or more recorded by the Iowa Dept of
Transportation, the street layout shall provide vehicle
access to such street or highway by means of a frontage or
other collector street system.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
163
9. Physical and Cultural Features
In general, streets shall be platted with appropriate
regard for topography, watercourses, wooded areas, public
and institutional areas and other natural features which
would lend themselves to attractive treatment and avoidance
of disruptive effects of streets and traffic.
10. Street Grades
Streets and alleys shall be completed to grades which have
been officially determined or approved by the City. All
streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-ofway
and adjacent side slopes graded to blend with the
natural ground level. The maximum grade shall not exceed
six per cent for primary and secondary streets, or ten per
cent for collector or minor streets. All changes in grades
on major roads or highways shall be connected by vertical
curves of a minimum length equivalent to twenty times the
algebraic difference between the rates of grades, expressed
in feet per hundred, or greater, if deemed necessary by the
City; for secondary and minor streets, fifteen times. The
grade alignment and resultant visibility especially at
intersections shall be worked out in detail to meet the
approval of the City.
11. Street Intersections
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as
possible.
12. Street Names
All newly platted streets shall be named and in a manner
conforming to the prevailing street naming system. A
proposed street that is obviously in alignment with other
existing streets, or with a street that may logically be
extended although the various portions be at a considerable
distance from each other, shall be subject to the approval
of the City in order to avoid duplication or close
similarity of names; and proposed street names shall also
be reviewed by the county 9-1-1 authorities for the same
purpose.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
164
13. Street Widths
The normal standard for right-of-way width shall be 66 feet
wide. Cul-de-sac streets may qualify for a variance in
right-of-way width of not less than 50 feet, depending upon
the circumstances of topography, housing density, parcel
configuration and any other planning and development factor
as judged by the Planning Commission and City Council. Any
street, other than a collector or arterial street in the R-
1 Low Density Residential Zoning District having twelve
(12) or fewer platted lots fronting on such street may have
a minimum right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet. Streets
that are a part of an industrial park shall have a rightof-
way width of at least 80 feet. The City may require any
other right-of-way to be wider than 66 feet based on known
plans or other land use or traffic factors requiring a
right-of-way wider than the normal standard. The right-ofway
width for the Loop Lane Street shall be at least
thirty-five (35) feet.
14. Loop Lane Street
A loop lane within a residential subdivision shall access
no more than twelve (12) lots with a total length not to
exceed three hundred (300) linear feet measured along the
median center from the Collector Street. The loop lane
shall have an inside radius of not less than thirty-five
(35) feet from the median center. The median shall be
either owned by a Homeowner’s Association created under the
Iowa Horizontal Property Regime Act or shall be dedicated
to the City subject to the City’s approval thereof. The
median under a Homeowner’s Association ownership may be
subject to a dedicated public easement over, along, or
under the median area for utilities.
15. Recreational Trail
A recreation trail shall be designed to comply with the
current standards of the Urban Design Standards Manual as
published by the Urban Standards and Specifications
Committee of the Des Moines Metropolitan area as the manual
now and hereafter provides.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
165
F. Plats Adjacent To Streams
For any proposed plat which includes the shoreline of Cedar Creek,
Cedar Lake or the Middle River and any land within 400 feet of the
ordinary high water shoreline of these water bodies, the following
standards for the preservation of open space and protection of
environmental resources shall apply:
1. Natural shorelines and stream courses shall not be changed.
2. The natural ground surface shall not be hard surfaced or
altered in any other way that would cause erosion or
accelerate the runoff of surface water.
3. Healthy trees over four inches in diameter at a point four
feet above the ground and within 400 feet of the above
shorelines hall not be removed or killed as a part of
subdivision development.
4. Flood Prone lands or wetlands shall have a permanent
easement placed upon them prohibiting the placement of any
structures, fill, drainage, or permanent storage of any
material.
5. Any development or land disturbance in excess of 1000
square feet on slopes of seven percent or greater shall
install a silt fence or other soil retention device to contain
soil washing from the disturbance site.
6. No regulation in this section is intended to prohibit land
and water management practices which are a part of a Drainage
District Plan approved by the County Soil and Water Board and
by the City Council.
7. If proposed land development requirements are such that
variances from the terms of this chapter are granted, then
reasonable measures shall be implemented to mitigate any
adverse effects of such variance, with such mitigation
measures determined by the city in cooperation with the land
owner.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
166
4.1006 LAND SUITABILITY. No land that falls under the
jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be approved as a major or minor
subdivision which is determined to be unsuitable for the proposed use
by the zoning administrator and the Planning and Zoning Commission
because of substantial conflict with the Comprehensive Plan, and
specifically, for reasons of flooding, inadequate drainage and wetland
conditions, severe erosion potential, excessively steep topography,
inadequate drinking water supply, inadequate waste water disposal
capabilities, significant potential for contamination of surface
waters and drinking water supplies, conflicts with existing or planned
parks, airports, agricultural activities, or other planned
improvements or features likely to be harmful to the health, safety or
welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the
community.
In applying the provisions of this section, the Zoning Administrator
and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall base its decision upon a
written finding of fact upon which it bases its conclusion that the
land is not suitable for the proposed use and afford the subdivider an
opportunity to present evidence regarding such suitability.
Thereafter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may affirm, modify or
withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
4.1007. IMPROVEMENTS. The Subdivider shall install and
construct all improvements required by this Chapter as provided by
this Chapter. All required improvements should be installed and
constructed in accordance with the specifications and under the
supervision of the City and to its satisfaction. The Subdivider shall
warrant, by way of a maintenance bond, the design, material and
workmanship of such improvements and their installation and/or
construction for a period of four (4) years from and after acceptance
by the City. The subdivider’s engineer shall certify, in writing, to
the city that all required improvements meet engineering standards and
that all such improvements were constructed and installed in
compliance with all standards of this ordinance and any other
conditions imposed by the city. The city Zoning Administrator shall
conduct an inspection of the final improvements with the subdivider’s
engineer prior to the engineer’s certification to confirm said
compliance.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
167
The City Council shall approve by resolution either the installed
improvements after certification by the subdivider’s engineer or
approve a performance bond at the time of acceptance of the final
plat. The Zoning Administrator, with the assistance of an engineer if
necessary, shall report to the City Council that all the required
improvements have been installed to the City's specifications and
requirements. Alternatively, the subdivider shall submit to the City
the performance bond in an amount not less than one hundred twentyfive
per cent (125%) of the cost of the required improvements not then
installed all as determined by the City Engineer. The performance
bond may be secured and guaranteed by a corporate surety authorized to
issue such bonds by and in the State of Iowa or by an irrevocable bank
letter of credit issued by a state or federally chartered bank
authorized to issue such letters in the State of Iowa with the bank
serving as the surety and the performance bond signed both by the
Principal and the Surety.
Upon the recommendation of the Commission, the Council may postpone
the installation of any of the improvements if the subdivider will
post a performance bond with the City prior to final acceptance of the
plat guaranteeing that improvements not completed will be constructed
within an approved period of time from final acceptance of the Plat;
but final acceptance of the plat will not constitute final acceptance
by the City of any improvements to be constructed. Such postponement
shall be based upon good cause and special circumstances.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been
completed, and no city funds or services will be expended in the
subdivision for these deferred improvements until such improvements
have been completed and accepted by the City. Any postponed
improvements shall be completed within eighteen months of posting the
performance bond with the City Clerk.
The subdivider may divide the preliminary plat for an entire tract to
be subdivided into numbered preliminary segments. Thereafter, the
subdivider shall file final plats for each such segment. The plan for
the entire tract encompassed by the preliminary plat shall meet the
approval of the Commission in the manner provided by this Chapter
prior to acceptance of any final plat. A numbered segment shall
include all adjoining right-of-way areas to be dedicated according to
the preliminary plat. The numbered final plats will be filed in the
order provided by the approved preliminary plat in accordance with
this Chapter.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
168
Changes in said preliminary plat may be made from time to time by the
subdivider upon the approval of the Commission. The provisions of
this Chapter regarding construction and/or installation of
improvements shall apply to each numbered final plat and the
subdivider shall comply with said provisions as to each numbered final
plat prior to final acceptance thereof.
The Council may waive the requirements of this Chapter for the
construction and installation of some or all of the improvements in
cases of re-subdivisions where only the size, shape and arrangement of
the lots is being changed; provided however, such waiver shall be
limited to existing improvements in good repair as determined by the
City. Improvements not existing or in poor repair shall meet the
City's specifications prior to acceptance.
A. All Improvements
All plans, specifications, installation and construction required
by this Chapter shall be subject to the review, approval and
inspection by the City. The city shall have the right to stop the
construction of any improvement which is not being constructed in
accordance with approved specifications and conditions approved
by the city. The subdivider shall furnish the City with a
construction schedule prior to commencement of any and/or all
construction.
B. Drainage
All subdivisions shall include storm drainage plans for the
removal of storm waters by way of a storm sewer system and
necessary appurtenances. Such plans shall be prepared by the
subdivider’s Engineer and subject to city review and approval.
The following criteria shall be considered minimum standards:
1. Runoff for street and limited area drainage shall be
determined by the rational method.
2. Storm frequency chart for determination of rainfall intensity
shall be not less than ten years.
3. The system shall be designed with the use of materials, flow
velocities and sizes so as to assure long life, low
maintenance and self-cleaning of the drainage facilities.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
169
4. The subdivider’s Engineer shall upon the completion of
construction certify to the City that the drainage facilities have
been constructed and installed in accordance with the plans and
specifications which have been designed to comply with the intent of
this Chapter.
5. In addition to the storm drainage to handle surface water
runoff, storm drains shall be made available to each lot for drainage
of sump pump discharge or footing drains. These storm drains shall be
for subsurface clean water and shall connect to the storm sewer
system, if available.
6. For subdivisions in the R-1 Low Density Residential Zoning
District, storm sewer system requirements in subparagraphs 1 through 5
above may be subject to variance by the City and, in such event,
replaced by on-site storm water retention and detention measures and
erosion and sedimentation control measures as recommended by the
Subdivider’s Engineer and approved by the City. All such measures
will be shown on the preliminary plat and will be made conditions of
final plat approval. Natural drainage channels and courses shall not
be developed or encroached upon so as to allow for natural drainage.
The minimum non-disturbance distances shall be fifty(50) feet from the
center line of a drainage swale and one hundred (100) feet back from
the ordinary high water line of any flowing stream, except that all
subdivision development is prohibited within the 100 year flood limits
of any stream. The roadways crossing such draining channels shall
have adequate sized culverts as specified by the Subdivider’s
Engineer. Adequate on-site drainage measures shall be planned and
constructed so as to minimize the amount of new drainage waters in
excess of previous natural conditions that would flow beyond the
boundary of a proposed subdivision.
C. Gas
Gas Mains shall be installed underground by the franchisee
gas utility. Natural gas will be required in all
subdivisions where available.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
170
D. Paving
Portland Cement Concrete pavement shall be designed by the
Subdivider’s Engineer in accordance with the standard
specifications established by the City. These standards
are to comply with the Iowa Statewide Urban Design
Standards for Public Improvements (SUDAS), current edition.
The minimum roadway paving width shall be twenty-nine (29)
feet wide unless the City requires a greater width. The
minimum roadway paving width for alleys shall be sixteen
(16) feet. The Loop Lane shall have a minimum roadway
paving width of twenty (20) feet. The Subdivider’s
Engineer shall at the completion of construction certify to
the City that the pavement has been constructed and
installed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications.
Curb and Gutter shall be required on all streets, except as
hereafter provided. All Curb and Gutter shall be
constructed to the grade approved by the City.
For subdivisions in the City’s R-1 Low Density Residential
Zoning District, the foregoing paving and curb and gutter
requirement may be subject to variance by the City. In the
event of such variance, the following requirements shall
apply:
A licensed Engineer must design all roadways. The roadway
shall be designed to comply with the Iowa Statewide Urban
Design and Specifications (SUDAS) for Public Improvements,
current edition. The roadway shall have a minimum width of
twenty-four (24) feet
Traveled roadway and graded shoulder width of two (2) feet
on each side of the traveled roadway. Storm water drainage
and the use of curb and gutter in conjunction with the
roadway design may be subject to variance as provided
above. Upon completion of the roadway, the Engineer shall
submit to the City a letter certifying the construction of
the roadway in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications. The letter shall be submitted prior to the
acceptance of the final plat.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
171
E. Sewer
Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the
Subdivider shall connect to the sanitary sewer main and
provide each lot in the subdivision with connection to this
sewer. Sanitary sewer lines shall be designed by the
Subdivider’s Engineer in accordance with the standard
specifications established by the City. Further, where the
existing sewer may be reasonably extended through the
subdivision at a greater depth and/or with a larger
diameter pipe so as to provide for continuous future
development, such installation shall be made by the
Subdivider and the additional cost may be divided between
the City and the Subdivider based upon a negotiated cost
share considering the circumstances of each development
project.
All house service lines shall be installed to the right-ofway
line prior to the paving of the street, Service lines
shall have a minimum diameter of four (4) inches and be
made available to each lot. The end of these service lines
shall be marked on the ground surface by a wooden or metal
stake substantial enough to remain in place until the lot
is developed.
Any plat that cannot reasonably be served by public sewer
may be eligible for the installation of an on-site
wastewater disposal system. The Subdivider shall show
results of soil percolation tests made by the Engineer
preparing the plat and show evidence that the County
sanitary permits can be issued for the soils in such
subdivision. Such tests shall be in accordance with
federal, state and local requirements. All such systems
are to comply with all applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations pertaining to such systems. The
Engineer shall furnish the City with three (3) certified
copes of as-built plans for such systems and certify that
the facilities have been installed in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications and permit standards.
As-built plans shall specifically show service lines
locations.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
172
F. ELECTRICITY
Electrical main lines with accessory equipment shall be
installed available to each lot in compliance with City
standards and procedures.
G. TELEPHONE
Telephone main lines with any accessory equipment shall be
installed available to each lot in compliance with the
telephone franchisee standards and procedures.
H. CABLE TELEVISION
Cable television lines with any accessory equipment shall
be installed available to each lot in compliance with the
cable television franchisee standards and procedures.
I. Water Lines
Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider
shall connect to such water main and provide a water
connection for each lot, extended to the right-of-way line
prior to the paving of the street. The end of this line
shall be marked on the ground surface by a wooden or metal
post substantial enough to remain in place until the lot is
developed. Water lines shall be designed by a Registered
Engineer in accordance with the standard specifications
established by the City. Water line construction and
specifications shall conform to any requirements and plans
of the Board of Trustees of the Winterset Municipal
Utilities.
The subdivider’s Engineer shall furnish the City with three
certified copies of as-built plans and certify that the
facilities have been installed in accordance with his plans
and specifications. As-built plans shall specifically show
service line stub locations. Where a proposed water main
may reasonable be extended through the subdivision at a
larger size so as to provide for future development, such
installation shall be made by the developer and the
additional cost shall be divided between the subdivider and
the city based upon a negotiated cost share considering the
circumstances of each development project.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
173
J. Recreation Trail
A recreation trail shall be designed to comply with the
current standards of the Urban Design Standards Manual as
published by the Urban Standards and Specifications
Committee of the Des Moines Metropolitan area as the manual
now and hereafter provides. The property upon which a
recreational trail is located shall be either owned by a
Homeowner’s Association created under the Iowa Horizontal
Property Regime Act or shall be dedicated to the City
subject to the City’s approval thereof.
4.1008 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS. Minor subdivisions shall, except as
otherwise provided in this section, be exempt from the plat review and
approval procedure for preliminary and final plats; but the following
procedures and requirements shall apply to minor subdivision plats:
A. Purpose.
The purpose of a minor subdivision procedure is to provide
a more expedient process for reviewing small divisions of
land having less land development impact and having no
requirements for public streets or municipal infrastructure
as a part off such land division as compared to major
subdivisions requiring the full preliminary and final plat
procedures as specified under this ordinance.
B. Procedure.
The subdivider shall consult with the zoning administrator
and shall submit three copies of a sketch plat which
contains all information required in Section 4.1007, A. and
drawn as a certified survey by a licensed engineer or
surveyor. Within 15 days of receiving copies of the sketch
plat, the Zoning Administrator shall take action to
approve, conditionally approve, or refer such plat to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, unless time is extended by
mutual agreement with the subdivider. The Planning and
Zoning commission is the only body having the authority to
reject a minor subdivision plat. Where a minor subdivision
is conditionally approved or rejected the reasons for
rejection or the imposed conditions shall be stated in
writing.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
174
4.1009 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS. The
preliminary plat of a subdivision is not intended to serve as a record
plat and shall be submitted for review separately and prior to
submission of the final plat. Preliminary platting procedure is as
follows:
A. Pre-application Coordination
Prior to filing a preliminary plat the subdivider or his
agent shall consult with the Zoning Administrator for the
purpose of receiving general information about any city
plans, zoning requirements or other factors so as to avoid
unnecessary difficulty and time delays for the subdivider
and facilitate the plat review. No formal plat or filing
fee is required for this step. A sketch map, drawn to a
scale acceptable to the Zoning Administrator shall be
provided to the Zoning Administrator, and which sketch
which shall include, at a minimum, the following
information: legal description and boundaries of the
property proposed for subdividing, the ownership of all
adjacent lands, the approximate size of the planned
parcels, north arrow, all existing structures, principal
natural land features including drainage ways, existing
roads within or giving access to the property, location of
flood prone lands and any other information relevant to the
development of the property. At this review, or within 15
days thereafter, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the
subdivider of any additional information needed,
recommended changes or corrections to be made before a
preliminary plat is prepared. The Zoning Administrator
shall provide the results of this pre-application
coordination to the Plan Commission at the time the
preliminary plat is reviewed by the Commission.
B. NUMBER OF COPIES AND SCALE OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAT
Three copes of the preliminary plat shall be submitted to
the city’s plat review agent and prepared according to the
requirements of this Section for review. The scale of the
map shall be 1" = 50' on small subdivisions and 1" = 100'
on large subdivisions unless otherwise approved by the
Commission.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
175
C. CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
1. Areas to be dedicated for public use such as parks,
playgrounds, streets, drainage easements and utility
easements.
2. Boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be
labeled and indicated by a heavy line.
3. Proposed lot lines.
4. Buffer easement and method where required.
5. Contour lines at intervals of not more than two (2)
feet to City datum, except where the slope of the land
exceeds twenty-five (25) per cent in which event five
(5) foot intervals may be used.
6. Location and size of all proposed utilities and
required utility easements. For water lines, the
location of all laterals, hydrants and gate valves
shall be shown. For sanitary sewers, all manholes
shall be shown.
7. Existing buildings, railroads, underground
utilities, other rights-of-way
8. Location and name(s) of adjoining subdivision(s).
9. Location, names and widths of all existing and
proposed roads, alleys, streets and highways adjoining
the area being subdivided.
10. Lot area (approximate) of all non-rectangular lots
and the area of smallest rectangular lot.
11. Lot numbers
12. Name and address of engineer and surveyor.
13. Name and address of land owner(s) and/or
developer.
14. Name of subdivision, date, compass point, scale
and legal description and acreage of the property
being platted.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
176
15. The boundaries and numbers of all addressing
blocks within the proposed subdivision according to
the city’s addressing plan.
D. ACCOMPANYING MATERIAL
1. Any plat that cannot reasonably be served by public sewer
shall show results of soil percolation tests made by the Engineer
preparing the plat as required by this Chapter and certification
from the County Sanitarian as to what parts of the plat would
qualify for a septic system permit.
2. Restrictions proposed, if any, to be included in the owner's
dedication of the plat. Such restrictions are not subject to
approval by the City, however, it’s the applicant’s
responsibility to assure that no such restriction shall be in
violation of any federal, state or city laws.
3. Written statement by the appropriate officials of the
availability to the proposed subdivision of all utilities
required by this Chapter.
4.1010 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS OF MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
A. NUMBER OF COPIES AND SCALE
After the preliminary plat is approved, the subdivider shall
submit six copies of the final plat for review by the Commission.
The final plat may include only part of the preliminary plat. The
scale of the plat, if different from the preliminary plat, shall
be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
B. CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT
The following information shall be shown on the plat:
1. Block lines shall be designated by heavy solid
lines.
2. Boundary lines shall be designated by a heavy line.
a. Boundary dimensions from angle point to angle point
shall be shown for all sides of the closed traverse.
b. Bearings, based on an assumed meridian approximating
north, of all boundary lines or internal angles of all
angles points on the boundary shall be shown.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
177
3 Street names, locations, lot designations and right-of-way
width for all streets within or abutting the plat shall be
shown. Streets that are a continuation of present streets
should bear the same name. The city Council shall be the
final authority for approving street names consistent with any
9-1-1 street naming standards.
4. Certification by a registered Land Surveyor in accordance with
the Iowa law.
5. Easements for public utilities and drainage facilities shall
be designated by fine line of medium length dashes, and
appropriately labeled with reserved width and type of
easement.
6. Fractional lines and corners of the Government Township and
section surveys shall be appropriately labeled and dimensioned
as applicable to the plat. All plats shall be tied to a known
section or fractional corners or adjoining subdivisions by
distances and bearing or angles.
7. Legal description of the platted area shall be included on the
plat.
8. Lot lines shall be designated by medium fine to solid lines.
9. Lots shall be numbered consecutively with all sides
dimensioned. The bearings or corner angles of all lot lines,
which are not parallel to the block lines, shall be shown and
lines intersecting a curved line shall be labeled as radial or
not radial as applicable. Dimensions of lot lines which are
curved shall include appropriate curve data.
10. Permanent reference monuments shall be labeled (P.R.M.) and
located.
11. Scale shall be indicated graphically as the scale in feet
along with the compass point.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
178
12. Surveyor's notes shall include the following as appropriate
or applicable to the particular plat.
a. All bearings are based on an assumed meridian for
computation purposes.
b. A legend indicating the meaning of various lines and
symbols in the plat.
c. Any other notes deemed necessary for the particular
plat.
C. ACCOMPANYING MATERIAL
The final plat upon filing with the Zoning Administrator shall be
accompanied by the following material:
1. All documents required by Iowa Code Section 354 as that
section now or hereafter requires, except for the resolution of the
City Council approving the final plat.
2. Any protective covenants or restrictions to be imposed upon
the plat. Such covenants or restrictions are not subject to approval
by the City; however, it is the responsibility of the subdivider to
assure that no such covenant or restriction violates any federal,
state or local laws.
3. Plans and profiles of all street, alleys and sidewalks
(whether being installed or not) at an appropriate scale approved by
the Zoning Administrator. Profiles shall show location, size and
grade of all conduits, sewers, pipelines, sidewalks, streets, etc.
being installed
4. The following documents:
a. A certificate by the subdivider’s Engineer that all
improvements required by this Chapter have either been
installed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications and a description of any improvements which
fail to meet the approved plans and specifications.
b. Maintenance bond for all installed improvements
warranting the materials and construction methods for a
period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance by the
City of the improvements (four years for the street
paving); or,
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
179
c. Performance bond, if necessary, for any improvements not
installed at the time of filing of the final plat.
d. A digital video of the Storm and Sanitary sewer Main
systems showing the inside area within the Main line.
e. The computer data for the installed utility systems
compatible with City software to be integrated into the
City Geographic Information System (GIS).
D. RECORDING PLAT
After approval of the final plat by the City Council, the final
plat and the pertinent accompanying material shall be recorded at
the subdivider's cost in the manner required by Iowa Code Chapter
354, including rules of the County Recorder’s Office
4.1011 VARIANCES. Where in the case of a specific proposed
subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the
requirements of this chapter would warrant consideration for relief
from such requirements, a variance may be considered under those
conditions provided below:
A. Hardship.
Where the Plan Commission and city Council find that
extraordinary hardship or practical difficulties caused by strict
compliance with these regulations due to topography and parcel
size and shape which thereby cause reduced development potential,
it may make variations or exceptions to the regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured,
provided that such variation or exception shall not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations
or the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan; that it not be in
conflict with the Zoning Ordinance; and further provided the
Council shall not grant variations or exceptions to these
regulations unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case that:
1. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
180
2. The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based
are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are
not applicable, generally, to other property.
3. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a
mere inconvenience, of the strict letter of the regulations were
carried out.
4. The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property.
5. Except as provided in sub-paragraph B below, neither the code
requirements for improvements to be dedicated to the public shall not
be waived nor the construction standards for the physical improvements
diminished.
B. Plats Located in the R-1 Low Density Residential Zoning
District. Residential subdivision plats with this District shall
be considered for variances from the improvement standards and
requirements of this Chapter due to the lesser need for all such
improvements in a low intensity development and the intentions of
this zoning district to preserve as much of the natural landscape
as possible. Variances shall not be considered for the
improvement standards referenced in Section 4.1007 of this
Chapter for subdivisions in other zoning districts. The
Subdivider shall present to the Commission a written description
and justification of each variance requested. Final variances
shall be determined by negotiations between the Subdivider and
the Commission and City Council. Any and all variances granted
under this subparagraph shall remain consistent with providing
for the health, safety and general welfare of the Subdivision
occupants and the City in general and shall be consistent with
the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. Any roadway for which a
variance is granted from the standards of this Chapter may be
accepted as a public street by the City Council, provided,
however, that any such roadway shall have as a minimum a twentyfour
(24) foot wide traveled roadway, a two (2) foot wide graded
shoulder on each side of the roadway, and a fifty (50) foot road
lot or easement for each such roadway variance.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
181
B. Conditions.
In granting variations and exceptions the Council may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially
the objectives of the standards or requirements of this chapter.
C. Procedure For Variance.
A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by
the developer at the time when the preliminary plat is filed.
Such petition shall be signed by the subdivider acknowledging the
accuracy of all information in the petition. The petition shall
state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts
relied upon by the petitioner. The petition submitted by any
petitioner with a variance request and the record of the granting
of any such request shall be filed for record by the subdivider
with the recording of the final Plat.
4.1012 FEES. Before a Preliminary Plat may be considered by the
Commission, the Subdivider shall pay the City a fee in a sum of money
fixed by Resolution of the City Council from time to time and shall
not need to be fixed by City Ordinance.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
182
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
183
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
184
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
185
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
186
4.1013 ENFORCEMENT.
A. No plat of any subdivision or plat of survey shall be recorded
in the County Recorder’s office or have any validity until the
division and the improvements, if any, have been approved in
conformance with both this Chapter and Iowa law.
B. The City Council shall not permit any city funds to be
expended for repairs or maintenance on any improvements in any
area that has been subdivided unless such subdivision has been
approved and the improvements accepted in accordance with this
Chapter.
C. No building permit shall be issued for any lot in a
subdivision which has received final approval under this Chapter,
wherein the improvements as provided in Section 4.1006 of this
Chapter have neither been installed nor a performance bond for
the improvements posted with the City as provided in this
Chapter. Unless in an approved Planned Unit Development Zoning
District, the City shall not allow more than one (1) principal
structure on any one subdivided residential lot unless the
division of that lot had been established by replat approved in
conformance with this Chapter and Iowa law.
D. No more than one building permit for each separate tract
existing as of January 1, 1973 shall be issued unless said tract
has been platted, except that this provision shall not limit the
number of building permits that may be issued for accessory
buildings or additions to building already existing on said
tract. Separate tract means an aliquot part of a section, a lot
within an official plat, or a government lot under one ownership
as of January 1, 1973.
E. This Code Chapter shall apply to and be enforceable upon
any division of a tract or parcel of land within the jurisdiction
of the City as defined by Section 4.1002 of this Code for which
an Official Plat is required by the laws of the State of Iowa or
this Code Chapter.
F. Subdivision lots which have been further divided by plat
of survey shall not have any Building Permits issued for
improvements to be placed thereon until the division has been
established by replat approved in conformance with both this
Chapter and Iowa law.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
187
4.1014 COMMISSION REGULATIONS. The Commission may issue rules
and regulations implementing the provisions of this Chapter.
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
188
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 10 SUBDIVISIONS
189
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 10 SUBDIVISION
190
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 11 SIDEWALKS
191
4.1101 COUNCIL MAY ORDER
4.1102 ABSENCE OF SIDEWALKS
4.1103 IMPROPERLY BUILT SIDEWALKS
4.1104 WORN-OUT SIDEWALKS
4.1105 GENERAL PROCEDURES
4.1106 NOTICE TO THE PROPERTY OWNERS
4.1107 METHOD OF SERVICE
4.1108 OWNER OF THE PROPERTY
4.1109 APPEAL RIGHTS
4.1110 JUDICIAL REVIEW
4.1111 CONSTRUCTION BY THE CITY
4.1112 STATEMENT OF COSTS
4.1113 TIME FOR OWNER TO PAY COSTS
4.1114 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS
4.1115 GRADE ESTABLISHED BY THE CITY
4.1116 LOCATION OF WALKS
4.1117 REPAIR
4.1118 VOLUNTARY CONSTRUCTION BY THE OWNER
4.1119 VOLUNTARY ASSESSMENT BY THE OWNER
4.1101 COUNCIL MAY ORDER. The City Council may, by
resolution, order the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks
along any of the streets, avenues or other public ways of the city.
4.1102 ABSENCE OF SIDEWALKS. Sidewalks may be ordered
constructed whenever either side of the street, or any portion
thereof, shall be without a sidewalk.
4.1103 IMPROPERLY BUILT SIDEWALKS. Sidewalks may be ordered
constructed to take the place of any sidewalk which at the time of
being built does not conform to the requirements of the ordinances and
policies of the City as to material or to other specifications and the
manner of construction, or which is not constructed at the established
grade.
4.1104 WORN-OUT SIDEWALKS. Sidewalks may be ordered
constructed as provided by this Chapter to take the place of any
sidewalk, whenever and however built, which has become worn out,
dilapidated, or dangerous, and which has fallen into such condition as
that ordinary repairs in the judgment of the City are insufficient to
pace the sidewalk in a good, safe condition.
Chapter 11 SIDEWALKS
192
4.1105 GENERAL PROCEDURES. Whenever the City Council desires
the construction or reconstruction of any sidewalk, the City Council
shall first adopt a resolution as provided by Section 4.1101 of this
Chapter. The resolution so adopted shall include the following
information:
a. Name and last known address of all property owners
abutting to the sidewalk proposed for construction or
reconstruction;
b. Location of the sidewalk and list of specifications of
materials to be used and construction methods to be
followed;
c. statement of estimated unit cost;
d. a statement that if the sidewalk is not constructed or
reconstructed by the owner of the property abutting thereon
within the time fixed in this Chapter, then the sidewalk
shall be constructed or reconstructed by the City and the
costs thereof shall be assessed against the abutting
property as provided by this Chapter; and,
e. specify the rate of interest on any unpaid
assessments, which rate shall not exceed the rate permitted
by Chapter 74A of the Code of Iowa.
4.1106. NOTICE TO THE PROPERTY OWNERS. When a sidewalk is
ordered to be constructed or reconstructed as provided in this
Chapter, a written notice shall be served on the owner of the abutting
property. The notice shall provide the following information:
a. All material parts of the resolution of the Council as
set out in Section 4.1105;
b. Shall inform the person notified that unless the
sidewalk is built or rebuilt by them within the time period
specified in the Council resolution ordering the
construction or reconstruction, then the sidewalk will be
built or rebuilt by the City, and the costs thereof
assessed against the abutting property; and,
c. Shall inform the person notified of their right to
appeal the proposed action to the City Council as hereafter
provided.
Chapter 11 SIDEWALKS
193
4.1107. METHOD OF SERVICE. All notices required to be served
by this Chapter shall be deemed served upon the person or persons
named on the Notice upon mailing by certified mail through the United
States Postal Service to the person's last known address.
4.1108. OWNER OF THE PROPERTY. The owner of the property shall
be deemed to be the person in whose name the real estate is taxed
according to the property tax records maintained by the County
Treasurer.
4.1109 APPEAL RIGHTS. The owner of the property shall have the
right to appeal the proposed action of the City to the City Council
within fifteen (15) days from the date of service of the notice as
provided by Section 4.1107. The date of depositing the Notice in a
United States Postal Service mail receptacle shall be deemed the date
of service. The appeal shall be in writing signed by the owner of the
property and shall be filed with the office of the City Administrator.
The City Council shall set the date of hearing on the appeal, shall
cause the appellant to be notified of the hearing date at least three
(3) days in advance and shall act upon the appeal following the
hearing thereon. The City Council by resolution may prescribe rules
for the appeal hearing. The action of the City Council on the appeal
shall be final for all purposes under the Chapter unless timely
appealed as hereafter provided. If the Council action on the appeal
orders the sidewalk construction, then the Council shall also further
specify the time period in which the property owner shall be allowed
to construct the sidewalk.
4.1110. JUDICIAL REVIEW. The owner of the property within
thirty (30) days of the City Council action on the appeal may appeal
the decision of the Iowa District Court as provided by Section 414.l5
of the Code of Iowa.
4.1111. CONSTRUCTION BY THE CITY. In case the owner of the
property so ordered to construct or reconstruct the proposed sidewalk
shall fail to timely install the sidewalk at their expense, then the
sidewalk shall be constructed or reconstructed by the City or their
agent or contractor.
Chapter 11 SIDEWALKS
194
4.1112. STATEMENT OF COSTS. After the construction or
reconstruction of the sidewalk by the City is complete, the City
Administrator shall cause to be prepared a statement of the number of
square feet of sidewalk built along each parcel of property abutting
on said sidewalk, and the total costs thereof. The statement of costs
shall further provide that the total costs, unless paid within thirty
(30) days, will be assessed against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax; the unpaid assessment
shall be payable in five (5) annual installments; and, the unpaid
assessment shall bear interest in the manner and at the rate not to
exceed the rate permitted by Chapter 74A of the Code of Iowa. The
City Administrator shall cause this statement to be mailed to the
owner of the property in the manner provided by Section 4.1107.
4.1113. TIME FOR OWNER TO PAY COSTS. The owner of the property
shall be allowed to pay the costs of said sidewalk in the amount
provided in the statement of costs within thirty (30) days of the date
of mailing said statement.
4.1114. ASSESSMENT OF COSTS. In the event the owner of the
property does not timely pay the costs of said sidewalk according to
the statement of costs, then the City Administrator shall cause any
unpaid costs thereof to be assessed against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax. The unpaid
assessment shall be payable in five (5) annual installments with
interest on the unpaid installments at an annual rate not to exceed
the rate authorized by Chapter 74A of the Code of Iowa.
4.1115. GRADE ESTABLISHED BY THE CITY. In all cases the City
shall first establish the proper grade for the sidewalk. The owner of
the abutting property at their cost shall be responsible for the cost
of establishing the grade and for bringing the bed of the sidewalk to
the grade established by the City. In all cases, the sidewalk shall
be built to the established sidewalk grade.
4.1116. LOCATION OF WALKS. All sidewalks shall be constructed or
reconstructed in the public right of way as nearly as practicable on
or near the lot line. Sidewalks so constructed or reconstructed shall
be of such width as specified in the resolution ordering the sidewalk
and shall run in a straight line as nearly as may be practicable, and
shall join on and be a continuation of the sidewalks already built.
Chapter 11 SIDEWALKS
195
4.1117. REPAIR. All property owners shall keep the sidewalks
abutting their property in good repair and safe for public use.
4.1118. VOLUNTARY CONSTRUCTION BY THE OWNER. Any property owner
who desires to voluntarily construct sidewalks in front of their
property shall first apply to the City Administrator for a building
permit on forms supplied by the City. Upon receipt of a building
permit application for sidewalk, the City shall set construction
standards and specifications for the sidewalk and shall cause the
grade to be established for the sidewalk, if necessary. Upon issuance
of the building permit, the owner may then commence construction or
reconstruction of the sidewalk. The sidewalk shall be built in
accordance with the specifications provided by the City.
4.1119. VOLUNTARY ASSESSMENT BY THE OWNER. Any property owner
who desires to voluntarily have sidewalks constructed or reconstructed
in front of their property and have the costs thereof assessed against
their abutting property for collection in the same manner as a
property tax may make application to the City Administrator on forms
supplied by the City. Such application shall request the City to
cause said sidewalk to be installed with the costs thereof assessed
against the abutting property in the same manner as a property tax.
The application shall waive the property owner's right to a statement
of costs and an opportunity to pay such costs and shall acknowledge
the assessment procedure established by this Chapter. Upon completion
of the construction or reconstruction of the sidewalk by the City, the
City Administrator shall cause the costs thereof to be assessed
against the property for collection in the same manner as a property
tax in accordance with Section 4.1114.
Chapter 11 SIDEWALKS
196
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
197
CONTENTS
PREAMBLE
Page No.
4.12001 SHORT TITLE 203
4.12002 INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS 203
4.12003 DEFINITIONS 203-218
4.12004 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 219
4.12005 DISTRICTS 221
4.12006 BOUNDARIES 221
GENERAL REGULATIONS
4.12007 RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT 221
4.12008 CONFORMANCE REQUIRED 221
4.12009 CONTINUING EXISTING USES 221
4.12010 NONCONFORMANCE 222
4.12011 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD 222
4.12012 NONCONFORMING USES IN ANY DISTRICT 222
4.12013 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED 223
4.12014 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 226
4.12015 CORNER LOTS 227
4.12016 FENCES, WALLS AND VISION CLEARANCE 228
4.12017 REQUIRED YARD CANNOT BE REDUCED 228
4.12018 BUILDING LINES ON APPROVED PLATS 230
4.12019 PENDING APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS 230
R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4.12020 PURPOSE 231
4.12021 USE REGULATIONS 231
4.12022 MAXIMUM HEIGHT REGULATIONS 232
4.12023 LOT AREA, FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS 233
R-2 SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4.12024 PURPOSE 235
4.12025 USE REGULATIONS 235
4.12026 MAXIMUM HEIGHT REGULATION 238
4.12027 LOT AREA, FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS 238
4.12028 SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING STANDARDS 238
R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4.12029 PURPOSE 241
4.12030 USE REGULATIONS 241
4.12031 BUILDING AREA PERMITTED 242
4.12032 LOT AREA, FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS 242
4.12033 SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING STANDARDS 243
4.12034 OFF-STREET PARKING 243
Chapter 12 ZONING
198
TD-1 RESIDENTIAL-COMMERCIAL TRANSITION DISTRICT
4.12035 PURPOSE 245
4.12036 USE REGULATIONS 245
4.12037 HEIGHT, AREA, LOT FRONTAGE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS 245
4.12038 OFF-STREET PARKING 245
TD-2 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL TRANSITION DISTRICT
4.12039 PURPOSE 248
4.12040 USE REGULATIONS 248
4.12041 HEIGHT, YARD, AND BUILDING MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS 248
4.12042 OFF-STREET PARKING 248
DC-DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
4.12043 PURPOSE 251
4.12044 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 251
4.12045 USE REGULATIONS 251
4.12046 LOT AREA, FRONTAGE, YARD AND
HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 254
4.12047 OFF STREET PARKING 257
4.12048 BUILDING MATERIALS 257
C-COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
4.12049 PURPOSE 259
4.12050 USE REGULATIONS 259
4.12051 HEIGHT REGULATIONS 261
4.12052 LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS 261
4.12053 OFF-STREET PARKING 261
I-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
4.12054 PURPOSE 263
4.12055 USE REGULATIONS 263
4.12056 HEIGHT REGULATIONS 265
4.12057 LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS 266
4.12058 OFF-STREET PARKING 266
A-AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
4.12059 PURPOSE 269
4.12060 USE REGULATIONS 269
4.12061 HEIGHT REGULATIONS 270
4.12062 LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS 270
CO-CONSERVATION-OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
4.12063 PURPOSE 272
4.12064 USE REGULATIONS 272
Chapter 12 ZONING
199
PUD – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
4.12064.1 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 274
4.12064.2 STATEMENT OF INTENT 274
4.12064.3 SIZE, LAND USE AND MAXIMUM DENSITY 274
4.12064.4 MASTER PLAN 275
4.12064.5 PUD RULES, REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES
FOR LAND USE AND PERFORMANCE 276
4.12064.6 CITY REVIEW OF THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 277
4.12064.7 RECORDATION OF MASTER PLAN AND REGULATIONS 278
4.12064.8 MODIFICATIONS OF APPROVED PUD DISTRICT 278
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
4.12065 REGULATIONS 279
4.12066 MOBILE HOME PARKS 280
4.12067 TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS 282
4.12068 SWIMMING POOLS, WATER IMPOUNDMENTS AND DRAINAGE 283
4.12069 REQUIRED CONDITIONS AND PROCEDURES 284
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
4.12070 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIRED 287
4.12071 OFF-STREET PARKING AREA REQUIRED 288
OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
4.12072 INTENT 292
4.12073 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS 292
SITE PLANS
4.12074 SITE PLANS 294
4.12075 LOT BOUNDARIES LOCATED 295
EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS, INTERPRETATIONS
4.12076 STRUCTURES PERMITTED ABOVE HEIGHT LIMIT 296
4.12077 DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS 296
4.12078 OTHER EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS 296
4.12079 UNCONVERTED MOBILE HOMES 296
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS
4.12080 DEFINITIONS 298
4.12081 SIGN REGULATIONS 300
4.12082 NONCONFORMING SIGNS 303
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT BUILDING PERMITS
AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
4.12083 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 305
4.12084 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED 305
4.12085 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT 305
4.12086 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY FOR NEW,
ALTERED OR NON-CONFORMING USES 305
Chapter 12 ZONING
200
4.12087 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN
APPLICATIONS, PLANS, PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
OF ZONING OCCUPANCY 306
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURE, POWERS AND DUTIES
4.12088 BOARD CREATED 306
4.12089 MEETINGS, GENERAL PROCEDURES AND RULES 306
4.12090 APPEALS 307
4.12091 FEE FOR APPEAL 307
4.12092 HEARINGS, NOTICE 307
4.12093 JURISDICTION AND POWERS OF
THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 307
4.12094 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 309
4.12095 APPEALS FROM DECISION OF
THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 309
DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER, BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT, COUNCIL AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL
4.12096 DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER,
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, COUNCIL AND COURTS
ON MATTERS OF APPEAL 310
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
MAP REPLACEMENT AND ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS
4.12097 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 310
4.12098. MAP REPLACEMENT 312
4.12099. ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS 312
4.12100 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS 313
ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
4.12101 ENFORCEMENT 313
4.12102 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 313
Chapter 12 ZONING
201
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
202
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
203
PREAMBLE
4.12001. SHORT TITLE. This Chapter shall be known as the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Winterset, Iowa, and shall also be known as
Title IV, Chapter 12 of the Winterset Municipal Code
4.12002. INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS. This ordinance is intended
to provide for the health, safety, general welfare, and efficiency in
the provision of municipal services and the overall quality of life
for the City of Winterset, Iowa. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be
minimum requirements. Where this Chapter imposes a greater
restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or
by other rules or regulations or Chapters, the provisions of this
Chapter shall control.
4.12003. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Chapter, certain
terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
Person. The word person includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
The word shall is mandatory; the word may is permissive.
The words used or occupied include the words intended, designed, or
arranged to be used or occupied.
The word lot includes the words plot or parcel, and all other words or
phrases used to denote an individual building site which complies with
the minimum provisions of this Chapter.
Accessory Use or Structure:
A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a building or
other improvement upon the lot and serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the use of the principal building or use of the land. A
storage or freight vessel capable of being used for commercial hauling
shall not become an accessory structure upon any lot.
Chapter 12 ZONING
204
Agriculture:
The use of land for farming, including animal husbandry, dairying,
field cropping, floriculture, forestry, groves, horticulture,
orchards, poultry husbandry, ranching, viticulture, horse raising and
stables, kennels and the necessary accessory uses for sheltering, feed
storage, pacing, showing, training, treating; however, the operation
of any accessory uses shall be subordinate to that of the normal
agriculture activities. The term Agriculture in this ordinance does
not include commercial feedlots and confinement feeding of livestock
or poultry.
Alley
A public way other than a street, twenty-six feet or less in width,
affording secondary means of access to abutting property. An alley
shall not be considered a public thoroughfare.
Automated bank telling services:
Services provided by an electronic banking outlet (ATM) which outlet
allows customers to complete banking transactions without the
assistance of a bank representative or teller.
Automated fuel dispensing services:
Services provided by electronic motor fuel dispensing equipment which
equipment allows customers to dispense fuel into the fuel tank of
motor vehicles and make payment for the fuel without the assistance of
a gas station or convenience store attendant.
Automobile Service Station:
A retail place of business having pumps and/or storage tanks from
which liquid fuel and/or lubricants are dispensed directly into the
motor vehicle. Sales of auto accessories, washing, polishing,
inspections and cleaning and similar activities incidental to the sale
of fuel, lubricants and accessories are permitted; and, the
performance of minor repairs not involving replacing or repairing
major auto components such as engines or transmissions are permitted.
However, steam cleaning, major auto repairs or auto bodywork are not
allowed.
Automobile Wrecking:
(See "Junk Yard")
Awning:
Roof like cover entirely supported by and extending from a building
for the purpose of protecting openings therein from the elements.
Basement:
A story having more than one-half of its heights below grade.
Chapter 12 ZONING
205
Bed and breakfast home: A private residence which provides lodging and
meals for guests, in which no more than five guest families or
individual patrons are lodged at the same time, and which, while it
may advertise and accept reservations, does not present itself to the
public as a restaurant, hotel, motel, or resort, and does not require
reservations, and serves food only to overnight customers.
Block:
Property abutting on one side of a street and property lying between
the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, railroad rightof-
way, waterway, open space, farm land, campus, park or other
definite boundary.
Building Height:
The vertical distance from the average finished ground grade at the
building line to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to
the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between
caves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
Centerline, Public Thoroughfare:
A line running parallel with the thoroughfare right-of-way which is
half the distance between the extreme edges of the official right-ofway
width.
Certified Survey:
A sketch, plat, map or other exhibit bearing a written statement of
its accuracy or conformity to specified standards which is signed by a
Registered Land Surveyor as defined by the Code of Iowa.
Commission:
The Planning and Zoning Commission.
Convenience Store:
A retail place of business whose primary purpose is the sale to the
general public of the following consumer goods: edible foodstuff,
beverages, petroleum products for immediate use in motor vehicles, and
other similar retail consumer goods generally associated with this
type of consumer servicing enterprise.
Dwelling:
Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes including modular homes and
manufactured homes as defined in this section, but not including a
tent, cabin, trailer, vehicle, motor home or travel-trailer.
Dwelling Unit:
One or more rooms arranged, designed, connected together and resided
in by only one family. Such unit shall have its own cooking, sleeping
and bathroom facilities. Such unit shall be physically separate from
any other dwelling units in the same building.
Chapter 12 ZONING
206
Dwelling, One-Family:
A building designed for and used exclusively for residential purposes
by one family and containing one dwelling unit.
Dwelling, Multiple:
A building designed for and used for occupancy by three or more
families living independently of each other and containing three or
more dwelling units.
Dwelling, Earth Sheltered:
A residential building constructed underground, or with more than onehalf
of its height (measured from floor to ceiling) below the
adjoining exterior grade on one or more walls, having one or more
sides completely exposed and having its main floor level at or above
the approximate grade between the building and property line on one or
more sides and generally not more than one-half story below the grade
of the street from which access is obtained unless the natural slope
would normally accommodate a full walk-out story.
Duplex:
A building designed for and used for occupancy by two families living
independently of each other and containing two dwelling units.
Family:
A family is:
A. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption or foster children living together as a single housekeeping
unit in a dwelling unit, or
B. A group of not more than five persons who need not be related,
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
Farm:
An area comprising ten acres or more that is used for agriculture.
Garage, public:
A structure in which major mechanical repair or rebuilding of motor
powered vehicles is performed and in which the storage, hiring,
selling, leasing are accessory uses.
Garage, Private:
An accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building,
designed and/or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles, trailers
boats or other personal property owned by the occupants or by the
owners of the main building.
Chapter 12 ZONING
207
Garage, private, residential: An accessory use structure located on
and serving a residential property which shall be designed and used
for the sheltering of no more than three motor vehicles and other
personal property used by the occupants of the associated residential
property, and no more than one of these vehicles may be a commercial
vehicle over two tons capacity.
Chapter 12 ZONING
208
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
209
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
210
Grade:
The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to
the exterior walls of the structure. However, when any wall
approximately parallels and is not more than five feet from a street
line, then the average elevation of the street along that wall shall
be grade.
Home Occupation:
Any occupation or profession conducted solely by resident occupants in
their place of residence, involving primarily service and not the sale
of commodities upon the premises; provided further, that not more than
one quarter the area of not more than one floor level of the building
may be used in pursuit of the occupation and any sign identifying the
occupation shall not exceed two square feet in total area and shall be
attached to the outer wall of the residence; one person other than the
occupant of the building may be employed in the home occupation. Home
occupations may sell incidental products held in stock to customers
but there shall be no advertising of such incidental products. Home
occupations shall have no exterior storage of materials or products
and shall not emit odors, smoke, glare, noise, and lighting or create
parking problems which would be a nuisance in the neighborhood. Home
occupations are subject to periodic zoning compliance inspections by
the City Zoning Administrator. In Home Day Care Provider is a separate
zoning classification and is not considered a Home Occupation.
In Home Day Care Provider:
Childcare provided in the home of the resident occupant for all day or
a portion of the day for compensation, excluding emergency situations.
The provider’s children who are age thirteen (13) or younger shall be
included in determining the number of children under childcare.
Loading Space:
Any off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials.
Lot:
A parcel of land or two or more contiguous parcels to be used as a
unit under the provisions of this Chapter, and having its principal
frontage on a dedicated street or an approved private street and of at
least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use and
area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein
required. A lot may consist of any one of the following:
Chapter 12 ZONING
211
A. A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of records, or of portions of lots of
record.
B. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds: provided that
in no case of division or combination shall any residential lot
or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this
Chapter.
C. A single lot of record.
Lot Lines:
A. Front: The front property line of a lot shall be determined as
follows:
Corner Lot. The front property line of a corner lot shall be the
shorter of the two lines adjacent to the streets as platted,
subdivided, or laid out. Where the lines are equal, the front line
shall be that line which is obviously the front by reasons of the
prevailing custom of the other buildings in the block. If such front
is not evident, then either may be considered the front of the lot,
but not both.
Interior Lot. The front property line of an interior lot shall be the
line bounding the street frontage.
Through Lot. The front property line of a through lot shall be that
line which is obviously the front by reason of the prevailing custom
of the other buildings in the block.
Where such front property line is not obviously evident, the Board of
Adjustment shall determine the front property line. Such a lot over
200 feet deep shall be considered for the purpose of this definition,
as two lots each with its own frontage.
B. Rear: The rear property line of a lot is that lot line
opposite the front property line. Where the side property lines
of a lot meet in a point, the rear property line shall be assumed
to be a line not less than ten feet long lying within the lot and
parallel to the front property line. If the front property line
is a curved line, then the property line shall be assumed to be a
line not less than ten feet long lying within the lot and
parallel to a line tangent to the front property line at its
midpoint.
C. Side: The side property lines of a lot are those lot lines
connecting the front and rear property lines of a lot.
Chapter 12 ZONING
212
Lot Measurements:
A. Area. The gross area exclusive of dedicated or easement
streets or other recorded rights-of-way such as railroads.
Except as noted in Article XIV.
B. Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines as measured perpendicular to the midpoint of the mean
front lot line. In the case of an interior triangular or goreshaped
lot, the depth shall be the horizontal distance between
the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines.
C. Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as
measured perpendicular to the line comprising the lot depth at
its point of intersection with the required minimum front
setback. Where the lot width is decreasing from front to rear,
the horizontal distance between the side lot lines as described
above shall be measured at its point of intersection with the
required minimum rear setback.
Lot Types:
A. Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets and having the street right-of-way abut the front and one
or more sidelines of the lot.
B. Double Frontage Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two
or more streets and having the street right-of-way abut the front
and one or more sidelines of the lot.
C. Interior Lot. A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on
but one street or public thoroughfare.
D. Key Lot. An interior lot, one side of which is contiguous to
the rear line of a corner lot.
Major Recreational Equipment:
Travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent
trailers, boats or boat trailers, personal water craft, hover craft,
horse trailers, snow mobiles or snow mobile trailers and similar
equipment.
Chapter 12 ZONING
213
Manufactured Home:
A factory-built single family structure, which is manufactured or
constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Section 5403, Federal
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and is to be used
as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or
equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be
moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and
which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any
wheels or axles. For the purposes of these regulations, manufactured
home shall be considered the same as any other site built singlefamily
dwelling.
Modular Home:
Factory-built housing as provided by Iowa Code Section 135.1(3), which
has been certified as meeting the State Building Code Applicable to
modular housing. Once certified by the State of Iowa, modular homes
shall be subject to the same standards as site built homes.
Chapter 12 ZONING
214
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
215
Mobile Home:
Any vehicle as provided by Iowa Code Section 135.1(1) without motive
power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being
used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so
designed, constructed, or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to
be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons; but
shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not registered
as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home is a factory-built housing
built on a chassis. A mobile home shall not be construed to be a
travel trailer or any other form of recreation vehicle. A mobile home
shall be construed to remain a mobile home, subject to all regulations
applying thereto, whether or not wheels, axles, hitch, or other
pertinence of mobility are removed and regardless of the nature of the
foundation provided. However, certain mobile homes may be classified
as "manufactured homes." Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed
as permitting a mobile home in other than an approved mobile home
park, unless such mobile home is classified as a manufactured home. A
mobile home shall be a dwelling unit for density and parking
requirements purposes, but shall not be considered a single or
multiple dwelling, apartment, efficiency apartment, rooming unit or
guest room. A mobile home shall be larger than eight (8) feet in
width and thirty-two (32) feet in length. The mobile home shall
contain sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub, or shower, and
kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided
for attachment to outside systems.
Mobile Home Park:
Any lot, tract or parcel of land licensed and used or offered for use
in whole or in part, with or without charge, for the parking of
occupied mobile homes and travel trailers subject to Article X and
used solely for living and/or sleeping purposes. Travel trailers
shall not occupy more than fifteen percent of the spaces of the total
mobile home park.
Motel or Motor Hotel:
A building or group of two or more buildings designed to provide
sleeping accommodations for transient or overnight guests with garage
attached or parking facilities conveniently located to each such unit.
Non-Conforming Use:
Any structure or land lawfully used at the time of the effective date
of this Ordinance, which does not conform, with the use regulations of
the District in which it is located.
Chapter 12 ZONING
216
Parking Space, Automobile:
An area other than a street or alley reserved for the parking of an
automobile--such space having a dimension not less than ten feet by
twenty feet, plus such additional area as is necessary to afford
adequate ingress-egress. Where four or more automobile parking spaces
are to be grouped as a common facility meeting a requirement of this
Chapter, the individual car spaces, plus the area necessary for
driveways, shall total not less than 315 square feet per car space.
Premises:
A lot or tract of land and any structure located thereon.
Public Thoroughfare:
(See "Street".)
Seasonal Room:
An enclosed porch area or room attached to the dwelling unit which has
an exterior door separating the area or room from the dwelling unit. A
seasonal room which is heated and/or cooled shall be constructed in
compliance with Title IV of the City Code.
Setback:
The building restriction line nearest the front of and across a lot
establishing the minimum distance to be provided between the line of a
building located on said Lot and the nearest street right-of-way line
or nearest lot line if there is no street.
Spas:
A bathing facility such as a hot tub or whirlpool designed for
recreational or therapeutic use and not designed to be drained,
cleaned, and refilled for each individual use. Spas shall have a means
of agitation to include, but not be limited to, hydro jet circulation;
hot water, cold water, mineral baths, air inductions systems; or, any
combination thereof.
Street:
A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
the
abutting property. An alley is not a street. (See "Public
Thoroughfare.")
Structural Alterations:
Any replacement or change beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance in
the shape or size of any portion of a building or of the supporting
members of a building or structure such as walls, columns, beams,
arches, girders, floor joists, or roof trusses.
Chapter 12 ZONING
217
Structure:
Anything constructed or erected either portable or with a rigid or
fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground, including buildings, walls, fences,
signs, light standards, towers, tanks and billboards, monuments,
stadiums.
Subdivision:
A division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into three or more lots,
plats, sites for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale,
lease, conveyance or transfer with the appurtenant streets, alleys,
and easements, dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use or
for the use of purchasers or owners within the tract subdivided. If a
new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land or the
division into two or more parts of any residential lot shall also be
deemed a subdivision.
SWIMMING POOL:
A body of water which has a depth of more than 24” in an artificial or
semi-artificial receptacle, except for spas.
Travel Trailer:
Any vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, with or without
motive power, designed as a temporary dwelling not exceeding eight
feet in width, exclusive of slide-out components, and not exceeding
forty-two feet in length exclusive of separate towing unit. The term
"travel trailer" shall include pick-up coach, motor home, camp
trailer, or other similar mobile and temporary dwellings commonly used
for travel, recreation or vacation quarters.
Travel Trailer Park:
Any lot, tract or parcel of land licensed and used or offered for use
in whole or in part, with or without charge, for the parking of
occupied mobile homes, travel trailers, pick-up campers, converted
buses, tent trailers, tents or similar devices served by licensed
sanitary facilities, and used for temporary recreational and sleeping
purposes associated with recreational, vacation and tourism purposes.
Chapter 12 ZONING
218
Variance:
A modification of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the
actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship and practical difficulty. As
used in this ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area
and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment
or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by
variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of
non-conformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning
district.
Yard:
An open space on a lot extending from the lot line to the required set
back line and unoccupied and unobstructed from thirty inches above the
ground upward, except for landscaping, balconies, steps and awnings or
as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
Yard, Front:
The yard area extending across the front of a lot between the public
right of way and the required front yard setback line. On corner lots,
the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon
which the lot has its least dimension, except where the owner shall
elect to front the building on the street parallel to the lot line
having the greater dimension.
Yard, Rear:
The yard area extending across the rear of a lot between the lot line
and the required rear lot set back line.
Yard, Side:
The yard area lying between a front and rear yard setback lines and
extending from the side lot line to the required side yard setback
line.
Zone:
Any one of the classes of districts established by this Chapter.
Chapter 12 ZONING
219
4.12004 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. The City is hereby divided into
districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with
all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by this reference
and declared to be a part of this Chapter.
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to
in Section 4.12004 of the Winterset Municipal Code". This map shall be
kept on file at City Hall and available for inspection by the public.
The official zoning map shall have inscribed on its face the
boundaries of all rezoning approved by the City Council. The official
zoning map may be updated at any time by the Planning Commission and
City Administrator with such map re-certified as provided above.
Chapter 12 ZONING
220
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
221
4.12005 DISTRICTS. For the purpose of this Chapter, the City
is hereby divided into land use districts as follows:
R – 1 Low Density Residential District
R - 2 Single and Two Family Residential District
R - 3 Multi-Family Residential District
TD- 1 Residential-Commercial Transition District
TD- 2 Downtown Commercial Transition District
C - Commercial District
DC- Downtown Commercial District
I - Industrial District
A - Agricultural District
CO- Conservation – Open Space District
4.12006. BOUNDARIES. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of any of these districts, the district boundaries are
either lot lines or the centerlines of street and alleys, quarterquarter
section lines or lines denoted by specific measurements from
known and fixed points. Where uncertainties or disputes arise, the
Board of Adjustment shall investigate and determine zoning boundary
locations.
GENERAL REGULATIONS
4.12007. RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. No major recreational equipment
shall be parked or stored in any front yard in a residential district
for more than twenty-four hours except on the driveway for the
residence. Major recreational equipment shall not be used for living,
sleeping, or housekeeping purposes except in a mobile home park.
4.12008. CONFORMANCE REQUIRED. Except as hereinafter specified,
no building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered nor shall any building or
land be used which does not comply with all of the district
regulations established by this Chapter for the district in which the
building or land is located.
4.12009. CONTINUING EXISTING USES. Except as hereafter provided,
the lawful use of a lot or parcel of land at the time the lot or
parcel first became subject to zoning regulation by the City may be
continued even though such use may not conform with the regulations of
this Chapter for the district in which it is located. This provision
shall not be construed to authorize a land use which under prior
zoning regulations was invalid.
Chapter 12 ZONING
222
4.12010. NONCONFORMANCE. Within the districts established by
this Chapter or by amendments which may later be adopted, there exist
lots, structures, buildings and uses which were lawful before this
Chapter was effective or amended, but which would be prohibited
regulated or restricted under the provisions of this Chapter or future
amendment, the intent of this Chapter is to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed or cease to be so
used, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent
of this Chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
4.12011. NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD. A single family dwelling
and customary accessory buildings, notwithstanding limitations imposed
by other provisions of this Chapter, may be erected in any district in
which single family dwellings are permitted on any single lot of
record at the date the lot or parcel first became subject to city
zoning regulations. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of
continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This
provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable
in the district, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements
not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
4.12012. NONCONFORMING USES IN ANY DISTRICT. No building or land
devoted to a use not permitted by this Chapter in the zoning district
in which such building or land is located shall be enlarged, extended
constructed, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered,
unless the use thereof is changed to a use permitted in the district
in which such buildings, structure or premises is located, except as
follows:
A. SUBSTITUTION. If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of building or structure may be changed to
another nonconforming use of the same or of a more
restrictive zoning use classification. Whenever a
nonconforming use has been changed to a more restrictive use
or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restrictive use.
Chapter 12 ZONING
223
B. DISCONTINUANCE. In the event that a nonconforming use
classification of any building or premises is discontinued or
abandoned or is a nuisance as defined by this Code, the use of
premises shall conform thereafter to the uses permitted in the
district in which it is located. The use of land upon which no
improvement or building is erected or constructed, which becomes
nonconforming by reasons of a subsequent change in this Chapter,
shall be discontinued within one year from the effective date of
the zoning change.
C. REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES. Any
nonconforming building or structure requiring repairs or
maintenance as a result of ordinary wear and tear, depreciation,
or for any other reason which costs more than fifty percent of
its then existing value, as determined by the building inspector,
shall not be repaired, restored or reconstructed and the
nonconforming use shall then cease; but, if the cost of such
repairs or maintenance is less than fifty percent of the then
existing value of the structure, it may be restored,
reconstructed and used as before provided that such repairs can
be completed within six months.
4.12013. STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED.
A. Except as permitted in Section 4.12010, no lot shall contain any
building used in whole or in part for residence purposes unless
such lot abuts at least forty feet on at least one street or
right-of-way, or unless it has an exclusive unobstructed private
easement of access or right-of-way at least twenty feet wide to a
street; and, there shall be not more than one single-family
dwelling for such frontage or easement, except that a common
easement of access at least fifty feet wide shall be provided for
two or more such single-family dwellings or for one or more twofamily
or multiple dwellings.
Chapter 12 ZONING
224
B. The number of ingress/egress access points to public streets
and/or alleys from off-street parking areas are subject to
the City approval and shall be located to limit vehicular
conflicts, provide acceptable location of driveway accesses
to public streets, preserve proper traffic safety and, as
possible, not impair the movement of vehicular traffic on
public streets and alleys. The permitted number of
ingress/egress driveway approaches to public streets/alleys
for an off-street parking lot shall be dependent upon the
existing and projected future average daily traffic (ADT) for
the public street and, where possible, public street accesses
should be located in alignment with driveway approaches
gaining access to the same public street and/or alley from
property on the opposite side of the street and/or alley.
C. Except for single-family detached dwellings, and unless
recommended by the Zoning Administrator, access drives onto
public streets/alleys should have a minimum separation of one
hundred feet (100') apart measured center line to center
line; and, on arterial streets the required distance should
be three hundred feet (300'). No driveway shall be
permitted to access a public street within twenty-five feet
(25') of the end of radius at a street intersection.
D. Single-family residences shall normally have only one (1)
driveway for each residential lot. The approved driveway
shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the square footage of
the lot nor shall the driveway within the front yard of a
single family residence occupy greater than fifty percent
(50%) of the area between the building setback line and the
public right of way. In considering exceptions, the Zoning
Administrator shall apply the criteria in subparagraph (a)
above, the City Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Zoning
Classification of the lot, and the compatibility of the
proposed use with other land uses within the vicinity of the
lot before approving any exceptions to this requirement.
Driveways and associated off-street parking areas for singlefamily
residences shall not be located closer than one foot
(1') from an adjoining residential lot line unless such
driveway is jointly used by the adjoining residential lot
owner and a joint access easement has been filed as a public
record.
Chapter 12 ZONING
225
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
226
4.12014. ACCESSORY BUILDING AND STRUCTURES. No accessory
building or structure shall be erected in a required yard, except as
provided hereafter.
1. Accessory building or structure which is located entirely
within the principal building area of the lot (the lot area minus
the required yards) whether attached or detached to the principal
building, shall be subject to the regulations applicable to the
principal building.
2. Accessory building or structures, except buildings housing
animals or fowl, may be erected as a part of the principal
building or may be connected thereto by a breezeway or similar
structure; provided said building shall comply with all yard
requirements for a principal building.
3. Detached accessory buildings may be located in rear yards as
follows:
a. A minimum of ten feet distant from other structures on
the lot.
b. A minimum of five feet from alley lines and lot lines.
4. Accessory building or structures may be located in side
yards no closer than ten (10) feet to the side of the principal
building providing the minimum side yard requirements can be met
on both corner and side lots.
5. Accessory buildings shall be no closer to the front right-ofway
line than the front line of the principal building.
6. The accessory building shall not exceed one story of twenty
feet in height.
7. Accessory buildings and structures shall not occupy more than
30% of any yard area on a lot, however this regulation shall not
be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a garage which
does not exceed 550 square feet of building area.
8. No more than two (2) accessory buildings or structures shall
be allowed on any lot within any residential district.
9. No accessory building or structure shall be located on a lot
before the principal building or use.
Chapter 12 ZONING
227
10. Detached garages and accessory structures shall be
residential in character with similar architectural features as
the principal structure, including roof slope, overhangs, etc.
The exterior surface of detached garages and accessory structure
which are metal clad shall be pre-finished colored steel or
similar cover. Galvanized metal is prohibited as the exterior
finish material in residential zoning districts.
11. All detached accessory buildings or structures on a
permanent foundation under 720 square feet in area shall be
constructed on at least a 3 ½ inch concrete slab with not less
than 6 inch by 6 inch continuous footings around the perimeter;
if the structure is set on sloping ground, the footing shall be a
minimum of 12 inches by 6 inches into existing soil. All
detached accessory buildings or structures on a permanent
foundation over 720 square feet in area, but less than 1,000
square feet in area shall have either frost-protected footings
extending 42 inches below finished grade (minimum 6 inches
thickness) or a 6 inch thick poured concrete slab containing
throughout a minimum of ½ inch reinforcement bar spaced on 30
inch centers with not less than 6 inch by 6 inch continuous
footings around the perimeter. All detached accessory buildings
or structures on a permanent foundation over 1,000 square feet in
area shall have frost-protected footings extending 42 inches
below finished grade (minimum 6 inches thickness)
4.12015. CORNER LOTS. For corner lots platted after the date the
City zoning ordinances first became effective, the street side yard
shall be equal in width to the minimum required side yard for the
district in which it is located, plus twenty feet; provided however,
this regulation shall not require a side street yard of greater width
than the minimum required front yard width.
On corner lots platted and of record at the time of the date the City
zoning ordinances first became effective, the same regulations shall
apply except that this regulation shall not reduce the buildable width
of the corner lot facing an intersecting street and of record to less
than twenty-eight feet nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory
building.
For corner lots, platted after the date the City zoning ordinances
first became effective, the minimum required lot width shall be
increased by an amount not less than twenty feet so as to allow for
the additional required street side yard.
Chapter 12 ZONING
228
4.12016. FENCES, WALLS AND VISION CLEARANCE.
1. On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a
height of two and one-half feet and ten feet above the centerline
grades of the area described as follows:
That area bounded by the street right-of-way lines of a corner lot and
a straight line joining points on said right-of-way lines twenty-five
feet from the point of intersection of said right-of-way lines.
This regulation shall not apply to the DC-Downtown Commercial
District.
a. Any fence installed or constructed in any zoning
district using materials with only one (1) finished side
shall have the finished side exposed to the street right of
way or the exterior of the lot.
2. In any district, fences and walls not exceeding six feet in
height are permitted within the side and rear yard areas. A
fence or wall not exceeding four feet in height is permitted
within the front yard area. In the case of retaining walls
supporting embankments, the above requirements shall apply only
to that part of the wall above the ground surface of the retained
embankment.
3. In any district where a fence or wall is required by this
Chapter, the Subdivision Chapter or other Chapter, to serve as a
screening wall, buffer wall or other separating or protective
wall, the restrictions of Paragraph 1 above, shall yield to the
requirements of the specific ordinance.
4.12017. REQUIRED YARD CANNOT BE REDUCED. No lot shall be
reduced in size so as to make the width or total area of the lot or
any yard, or any other open space, less than the minimum required by
this Chapter. No part of a yard or other open space about any
building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions
of this Chapter shall be included as part of a yard or other open
space required under this Chapter for another building or structure.
Off-street parking and loading areas may occupy all or part of any
required yard or open space except as otherwise specified in this
Chapter.
Chapter 12 ZONING
229
The following parking regulations shall apply in all R-Residential
Districts within the City:
a. FRONT AND SIDE YARDS. No off-street parking allowed except
for licensed and operable motor vehicles on the private driveways
or parking lots which are duly approved or authorized for such
use by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to this Zoning
Ordinance:
b. REAR YARDS. No off-street parking allowed except for:
1. Licensed and operable motor vehicles on driveways or parking lots
duly approved or authorized for such use by the appropriate city
officials pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance or:
2. Not more than one of any of the following types of property on the
other rear yard areas:
a. Licensed and operable motor vehicles
b. Licensed trailers
c. Any other type of operable machinery or equipment
Any person desiring a variance from these regulations shall apply for
a permit temporarily permitting parking for a period not to exceed 60
days. This application shall be in writing to the Zoning
Administrator upon such application form as is prescribed by the
Zoning Administrator. The fee to accompany said application shall be
$5.00 and is non-refundable in all cases. The application shall
include a site plan, if required, and such other plans, information or
justification necessary to clearly establish the basis for the
requested permit or such other information as may reasonably be
required by the Zoning Administrator in reviewing the application.
Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prevent application for a
new temporary permit following expiration of any permit obtained in
accordance herewith; however, the granting thereof shall not be deemed
a matter of right on the part of the applicant and the granting
thereof, as in the case of an initial permit, shall be at the
discretion of the Zoning Administrator. Appeals from the decision of
the Zoning Administrator upon said application shall be taken pursuant
to Section 4.12090 of this Code.
These off-street parking regulations within R-Residential Districts
shall not apply to any vehicle or trailer which in common usage is
moved by human power alone or to any vehicle parked within either an
attached or detached garage or within other duly authorized accessory
structure.
Chapter 12 ZONING
230
4.12018. BUILDING LINES ON APPROVED PLATS. Whenever the plat of
a land subdivision approved by the City and on record in the office of
the County Recorder shows a setback building line along any frontage
for the purpose of creating a front yard or side street yard line, the
setback requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall govern, subject to
Section 4.12093,A,3.
4.12019. PENDING APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS. Nothing
herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout,
plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, or part
thereof, for which approvals and required building permits have been
granted before the enactment of this Chapter.
Chapter 12 ZONING
231
R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4.12020. PURPOSE. The purpose of the R-1 Residential District is
to provide for low density residential land usage and accessory uses
particularly in fringe areas of the city where such low density would
not require a full complement of public infrastructure. Also, this
district is intended to be located in those areas where there are
special landscapes and environmental conditions intended to be
preserved but also capable of sustaining some development and where
low density will serve to preserve such natural conditions as opposed
to normal residential densities, which would significantly alter or
destroy such natural amenities. Also this district is intended to
reduce urban runoff, flooding, erosion and water contamination and is
intended to facilitate low intensity development with low impacts on
scenic and timbered landscape areas, all in accord with the
Comprehensive Plan.
4.12021. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used
only for the following purpose:
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Agricultural uses limited to cultivation, pasture and wood
lots
3. Permitted uses of the CO-Conservation–Open space District
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Normal accessory buildings and structures for a dwelling
such as private garages, children's playhouses, radio and
television receiving antennas, barbecue pits, playground
equipment, tennis courts, etc. A private garage of less
than three car capacity may be rented for the storage of
private vehicles of persons not residents on the premises.
2. Normal accessory buildings and structures for public
recreation areas such as refreshment stands, playground
equipment, all-weather shelters, tennis courts, barbecue
pits, etc.
Chapter 12 ZONING
232
3. Horses for personal use only, rather than commercial use,
may be kept in this district provided that no grazing or
structure housing such animals shall be located less than
200 feet from any structure used for dwelling purposes
(other than the residence of the owner of such animals),
nor less than 200 feet from the front lot line. Any
structure housing such animals shall be located at least
fifty feet from all side or rear boundary lines of the
property on which the structure is located. Not more than
two animals may be kept on any lot or parcel of land of
less than two acres in area, and one additional animal may
be added for each additional acre over two acre. These
number limitations shall not apply to tracts of land of ten
acres or more in size.
4. Domestic animals such as cats, dogs, birds, tropical fish,
etc. Horses, cows, sheep, chickens, etc., normally
considered farm or wild, untamed and dangerous animals,
shall be excluded except as otherwise provided in this
Code.
5. In Home Day Care Provider with 6 or fewer children.
6. Flower and vegetable gardening for noncommercial purposes.
7. Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries for noncommercial
purposes.
C. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
1. Home Occupations which are conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by persons residing therein,
which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling as a residence and does not change the
character thereof. Those occupations shall be excluded
which normally are classified as a trade and require the
substantial use of employees or subcontractors or mechanics
tools or equipment.
2. In Home Day Care Provider with more than 6 children
4.12022. MAXIMUM HEIGHT REGULATIONS. No principal building shall
exceed 35’ in height.
Chapter 12 ZONING
233
4.12023. LOT AREA, FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed:
Principal
Use
Lot
Area
Lot
Frontag
e
Front
Yard
Depth
s
Side Yard
Least
Width on
any one
Side
Sum of
Side
Yards
Rear
Yard
Depths
Single-
Family
dwellings
and non
dwellings
Agricultur
e
2 acres 150 ft. 30
ft.
25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
The enforcement of the lot frontage requirement for cul-de-sac and
loop lane streets may be at the building setback line for the lots
located on the radius of the street.
The single family dwelling standards of the R-2 Residence District
shall apply for such uses in the R-1 Low Density Residential District.
Chapter 12 ZONING
234
This Page Left Blank In Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
235
R-2 SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4.12024. PURPOSE. The R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential
District is for single and two-family dwellings designed to develop,
maintain, and protect residential neighborhoods of single family and
two family housing and associated residential environments, consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan.
4.12025. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used
only for the following purpose:
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
1. A single-family dwelling on each lot or building site.
2. Two-family dwellings.
3. Earth sheltered dwellings as defined by this Code.
4. Agricultural field crops but not including the raising
of poultry, pets, or livestock for commercial or
agricultural purposes.
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses of the R-1 District.
C. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
1. Home occupations which are conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by persons residing therein,
which use is clearly incidental and secondary to
the use of the dwelling as a residence and does not
change the character thereof. Those occupations shall
be excluded which normally are classified as a trade
and require the substantial use of employees or
subcontractors or mechanics tools or equipment.
2. Poultry, rabbits, chinchillas, mink, hamsters, pigeons
and other fowl or small animals for personal use only
rather than commercial use may be kept in this District
provided that no grazing or structure housing such
animals shall be located less than 200 feet from any
structure either now or in the future used for dwelling
purposes (other than the residence of the owner of such
animals), nor less than 200 feet from the front lot
line. Any structure housing such animals shall be
located at least fifty feet from all side or rear
boundary lines of the property on which the structure
Chapter 12 ZONING
236
is located. Not more than twelve of such poultry,
fowl, or small animals may be maintained on any lot or
parcel of land of less than one and one-half acres in
area.
3. Places of worship and associated public gathering
facilities
4. Any educational buildings or institutions.
5. Hospitals, medical and dental clinics and their related
professional offices and services, nursing homes,
boarding houses, clubs, lodge organizations.
6. In Home Day Care Providers with more than 6 children.
7. Bed and Breakfast Home as defined in 4.12003 of this
Code.
Chapter 12 ZONING
237
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
238
4.12026. MAXIMUM HEIGHT REGULATION. No principal building shall
exceed thirty-five feet in height.
4.12027. LOT AREA, FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed:
Principal
Use
Lot
Area
Lot
Frontag
e
Front
Yard
Depths
Side Yard
Least
Width on
any one
Side
Sum of
Side
Yards
Rear
Yard
Depths
Single-
Family
dwelling
7,500
sq ft.
60 ft. 30 ft. 5 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft
Two-Family
dwelling
12,000
sq ft
60 ft. 30 ft. 12 ft. 25 ft. 30 ft.
Nondwellings
1 acre 150 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
The enforcement of the lot frontage requirement for cul-de-sac and
loop lane streets may be at the building setback line for the lots
located on the radius of the street.
4.12028. SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING STANDARDS. The following
standards shall apply to all single and two family dwellings:
1. The minimum dimension of the main body of the dwelling unit
shall not be less than twenty-four feet.
2. The dwelling unit shall be erected on frost-free footings of
poured concrete installed around the entire perimeter of the
structure in accordance with the Building Code. Seasonal rooms
may be constructed on a foundation consisting of a minimum six
inch by six inch treated woods posts located under all roof
bearing points on an approved frost-free footing conforming to
the City Building Codes standards; or, the seasonal room
foundation may be structurally designed by a registered,
professional architect or engineer.
3. The dwelling unit shall be erected on a continuous permanent
foundation of either poured concrete or concrete block or
securely fastened to this foundation. This requirement shall not
apply to Manufactured Homes as defined in Iowa Code Section
414.28 which shall have a foundation system complying with the
State of Iowa Building Code as now or hereafter adopted or
amended.
4. The dwelling unit shall have a minimum area of eight hundred
sixty (860) feet.
Chapter 12 ZONING
239
5. Single family dwellings subject to the Iowa Horizontal
Property Regime Act need only meet one (1) side yard setback
requirement; all other dwelling units shall meet the relevant one
or two family dwelling requirements in Section 4.12027 of this
Code.
Chapter 12 ZONING
240
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
241
R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4.12029. PURPOSE. The R-3 Multi-Family Residential District
allows for diversity of housing choices, residential environments and
housing densities and allows for similar compatible uses designed to
maintain, protect and preserve the character of the development and of
the neighborhood, all in accord with the Comprehensive Plan.
4.12030. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used
only for the following purposes:
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
1. Any use permitted in the R-2 Residential District providing
such use shall comply with the minimum requirements of the
R-2 Residential District.
2. Multi-family dwellings; providing however, that a minimum
of 2,000 square feet of lot area be provided for each
dwelling unit.
3. Bed and breakfast lodging
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
1. Special Exception Uses of the R-2 Residence district
2. Playground areas and equipment accessory to multi-family
dwellings.
3. Community centers for recreational, laundry and other
service facilities for multi-family dwellings, providing
such areas shall not be located to the front of the
principal building at ground level or above and such areas
shall be screened from public view.
Chapter 12 ZONING
242
ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses of the R-2 Residential District
4.12031. BUILDING AREA PERMITTED.
Height Maximum
of Building Area
Building of Lot
1 story . . . . . . . . . . 35%
2 story . . . . . . . . . . 25%
3 story . . . . . . . . . . 25%
4 story . . . . . . . . . . 20%
4.12032. LOT AREA, FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed for the R-3 Residence district:
Principal
Use
Lot
Area
Lot
Frontag
e
Front
Yard
Depth
s
Side Yard
Least
Width on
any one
Side
Width
Minimu
m Sum
of
Both
Side
Yards
Rear
Yard
Depths
Single-
Family
dwellings
6,500
sq ft
60 ft. 25
ft.
5 ft. 15
ft.*
30 ft
Two-Family
dwellings
& day
nurseries
7,500
sq ft.
60 ft. 30
ft.
10 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft.
Multifamily
dwellings
10,000
sq ft.
80 ft. 30
ft.
10 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft.
Nondwellings
1 acre 150 ft. 50
ft.
25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
*Each lot shall have a minimum access to the rear yard of 10 ft.
The enforcement of the lot frontage requirement for cul-de-sac and
loop lane streets may be at the building setback line for the lots
located on the radius of the street.
Chapter 12 ZONING
243
4.12033. SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING STANDARDS. The single
and two family dwelling standards of the R-2 Residence District shall
apply for such uses in the R-3 Residence district.
4.12034. OFF-STREET PARKING. The provisions of Section 4.12070
shall apply
Chapter 12 ZONING
244
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
245
TD-1 RESIDENTIAL-COMMERCIAL TRANSITION DISTRICT
4.12035. PURPOSE. This district is intended to be a mixed-use,
buffer one between the Commercial District uses and areas intended to
remain residential. This District includes mixed uses of moderate
intensity such as offices, service uses, small-scale retail and
diverse housing types. This district is also intended to protect
residential neighborhoods from the intrusion of intensive commercial
uses and is intended to help protect residential property values and
to prevent the decentralization of commercial uses from the downtown
area. Off street parking is required in this District. This District
is intended to be compatible with the Comprehensive Plan.
4.12036. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used
for only the following purposes:
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
1. Permitted uses of the R-3 Residential District
2. Charitable and religious uses
3. Professional offices less than 2,500 sq. ft.
4. Medical clinics and medical offices
5. Retail and personal service businesses less than 2,500 sq. ft.
6. Restaurants
7. Gas stations and convenience stores, but no automobile garages or
repair shops
8. Museums
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory uses
C. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
1. Any office, retail or service business permitted in this
District in excess of 2,500 sq. ft.
2. Educational institutions.
3. Public and private entertainment or recreation facility.
4. Special exception uses of the R-3 District.
5. Home occupations.
6. Daycare including In-Home Daycare Providers with more
than six (6) children
4.12037. HEIGHT, AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS. The
requirements of the C-Commercial District shall apply.
4.12038. OFF-STREET PARKING. The provisions of Section 4.12070
shall apply.
Chapter 12 ZONING
246
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
247
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
248
TD-2 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL TRANSITION DISTRICT
4.12039. PURPOSE. This District is intended to provide a land use
buffer between the downtown commercial area and neighborhoods intended
to remain residential. This district is also a pre-designated area
which is planned for the expansion of the Downtown Commercial zoning
district as needs arise. An overall intention is to provide for the
growth and survival of a viable downtown area and at the same time
provide planned limits to such growth in the interest of protecting
residential values and living environments. This District is intended
to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
4.12040. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used
only for the following purposes:
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
1. Any Principal Permitted Use of the DC-Downtown Commercial
District.
2. Any Principal Permitted Use of the R-3 Multiple Family
Residential District.
B. ACCESORY USES
1. Customary accessory uses.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
1. In Home Day Care Providers with more than 6 children.
2. Day care centers
4.12041. HEIGHT, YARD AND BUILDING MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS. For all
residential uses in this District the standards of the R-3 District
shall apply. For all Commercial uses in this District the following
standards shall apply:
1. No principal building shall be taller than 35’.
2. Front, side and rear yard depth shall be a minimum of
5’.
3. No open space requirements.
4. No unloading zone requirements.
5. Building materials; the provisions of Chapter 12 Section
4.12048 of this Code shall apply.
4.12042. OFF-STREET PARKING. Off street parking is required for
all uses in this district. The provisions of Chapter 12 Section
4.12070 shall apply
Chapter 12 ZONING
249
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
250
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
251
DC-DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
4.12043. PURPOSE. The DC-Downtown Commercial District is
intended to provide the retail business and commercial service core of
the community. It is intended to provide diversity of business
environments and opportunity. The area’s historic and architectural
qualities are intended to be preserved and enhanced in accord with an
overall theme which is reflected in design continuity of structures
including public infrastructure and landscaping.
4.12044. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. The DC-Downtown Commercial
District shall be those represented on the city’s official Zoning
Map, and as may be changed from time to time.
4.12045. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used
for the following or similar type uses.
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
1. Retail business or service establishments to include, but
not limited to, the following:
Antique shop
Apparel shop
Art goods and bric-a-brac shop
Artist shop and studio
Ballroom and dance hall
Bakery
Bank, including drive-in teller service
Barbershop or beauty salon
Bicycle sales
Billiard parlor and pool hall
Bookstore
Bowling alley
Candy shop
Catalog merchandise store
Charitable and non-profit institutions and facilities,
lodges or
fraternal or public service clubs or organizations
Cigar and cigarette store
Clothes cleaning and laundry pickup station
Collection office of a public utility
Confectionery and ice cream store
Convenience stores with gas stations
Curio, hobby and bric-a-brac store
Dance and/or music studio
Drugstore
Florist shop
Furniture store
General hardware store
Chapter 12 ZONING
252
General department store
Gift shop
Governmental administrative offices
Governmental public protection facilities and water supply
Grocery, delicatessen or meat market
Hardware, paint, wallpaper and landscape supply store
Indoor Showroom of Motor Vehicles
Jewelry store
Laundromat
Leather goods store
Messenger office and newsstand
Millinery shop
Movie theatres and other performing arts establishments
Museums, libraries and other cultural attractions
Music store and record shop
Office equipment sales and service
Pet shop
Photographic store and/or studio
Plumbing and Heating Retail Sales only with no outside
storage of supplies, equipment, inventory, used heating
and/or plumbing items or other materials allowed
Post Office substation
Printing
Professional services
Radio and television sales and repair
Radio or TV broadcasting station, studios and offices
but not towers in excess of 100 feet
Restaurant and bakeries
School-business, commercial, dancing or music
Shoe and Shoe repair shop
Small animal clinic
Small appliances or household appliances or electronics
sales and/or repair
Variety store
2. Any use found by the Zoning Administrator to be compatible with
those retail uses specified herein and not injurious to the
neighborhood or detrimental to the public welfare may be
permitted by the Zoning Administrator subject to such reasonable
restrictions established by the Zoning Administrator to preserve
and maintain the intent and purpose of this Zoning District.
Subsequent violation of these restrictions shall be grounds for
termination of the permitted use by the Zoning Administrator, in
addition to any other penalties or remedies prescribed by law.
3. Outdoor advertising signs in accordance with provisions of
Section 4.12080 of this Code.
Chapter 12 ZONING
253
4. Private overhead or area lighting shall be located and focused so
as to avoid casting direct light upon any adjacent residential
property, or interfere with a traveled portion of a public
street.
5. Construction and alteration within any city-adopted Fire Zone
must comply with any applicable fire code regulations
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Any accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use
permitted providing such accessory use shall comply with the
minimum requirements for the DC-Downtown Commercial District.
2. Single Family, Two Family, and Multi-family Dwelling Units may be
located within this DC-Downtown Commercial District as follows:
i. Single Family, Two Family, and Multi-family Dwelling
Units only when located on the second floor or above of
the building structure; or
ii. Multi-Family Dwelling Units only when located on the
first floor or above of the building structure which are
within the following areas of the zoning district:
LOT NUMBER BLOCK NUMBER
3 and 4 11
1,2,3,4,5,6 10
3,4,5,6 18
3,4,5,6,7,8 23
5,6 24
1,2,3,4,7,8 12
1,2,7,8 17
1,2,7,8 25
C. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
1. Hotels and related facilities
2. Convenience store
3. Taverns and night clubs
4. Amusement parlors and arcades
5. Public and private parking lots
6. Day care centers
7. Automated bank telling services at a location remote
from and not otherwise physically accompanied by
principal banking or drive-in teller services.
Chapter 12 ZONING
254
4.12046. LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE, YARD And HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Lot area None
Lot frontage None
Front yard depth None
Side yard least width None, except adjacent to an R-Residential
any one side District in which case not less than 10
feet.
Where a side yard is provided it shall
not be
less than 8 feet wide.
Rear yard depth None, except abutting an R-Residential
District
in which case not less than 25 feet.
Height No principal building shall
exceed 35, feet in height
Chapter 12 ZONING
255
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
256
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
257
4.12047. OFF STREET PARKING. The DC Downtown Commercial District
shall be exempt from all off street parking requirements imposed by
this chapter.
4.12048. BUILDING MATERIALS. Natural materials, rather than
simulated or synthetic materials, shall be used for the exposed
building materials on exterior building surfaces visible to the public
streets for all principal buildings and accessory buildings. Natural
materials include, but are not limited to, stone, stone facing, brick,
wood, stucco, clay tile, ceramic tile, quarry tile, terra cotta, and
cut stone. Rough-faced concrete block may be used for an exterior
surface where concrete block is the only building material option
because of existing structural conditions or requirements. Materials
to be avoided include, but are not limited to, plain concrete block,
fiberglass, simulated brick and stone, vinyl siding, metal siding, and
wood siding panels
To the extent possible, original materials, consistent with the
natural materials enumerated above, shall be retained in existing
building facades. Such original material should be removed only when
it is structurally unsound and is beyond restoration.
Awnings are allowed on any building consistent with other City Codes
and requirements. Awnings shall not exceed six (6) feet in depth.
Awnings must provide a minimum of eight (8) feet vertical clearance
from the sidewalk to the bottom of the awning. Awnings must be
constructed of fire resistant materials. Vertical awning supports in
the surface paving are prohibited. Fixed metal awnings are prohibited.
Any awning extending over a public sidewalk or passageway shall
require a building permit with a condition of issuance being the
Zoning Administrator’s determination that the proposed awning complies
with the appropriate snow loading standard determined to be
appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 12 ZONING
258
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
259
C-COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
4.12049. PURPOSE. The C-Commercial District is intended to
provide areas for retail, commercial, service and related uses having
substantial space requirements and having requirements of direct
accessibility to arterial streets and highways. This district is
intended to provide the space needed for uses having large parking,
loading and storage requirements and not conducive to pedestrian
shopping. This District is not intended to duplicate or weaken the
Downtown Commercial District and is intended to be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
4.12050. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premise shall be used
only for the following purposes:
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
1. Permitted uses of the TD-1 Residential-Commercial
Transition District except the “Permitted uses of the R-3
Residential District.
2. Any other use not otherwise allowed by this section
involving the exchange or buying and selling of commodities
or services whether for profit or not, but not including
any principal permitted uses in the I-Industrial District
3. Supermarkets, pharmacies.
4. Wholesale businesses.
5. New Automotive and new farm equipment/implement sales and
related repair services; used automotive and used farm
equipment/implement sales only; automotive parts sales
stores; however, no salvage or junk yard operations of any
kind.
6. Mobile home and manufacturing home sales and display.
7. Fruit and vegetable markets, green houses and nurseries.
8. Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and pet shops.
9. Commercial or institutional outdoors recreational uses and
fields.
10. Lumber and Building Supply Retail/Storage Yards.
11. Warehouses and self-storage facilities.
12. Merchandise fulfillment centers including telemarketing
facilities.
13. Bowling alleys, dance halls, auditoriums and movie
theatres.
14. Hospitals, clinics and related professional offices and
services.
15. Private clubs and lodges.
16. Nursing homes.
Chapter 12 ZONING
260
17. Residential facilities for physically or mentally impaired
including halfway houses and rehabilitation facilities.
18. Funeral homes.
19. Places of worship.
20. Educational institutions.
21. Restaurants.
22. Motels.
23. Bank facilities.
24. Rescue missions and leagues.
25. Cabinet maker/custom carpentry.
26. Laundromat
27. Plumbing, heating, and/or air conditioning retail
sales
28. Tavern & Nightclubs
29. Convenience store
30. Day care
B. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
No occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses
until such use shall have been authorized by the Board of Adjustment
after reports by the Planning and Zoning Commission, engineer, Chief
of the Fire Department and the Health Department:
1. Special Exception Uses of the DC-Downtown Commercial
District
2. Gas cylinder recharging
3. Go-cart tracks
4. Race tracks for any motorized vehicles or devices
5. Shopping centers or additions there-to
6. Towers and structural elements, other than buildings,
taller than 35 feet.
7. Columbarium, crematories, mausoleums unless inside a
cemetery
8. Mobile home parks, subject to the minimum standards of
Chapter 12 Section 4.12066
9. Travel trailer parks, subject to the minimum standards of
Section 12
Chapter 4.12067.
10. Automobile body repair, wash and body shops
11. Automotive Repair Garage.
12. Farm equipment/implement repairs.
13. Automated fuel dispensing services at a location
remote from and not otherwise physically accompanied
by principal gas station or convenience store
services.
Chapter 12 ZONING
261
4.12051. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. No principal building shall be
taller than 35 feet.
4.12052. LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS. The
following minimum requirements shall be followed:
Front yard depth 25 feet
Side yard least width on any one
side
15 feet except adjacent to RResidential
District in which case
not less than 20 feet.
Width: minimum sum of both side
yards
30 feet
Rear yard depth 25 feet
4.12053. OFF-STREET PARKING. The provisions of Section 4.12070
of this Code shall apply.
Chapter 12 ZONING
262
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
263
I-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
4.12054. PURPOSE. This district is established to provide for
manufacturing or other industrial uses at locations all consistent
with land use planning principles and industrial location standards,
and compatible with surrounding neighborhoods, adequately served by
utilities and vehicle and truck access, compatible with the natural
environment and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
4.12055. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises may be used
only for any of the following permitted uses:
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
1. Automobile body repair shop
2. Automobile repair garage
3. Automobile construction, assembly or factory specializing
in the rework or rebuilding of automobile components
4. Auto service stations and/or convenience store
5. Bag, carpet and rug cleaning
6. Industrial Bakery
7. Carpenter and cabinet shop engaged in bulk production
8. Commercial cleaning facility
9. Concrete mixing, concrete products manufacture
10. Contractor's equipment and materials storage yard
11. Creamery, bottling works, dairy ice cream manufacturing
12. Ice manufacturing and cold storage plant.
13. Enameling, lacquering or japanning
14. Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metals or Electric
foundry not causing noxious fumes or odors.
15. Laboratory - experimental or testing
16. Lumber and building manufacturing or assembly yard
17. Machine shop
18. Milk distributing station
19. Motor freight terminal
20. Plumbing, heating and/or air-conditioning manufacturing
and/or reconditioning
21. Sawmill, planning mill, including manufacture of wood
products
22. Sheet metal shop
23. Kennels
24. Agricultural services such as hatcheries and laboratories
25. Concrete ready-mix plants
26. Manufacturing, assembly and processing of any metal or nonmetal
products, not otherwise prohibited in this section.
27. Circus or carnival or similar transient enterprises
28. Truck terminals and municipal garages and yard facilities
29. Whole businesses
Chapter 12 ZONING
264
30 New automobile and farm implement sales and repair, used
automobiles and farm implement sales only, auto parts
stores, but not salvage or junk yard operations.
31. Mobile homes and manufactured home sales and display.
32. Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and pet shops.
33. Lumber and building supply retail/storage yards.
34. Warehouses and self-storage facilities.
35. Merchandise fulfillment centers including telemarketing
facilities.
36. Cabinet maker/custom carpentry.
37. Professional, Mental health and counseling services.
B. ACCESSORY USE
Any accessory use customarily and incidental to a permitted
principal use.
C. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
No occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the uses until and
unless the location of such use shall have been authorized by the
Board of Adjustment after reports by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and, when deemed appropriate by the Board, the City
Engineer, Chief of the Fire Department and the County Health
Department:
1. Abattoir and slaughterhouse or stockyard
2. Acid manufacture or wholesale storage of acid
3. Cement lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture
4. Chemical manufacturing
5. Distillation of bones
6. Fat rendering
7. Garbage, offal or dead animals reduction or dumping
provided that all refuse is earth covered daily
8. Gas manufacture and cylinder recharging
9. Glue, size or gelatin manufacture
10. Junkyard where the premises upon which such activities are
conducted are wholly enclosed within a building, wall or
fence, not less than six feet in height, completely
obscuring the activity from surrounding lots.
11. Petroleum or its products, refining or wholesale storage of
gasoline, gasohol and diesel.
12. Rubber goods manufacture
13. Sand or gravel pits provided they are enclosed by a fence
which provides an effective barrier against trespassing.
14. Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores
15. Electric power and transmitting station
Chapter 12 ZONING
265
16. Manufacturing, blending, bulk storage and sales of any
flammable, explosive, or toxic substances, including but
not limited to: gasoline, fuel oil, liquid petroleum,
anhydrous ammonia, fertilizer, pesticide, herbicide, fuel
oil, dynamite and fireworks. For purposes of this
paragraph, “bulk storage” means storage for other than on
premise retail sales as part of a retail business. Any such
facility which is permitted shall be a minimum of 500 feet
distant from the property line of any residential property.
17. Any food manufacturing or processing plant including meat
packing plants
18. Airports and customary accessory uses
19. Caretakers quarters incidental to a permitted industrial
use.
20. Wind powered electrical generation facilities.
21. Family-Oriented Live Performing Arts Facility.
D. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
No permitted or special exception use in the Manufacturing District
will be permitted if it is in conflict with any ordinance of the City
of Winterset, Iowa; or law of the State of Iowa which regulates
nuisances; or if a proposed use has not produced evidence of being
able to meet or has met all requirements and regulations of any other
State or Federal laws related to land use development, construction,
environment or waste disposal.
E. REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
1. No use shall be permitted to be established or maintained
which by reason of its nature or manner of operation is or may become
hazardous, noxious, offensive or will pollute the air or water due to
the emission of cinders, fumes, noise, odor, smoke, refuse matter
or water carried waste.
2. The best practical means known shall be employed for the
disposal of refuse or water-carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious
or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or similar nuisance.
3. All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or
structures, including loading and unloading facilities shall be
located at least 200 feet from any R-Residential District and not less
than 100 feet from any other district except an I-Industrial District.
4.12056. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. Not over 45 feet for any building,
exclusive of penthouse structures, or utility fixtures, elevator
augers and shafts and similar functional devices serving the principal
use and secondary to it.
Chapter 12 ZONING
266
4.12057. LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS. The
following minimum requirements shall be observed.
Uses Lot
Area
Lot
Width
Front
Yard
Depth
Side Yard
Each Side
Rear
Yard
Depth
All Uses 20,000
sq ft
100 ft 45 ft 23 ft 45 ft
*All yards in the I-Industrial District abutting a public
thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and shall comply
with the requirements for a front yard.
I-Industrial District adjacent to any R-Residential District, the
minimum setback shall be fifty feet from the I-Industrial
District boundary line, except in such cases where the district
line is construed to follow the centerline of a public
thoroughfare, wherein such cases shall be determined by the
provisions of the required minimum front yard dept.
4.12058. OFF-STREET PARKING. The provisions of Code Sections
4.12070 and 4.12071 pertaining to off-street parking and loading areas
shall apply to this Zoning District.
Chapter 12 ZONING
267
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
268
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
269
A-AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
4.12059 PURPOSE. The A-Agricultural District is intended to
accommodate conventional farming land use, woodland and nursery use,
and customary accessory uses. This district is intended to be used to
protect farm operations and farm owners for those lands not subject to
plans for urban development. Land use for this District is intended
to be planned in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
4.12060. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used
only for the following purposes:
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
1. Agricultural land use and activities
2. Truck gardening and nurseries, provided that no permanent
dwelling units shall be erected thereon unless the tract contains
ten or more acres.
3. Forest and forestry.
4. Seasonal, portable roadside vegetable stands no larger than 500
sq. ft. with no customer parking on a public highway or street
right-of-way.
5. Farm-related residences of a farm owner, operator or lessee or a
parent or child of such owner, operator or lessee located on the
farmstead of the farm. There may be up to two such farm- related
residences on a single farmstead and one additional farm or nonfarm
residence per quarter-quarter section of the same farm
ownership exclusive of the quarter-quarter section where the
farmstead is located.
6. Grain storage
7. Seed corn dealers
8. Dealerships and sales of farm related products and equipment
carried on as a home occupation of the farm owner, operator or
lessee.
B. ACCESSORY USES.
1. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
any of the above uses.
Bulletin boards and signs pertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of
a building or premises, or signs pertaining to any material that is
grown, or treated within the district; provided, however, that such
signs shall be located upon or immediately adjacent to the building
or in the area in which such materials are treated, processed, or
stored.
Chapter 12 ZONING
270
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
1. Kennels and the residence of the owner or operator
2. Junk, salvage or wrecking yards and the residence of the owner
or operator
3. Trucking terminals, and the residence of the owner or operator
4. Livestock sales barns and related facilities including the
residence of the owner, operator or custodian
5. Fair grounds and related race tracks, concessions and
customary and historic Madison County fairground activities
6. Grain elevators and related storage; and fertilizer storage,
mixing and sales
7. Any other non-farm storage, processing or manufacturing uses
including food products for human or animal consumption
8. Home occupations
9. Mining operations, including Rock quarries, gravel pits and
customary accessory uses.
10. Mink ranches
11. Sanitary landfills, incinerators and other waste disposal
facilities provided such facilities possess all required
federal and state permits before being eligible to receive a
Special Exception Use permit from the City of Winterset.
12. Accessory uses larger than the principal permitted use.
13. Travel trailer parks per the standards of section 4.12067.
14. Shooting ranges including trap shooting
15. Non-commercial park, playground, gold courses) both public and
private) and recreational use.
16. Transmitting stations and communications towers
17. Airports and customary accessory uses.
4.12061. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. Any building hereafter erected or
structurally altered may be erected to any height not in conflict with
other existing or future Ordinances of the City of Winterset, Iowa.
4.12062. LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS. The
following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Principal
Use
Lot Area Lot
Width
Front
Yard
Depths
Side
Yard
Least
Width on
any side
Width
Minimum
Sum on
both
Sides
Rear
Yard
Depths
All uses 10 Acres 200 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 100 ft.
50 ft
Dwellings 2 acres 200 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 100 ft.
50 ft.
Chapter 12 ZONING
271
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
272
CO-CONSERVATION-OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
4.12063. PURPOSE. The CO-Conservation-open space district is
established to provide protection to environmentally sensitive lands
such as flood plains, wetlands, drainage courses, and park lands and
also to enhance the performance of these lands in their natural
functions. The standards of this district are intended to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the public through the
protection of water quality, prevention of erosion and siltation, and
the preservation of natural open spaces and plant material for the
maintenance of air quality. The cutting of non-nuisance plant
material is discouraged to protect scenic beauty, control erosion and
reduce the flow of pollutants and nutrients into streams and drinking
water supplies.
4.12064. USE REGULATIONS. A building or premise shall be used
for only the following purposes.
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
1. Truck gardening, hay fields, garden plots
2. Parks, play grounds, athletic fields and camp grounds
3. Recreational trails
4. Public roads and streets
5. Wood lots and orchards
6. Raising and keeping horses for personal use provided there
is at least two acres of land available per horse with
adequate shelter provided. Lands where horses are present
must be securely fenced with any horse stable or shelter
being at least 100 feet from any Residential zoning
district boundary line and with no manure storage or
spreading within this 100 foot distance.
7. Cemeteries
8. Historic, cultural and outdoor educational attractions and
facilities.
9. Other uses similar to the above uses and compatible with
the purpose of this district
B. Customary accessory uses
Chapter 12 ZONING
273
C. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
1. Any utility structure, substation, transmission line or
pipeline
2. Dams, dikes, drainage channels, reservoirs, ponds or other
devices intended to affect flowing or standing water.
3. Private roads and streets.
4. Any private filling, grading, impounding, dredging or land
filling.
5. Any building in excess of 200 square feet.
6. Shooting ranges including trap shooting.
D. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
1. Height limitation: maximum of 30 feet
2. Lot area and density: no minimum
3. Lot width: no minimum
4. Front yard setback: 35 feet
5. Side yard setback: 35 feet
6. Rear yard setback: 35 feet
7. Area of structures: no minimum
8. Parking: per Section 4.12070
9. Signs: per Section 4.12080
10. Flood prone areas: No temporary or permanent building or
other obstruction shall be placed in any flood prone area
on within any natural drainage course.
11. Land disturbance: There shall be no land disturbance,
including cultivation for agricultural farming, within 100
feet of the shore lines of any course of natural flowing
water or within 100 feet on either side of the center line
of a drainage course having intermittent natural drainage
flows. No stream or drainage course shall be straightened
or altered except in accord with a professionally prepared
plan justifying the need for such work and with such plan
approved by the Winterset City Council
12. Trees: Clear cutting of trees is prohibited and the
cutting of trees solely for income purposes is prohibited.
The cutting of trees, including substantial seedlings, can
be done for the purpose of silvicultural thinning and in
following a formal plan of a state forester official and
for removal of diseased and hazardous trees.
Chapter 12 ZONING
274
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICT
4.12064.1 Planned Unit Development District (PUD)
4.12064.2 Statement of Intent
4.12064.3 Size, Land Use and Maximum Density
4.12064.4 Master Plan
4.12064.5 Rules, Regulations, and Guidelines for Land Use
and Performance
4.12064.6 Process for City Review of Planned Unit
Development
4.12064.7 Recordation of Master Plan and Associated Rules,
Regulations and Guidelines
4.12064.8 Adjustments and Modifications
4.12064.1. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The Planned Unit
Development District (PUD District) is hereby established with the
Zoning Regulations hereafter set forth in this Chapter and elsewhere
in the Zoning Code to be applicable to the Planned Unit Development
District.
4.12064.2. STATEMENT OF INTENT. The PUD District is intended to
provide for the development or redevelopment of land under the control
and in accordance with a Master Plan providing for development
guidelines and standards in which the land uses, transportation
elements, building densities, arrangements, and types are set forth in
a unified plan, which may provide greater flexibility of land use,
transfer of development rights within the PUD, bulk regulations, and
building locations than the conventional zoning district may permit.
The PUD District is intended to maximize benefits from the use of open
spaces; maximize aesthetics; encourage certain architectural standards
for buildings, permit mixed uses and diversity of bulk regulations
without endangering the health, safety, welfare, and land value of
surrounding and internal properties. A PUD District may consist of a
mix of land uses of residential building types, commercial and limited
industrial, provided such approved Master Plan for the Planned Unit
Development is compatible with the City Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
4.12064.3. SIZE, LAND USE AND MAXIMUM DENSITY. A PUD District
shall be a minimum size of three (3) acres of land; shall have a
building unit density not in excess of the density set forth in the
City Comprehensive Land Use Plan; and, shall be located within the PUD
Zoning District.
Chapter 12 ZONING
275
4.12064.4. MASTER PLAN. In order to rezone land in the City as a
Planned Unit Development District, the Developer shall first prepare
and submit to the City in Fifteen (15) copies a Master Plan which
shows the generalized overall land use plan for the development of the
land area of the proposed PUD District which Plan shall include the
following information:
A. A vicinity map of sufficient scale to show site boundaries
and the zoning of adjacent properties within one thousand
feet (1,000') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
PUD.
B. Dimensions, legal descriptions of the land, acreage,
existing zoning classification, existing land use and
ownership of the land within the proposed PUD District; the
existing zoning classification and land use and ownership
of the adjacent properties within two hundred feet (200')
of the exterior boundaries of the proposed PUD.
C. The location and delineation of each “parcel” proposed with
different land uses and bulk regulations, and a schedule of
the proposed land use and bulk regulations for each
“parcel” set forth by ordinance.
D. Existing and proposed location of street, pedestrian ways,
trails, parks, recreation areas, open space, buffers,
parking areas, schools, and anticipated traffic generation.
E. Area and number of dwelling units, and anticipated floor
area of non-residential buildings by “parcel”.
F. Existing tree masses, water channels, drainage ways, flood
hazard areas, and other topographic or environmentally
important characteristics.
G. Proposed privately owned common areas and public ownership
areas, including any open space, park land, and school
sites.
H. Location of existing or proposed municipal utilities to
serve the PUD District and adjoining properties, including
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electricity and water.
I. In addition to storm sewer facilities, other required storm
water management facilities and requirements shall be shown
and/or explained in the Master Plan.
J. Dimensions of all street right-of-way and paving widths,
including all proposed easements areas.
Chapter 12 ZONING
276
K. Staging schedule of the development, including anticipated
year the construction is to be initiated and the phasing of
development planned to be implemented.
L. Landscape areas proposed as part of small-scale PUD
proposals to include the general location of shrubs, trees
and earth berms.
M. Delineate the traffic impacts that would result from the
Project and how the can be mitigated.
N. The Master Plan shall be submitted to the City on paper
sheets of 24 inches by 36 inches and at a minimum scale of
1=50.
O. The Developer shall be deemed a Subdivider under Chapter 10
of Title IV of the Code; the Master Plan shall comply with
the City Subdivision Code; and, the Master Plan shall be
considered a Preliminary Plat Plan under the City
Subdivision Code.
4.12064.5. PUD RULES, REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES FOR LAND USE AND
PERFORMANCE. The Developer shall submit to the City with the Master
Plan the proposed rules, regulations and guidelines for the
development of the PUD (hereafter the Regulations). In addition, the
Developer shall submit to the City a Petition for Rezoning the Land
accompanied by the proposed ordinance for the rezoning of the property
to a PUD Zoning District. The City shall provide the Rezoning
Petition, the proposed zoning ordinance, the Master Plan and the
Regulations to the Planning and Zoning Commission (hereafter the
Commission) for its consideration as hereafter provided.
The proposed Regulations shall set forth the permitted land use, bulk
regulations, transfer of development rights within the PUD land area,
height requirements, open space and landscaping requirements,
architectural standards, sign regulations, buffer requirements, off
street parking and loading requirements, and other performance
standards as required by the City for each parcel designated within
the Master Plan.
Chapter 12 ZONING
277
4.12064.6 CITY REVIEW OF THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. The
Developer may elect to present the PUD proposal to the Zoning
Administrator as a pre-Application proposal for their informal comment
and discussion. Upon receipt of the Developer’s formal Application
with the accompanying documents described above, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the submitted PUD Application; may discuss
any suggestions or provide additional information to the Developer,
and shall present a report together with the Applicant’s proposal to
the Commission.
A. The Commission shall consider the Application with all
accompanying materials pursuant to the following criteria:
1. Compatibility with the City Comprehensive Land Use
Plan;
2. Land Use and Density;
3. Building types, functions, architecture, buffers and
arrangements;
4. Provision and use of open space and landscaping;
5. Access to and from the site and related traffic
circulation; and,
6. General relationship to the adjoining properties and
area.
B. The Commission may approve or disapprove the Application, the
Master Plan, the Regulations as submitted either in whole or in
part and may require the Developer to modify, alter, adjust or
amend the Application and accompanying documents as the
Commission may deem appropriate in order to preserve the
harmonious intent and purpose of this Chapter and the City
Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
C. After the Commission’s final review of the Application and
accompanying documents, the Commission shall present to the City
Council its report and recommendation(s) on the matter.
D. Following the receipt of the Commission’s report on the
Application, the City Council shall set a date for public hearing
before the Council on the Petition for Rezoning the land to the
PUD Zoning District and upon the Application for the proposed PUD
District with Notice thereof as provided by this Chapter. In
addition to the public hearing notice requirements, notice of the
hearing shall be sent by regular mail at least seven (7) days
prior to public hearing to the owners of property which is
Chapter 12 ZONING
278
located within two hundred (200) feet thereof.
Following the public hearing on the matter, the City Council shall
approve or deny the Application and the Rezoning Petition. However,
such City Council approval shall not be considered as approval of any
final plat under Chapter 10 of Title IV of the City Code (the
Subdivision Code) unless and until the Developer has complied with
that Code Chapter and, in each instance, each phase thereof is to be
separately approved by the City as provided by the Subdivision Code.
4.12064.7. RECORDATION OF MASTER PLAN AND REGULATIONS. Upon
final approval of the Application and accompanying documents, the City
at the Developer’s cost shall record in the Office of the Madison
County Recorder the Ordinance rezoning the land to the PUD Zoning
District and the Master Plan and Regulations. No “phase” of the PUD
District is to be commenced until all the documents have been
recorded. The Rezoning Ordinance, Master Plan and Regulations
approved by the City shall be binding upon the property owner(s),
their heirs, successors or assigns.
4.12064.8. MODIFICATIONS OF APPROVED PUD DISTRICT. Any proposed
modification or amendment of the PUD District Plan as finally approved
by the City shall be submitted upon Application in the same manner and
in the same form(s) as the original Application and shall be submitted
by the City to the same review, approval and recordation procedure as
the original Application.
Chapter 12 ZONING
279
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
4.12065. REGULATIONS. The regulations set forth in this Article
or elsewhere in this Chapter that are applicable shall apply to the
special exception uses listed in this Article and listed in the
individual zoning districts.
It shall be recognized that certain uses possess characteristics of
such unique and special form as to make impractical their being
included automatically as permitted uses in the various districts
established by this Chapter; therefore, these uses shall be subject to
certain conditions and standards set forth in this Article or as set
by the Board of Adjustment as part of an application for a specific
special exception use and the issuance of a special exception use
permit by the Board of Adjustment provided, however; a special
exception use permit may not be granted for a use in a zoning district
from which it is specifically excluded by the provisions of this
Article.
A. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES PERMITTED IN ANY ZONING DISTRICT. The
following special exception uses may be authorized in any zoning
district, except as it is specifically excluded or limited by the
provisions of this Section.
1. Accessory or branch structures and facilities for public
utilities and public service uses, including reservoirs and
tanks, pumping stations, telephone exchanges and power and
transformer stations; providing, however, equipment storage yards
and garages which are considered commercial, business and
industrial uses shall not be permitted in any R-Residential
District.
2. Buildings and uses, except as herein designated as permitted
uses, owned by the City, County, State of Iowa or the U. S.
Government or its political subdivisions or by private agencies
providing public services for general public benefit on behalf of
a political subdivision under written contract with and funded,
in whole or in part, by the federal or state governments, or the
political subdivisions thereof; provided, however, all such uses
shall be compatible with surrounding land uses in the zoning
district and shall not be disruptive of, or contrary to, the
provisions of Section 4.12001 of this Code. Equipment and
vehicle storage yards and public garages involving major
mechanical repair or rebuilding shall not be permitted in any RResidential
District.
Chapter 12 ZONING
280
B. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES PERMITTED IN INDIVIDUAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
The individual zoning districts in this ordinance list those special
exception uses which are eligible to apply for a special exception
permit subject to the standards of Section 4.12068 and the procedures
of Section 4.12069. In addition the Board of Adjustment may impose
additional conditions and standards which address specific issues of a
requested use and which address issues regarding the specific location
and neighborhood setting of the requested use.
4.12066. MOBILE HOME PARKS. Mobile home parks are a special
exception use subject to the minimum development requirements as
follows:
A. LOCATION. C-Commercial District only
B. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Front yard Seventy-five feet.
Side yard. Thirty-five feet.
Area. Minimum of two acres.
Drives. The entrance road connecting the park streets with a
public street shall have a minimum road pavement width of twentynine
feet, measured back to back of curbs. All interior streets
shall be not less than twenty-nine feet in width, measured back
to back of curbs. All streets shall be constructed with either
hot mix asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete with an
approved curb to provide for drainage. Such streets shall meet
the specifications contained in Chapter 12, Section 4.10006 of
this Code.
Sanitary facilities. Connection with the municipal sewer system or
adequate private sewage disposal facilities.
Chapter 12 ZONING
281
C. HOME SPACES
Space size. Fifty feet by ninety feet.
Space area. 4,500 square feet.
Off-drive parking. One parking space for each home space.
Front yard. Fifteen feet.
Rear yard. Ten feet.
Side yard. Five feet.
Chapter 12 ZONING
282
4.12067. TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
A. LOCATION. C-Commercial Districts Only
B. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR PARK
Front yard. Same as the zoning district or fifty feet,
whichever is greater. This requirement shall apply to any
and all roads or streets upon which "park" abuts.
Side yard. Thirty-five feet.
Rear yard. Thirty-five feet.
Minimum area. One and one-half acres.
Maximum density. Twenty unit spaces per gross acre of park
site.
Drives. Twenty-five feet in width with asphaltic concrete
surface.
A common service building providing laundry facilities, short order,
food service, accessory supplies, etc, may be included, provided such
a building shall be located within the central "park" area, shall not
be visible to passing traffic, and shall be restricted to the use of
the park occupants. Such service buildings shall be permitted in the
C-Commercial District providing such use shall conform to the
requirements provided in the C-Commercial District Regulations. The
rear and/or side yards shall be screened from adjacent property access
by planting screen not less than ten feet in width, or by a fence
wall.
Chapter 12 ZONING
283
C. REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAILER SPACES
Minimum space size. Twenty feet by fifty-five feet.
Minimum space area. 1,100 square feet
Off-drive parking. One parking space for and within the area of
each trailer space.
Minimum front yard. Ten feet.
Minimum rear yard. Five feet.
Minimum side yard. Five feet.
Trailer separation. The minimum distance between any two trailers
shall be not less than ten feet.
4.12068 SWIMMING POOLS, WATER IMPOUNDMENTS AND DRAINAGE AREAS.
All private swimming pools, surface ponds, reservoirs, or any areas
containing runoff surface water in any zoning district within the City
shall meet the following minimum requirements:
A. No public swimming, or sunbathing or ice-skating will be
allowed unless specific permission is granted to do so by
the City.
B. Terrain surrounding any surface water area(s) will be so
graded to prevent runoff into any developed areas or into
soils with a high permeability rating that may result in
high levels of ground water in nearby developed areas.
C. Any discharge of water into the City's underground storm or
sanitary sewer system from a private surface water source
must be approved by the City on a case-by-case basis.
D. All such uses must meet applicable Federal, State or County
Public Health and Safety Standards.
E. A fence constructed of solid materials (wood, brick, cinder
block, chain link, etc.) must surround the immediate
surface water area. Any such fence must be a minimum of
six (6) feet in height. This paragraph applies only to
constructed swimming pools.
Chapter 12 ZONING
284
4.12069. REQUIRED CONDITIONS AND PROCEDURES
A. GENERAL CONDITIONS
1. A special exception use permit shall not authorize a use
which does not comply with the minimum requirements of the
district in which it is located.
2. A special exception use permit shall not authorize a use
which is in conflict with this Code or laws of the State of
Iowa or the United States regulating nuisance, pollution or
hazardous occupation.
B. REQUIRED SITE PLAN AND STATISTICAL INFORMATION
The request for authorization of special exception use shall be
accompanied by a site plan in compliance with Section 4.12061 of this
Code.
C. RESTRICTIONS And STANDARDS
Authorization for a special exception use permit may be granted
subject to the following conditions:
1. Buildings involving the large assemblages of people shall
not be located less than 300 feet from any existing
dwelling site.
2. Uses within the C-Commercial, TD Transitional and
I-Industrial Zoning Districts which emit or create a
substantial level of noise, vibration, odor, pollution,
etc. and which are within five hundred feet (500') of an
R-Residential Zoning District shall disclose these levels
and shall include a plan to control and minimize any
detrimental effects such levels may have upon adjoining
property.
3. Uses involving the large assemblages of people shall not be
located where the arterial traffic system is inadequate to
provide for the increased traffic density.
4. Uses involving the extensive use of exterior lighting shall
not be located where such lighting may be hazardous to air
or ground traffic and such uses shall not be located less
than a distance required to reduce the light intensity to
normal residential street lighting intensity at any RResidential
District boundary.
Chapter 12 ZONING
285
5. Public or private utility services which involve large
structures such as pumping stations, electric substations
and power transmitters and which are located within an RResidential
or C-Commercial District shall be screened from
public view by buffer walls or strip parks.
6. That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the
use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
7. That the use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the
purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and
impair property values within the neighborhood;
8. That the establishment of the use will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
9. That the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan
of any proposes structure will not be so at variance with
either the exterior architectural appeal and functional
plan of the structures already constructed in the
immediate neighborhood or with the character of the
applicable district as to cause a substantial depreciation
in the property values within the neighborhood;
10. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or
necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
11. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to
provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize
traffic congestion in the public streets;
12. That the proposed use is not contrary to the objectives of
any duly adopted comprehensive plan for the City of
Winterset; and,
13. In the case of the uses enumerated in the following
subparagraphs (I) and ii), that there be a minimum distance
of 500 feet between such use and all places of human
habitation, public assembly or business not associated with
such use and that such use not be so located that
prevailing winds would carry any fumes, odors or gasses
from such use toward developed properties or into the city:
Chapter 12 ZONING
286
(i) Bulk storage of any flammable or explosive substance,
including but not limited to liquid petroleum, gasoline,
fuel oil, dynamite, and fireworks. For purposes of this
subparagraph, “bulk storage” means storage for other than
retail or on-premises sales.
(ii) Storage, blending, mixing or on-premises sales of
toxic substances, whether or not under pressure, for
commercial or agricultural purposes, including but not
limited to anhydrous ammonia, fertilizer, pesticide, and
herbicide.
D. PROCEDURE. The procedure for obtaining a special exception
use permit shall be as follows:
1. Written applications shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator and shall be accompanied by such plans as
required by this Code. The application shall include a
list showing the names and last known addresses for all
property owners of record within five hundred feet of the
premises where the special use is to be located.
2. The application shall be referred to the Board of
Adjustment and the Board shall hold a public hearing within
thirty (30) days of receiving the application. The Board
or Zoning Administrator may refer the application to the
Planning Commission if in the judgment of the Board or
Zoning Administrator there are sufficient planning issues
justifying their input and recommendation.
3. The Board of Adjustment shall make a written report of its
decision on the application within forty-five (45) days of
the public hearing.
4. Notice of the public hearing by the Board shall be given to
all property owners within 500 feet of the boundary of the
property on which the special use is to be located. Such
notice shall be at least ten days prior to the hearing;
shall contain the time and location of such hearing; and,
shall be served by ordinary mail to the owner's last known
address submitted by the applicant.
Chapter 12 ZONING
287
5. If a special exception use permit is issued it is subject
to the addition of conditions which may include time limits
and other terms deemed necessary or appropriate by the
Board. Violations of such terms shall be deemed a
violation of this Code punishable as herein provided. In
addition, the Board may upon notice and hearing revoke the
permit for violation of the terms of the permit.
6. Whenever an application for special exception use permit
has been denied by the Board, no reapplication for the same
special use on the same property or any portion thereof
shall be filed or considered by the Board until six months
shall have elapsed from the date of the official denial of
the first application.
7. Before an Application for Special Use Permit may be
considered by the City, the Applicant shall pay the City a
fee in a sum of money fixed by Resolution of the City
Council from time to time and shall not need to be fixed by
City Ordinance.
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
4.12070. OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIRED.
A. In any district in connection with every building or part
thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of 10,000
square feet or more, which is to be occupied by uses requiring
the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise involving
uses such as manufacturing, storage, warehouse, good display,
retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary,
laundry, dry cleaning, there shall be provided and maintained on
the same lot with building, at least one off-street loading
space; and, one additional such loading space for each 20,000
square feet or fraction thereof in excess of 10,000 square feet.
B. The requirements for off-street loading spaces are as follows:
1. Each loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width
and sixty feet in length.
2. Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or
court space, except required open space under Section
4.12072 of this Code.
Chapter 12 ZONING
288
4.12071. OFF-STREET PARKING AREA REQUIRED.
A. In all districts, space for parking and storage of vehicles
shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule;
however, no parking area required hereunder shall be less than
1,000 square feet in area except in the case of dwellings and
retail stores and shops under 500 square feet.
1. Automobile sales and service garages - one parking space for each
300 square feet of floor area and one parking space for each four
persons regularly employed on the premises.
2. Banks, business and professional offices - one parking space for
each 200 square feet of floor area and one parking space for each
office in the principal building or one and one-fourth parking
spaces for each person regularly employed on the premises,
whichever is greater.
3. Bowling alley - five spaces for each alley and one space for each
five-spectator seats.
4. Churches - one parking space for each four seats and one parking
space for each classroom.
5. Dance halls, assembly halls - one parking space for each 100
square feet of floor area or one parking space for each four
seats of maximum seating capacity, whichever is greater.
6. Dwellings, residential:
a. One and Two-family Dwellings - two parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
b. Multi-family Dwellings - two parking spaces for each of the
first twelve dwellings units and one and one-half parking
spaces for each additional unit. One garage parking space
for each dwelling unit may be counted as a portion of the
parking requirement.
7. Funeral homes, mortuaries - fifteen parking spaces or one parking
space for each four seats in the principal auditorium or four
parking spaces for each service or viewing room, whichever is
greater. In addition, one parking space for each two persons
regularly employed on the premises.
Chapter 12 ZONING
289
8. Furniture, appliance and other retail stores displaying large and
bulky merchandise – one parking space for each 400 square feet of
floor area.
9. Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes - one parking space for
each four patient beds and one parking space for each two persons
regularly employed on the premises.
10. Hotels, motels, lodging houses - one parking space for each
room or suite of rooms offered for tourist accommodations and one
parking space for each two persons regularly employed on the
premises.
11. Industrial or manufacturing plants - one parking space for
each employee on the maximum working shift; or one parking space
for each 1,000 square feet of floor area up to 10,000 square
feet; and, then one parking space for each additional 1,500
square feet, or portion thereof.
12. Restaurants, taverns, night clubs or similar places dispensing
food, drink or refreshments – one parking space for each fifty
square feet of floor area devoted to patron use within the
establishment. In addition, on parking space must be provided
for each four persons regularly employed.
13. Retail stores, supermarkets, shopping centers, department
stores, etc.
a. Stores containing over 2,000 square feet floor area – one
parking space for each 175 feet of color area.
b. Stores and shops containing under 2,000 square feet - one
parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area, and
one space for each persons regularly employed on the
premises; provided, however, there shall not be less than
five parking spaces.
14. Schools and other places of education or instruction.
a. Elementary, junior high and other places for under driving
age students - one parking space for each person regularly
employed on the premises. In addition, one parking space
for each twenty student desks or classroom seating
facilities.
b. High schools - one parking space for each person regularly
employed on the premises. In addition, one parking space
for each ten student desks or classroom seating facilities.
Chapter 12 ZONING
290
c. Colleges, trade schools and other places of young adult
learning - one parking space for each person regularly
employed on the premises. In addition, one parking space
for each three student desks or classroom seating
facilities.
15. Sports arenas, theaters, auditoriums and other similar
places of public assembly - one parking space for each four
persons of maximum standing and seating capacity.
16. Wholesale establishments or warehouses -one space for each
person regularly employed on the premises.
B. In case of any building, structure or premises, the use of
which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a
use which is mentioned and to which said use is similar shall
apply.
C. All lots with off-street parking shall abut upon street right
of way except as may be provided by Section 4.12013 of this Code.
D. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private
parking area, including a commercial parking lot, shall be
developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. No part of any off-street parking space shall be closer
than five feet to any established street right-of-way or
alley line. Where this parking lot adjoins an RResidential
District, it shall be set back at least ten
feet from the R-Residential District boundary.
2. Any off-street parking area, including any commercial
parking lot for more than two vehicles shall be surfaced
with an asphaltic or Portland cement pavement or such other
surface as shall be approved by the City Engineer so as to
provide a durable and dustless surface; shall be so graded
and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation
within the area; and shall be so arranged and marked as to
provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading and
parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
3. Lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area
including any commercial parking lot shall be so arranged
as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in any
R-Residential District.
Chapter 12 ZONING
291
4. A landscaping plan ensuring compatibility with surrounding
and adjoining uses shall be submitted to the Board for
approval for any parking area with a gross capacity of
fifty (50) motor vehicles or more. The applicant shall be
responsible for the implementation of the plan in
accordance with the timetable submitted.
E. Off-street facilities for all uses, except one and two-family
dwellings fronting on a residential street, shall be designed so
as to permit entrance and exit by forward movement of the
vehicle. The backing or backward movement of vehicles from an
off-street parking facilities on to streets shall be strictly
prohibited.
Chapter 12 ZONING
292
OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
4.12072. INTENT. It is recognized that the extensive use and
congestion of land adversely affects the general health and welfare of
the community. Therefore, the intent of the following Section shall
be to ensure the creation and maintenance of adequate open spaces.
4.12073. OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
A. All buildings and land use in any R-Residential District or
TD-Transition District shall comply with the following:
1. On each lot there shall be provided an open space equal to at
least twenty-five per cent of the total lot area. Said
open space shall not include any structure or off-street
parking area.
2. Each principal structure of a multi-family dwelling unit shall
be separated from any other principal structure in the
complex by an open space of not less than sixteen feet in
width.
3. Where doors and windows in the exterior walls of a living unit
face a wall of the same building and/or wall of another
building in the same complex site, there shall be provided
a minimum open space of not less than thirty feet. Said
distance to be measured on a line projected at right angles
at the opening from the wall containing the opening to the
opposite wall.
4. Cantilevers and open porches may project from the building
wall into the required open space (court only) not more
than four feet; open stairways may project from the
building wall into the required open space (court only) not
more than seven and one-half feet. Stairways when located
in the required open space (court only) shall be
cantilevered or supported by the necessary columns only;
support by a wall other than the exterior building wall is
strictly prohibited.
B. All buildings and land use in any C-Commercial District or IIndustrial
District shall comply with the following except as
herein provided:
1. Any R-Residential District use in any C-Commercial District
shall comply with Part A above.
Chapter 12 ZONING
293
2. On each lot there shall be provided an open space equal to at
least twenty per cent of the total lot area; said space
shall not include any structure or off-street parking area.
3. Each principal structure of an building complex shall be
separated from any other principal structure in the complex
by an open space of not less than sixteen feet in width.
4. Where door and windows in the exterior walls of a living unit
face a wall of the same building and/or a wall of another
building in the same complex site, there shall be provided
a minimum open space of not less than thirty feet. Said
distance to be measured on a line project at right angles
at the opening, from the wall containing the opening of the
opposite wall.
5. Cantilevers and open porches may project from the building
wall into the required open space (court only) not more
than four feet; open stairways may project from the
building wall into the required open space (court only) not
more than seven and one-half feet. Stairways when located
in the required open space (court only) shall be
cantilevered or supported by the necessary columns only;
support by a wall other than the exterior building wall is
strictly prohibited.
Chapter 12 ZONING
294
SITE PLANS
4.12074. SITE PLANS. Site plans which are required for review
and approval for any use in any district or elsewhere by this Chapter,
and shall comply with the following:
1. Site plans shall be drawn at a scale not less than 1" =
100'; and, two copies of the site plan shall be submitted
with any application for rezoning or permit application.
2. The site plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
types of structure proposed, number and size of dwelling
units, floor area of any commercial or industrial building,
child capacity of a day nursery, buffers, landscaping, offstreet
parking area, walls, density, floor area ratio,
anticipated expansion and other information deemed
necessary to illustrate compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter.
3. A preliminary site plan may be submitted for preliminary or
tentative land use approval; providing however, that a
final site plan shall be submitted and reviewed for
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter prior to the
issuance of any zoning change or permit.
4. The site plan shall show the size and dimensions in feet of
the lot where the proposed structure is to be located.
5. The site plan shall include a legal description of the lot
or tract of land where the proposed structure is to be
located.
6. The site plan shall include the location of all utilities
located upon or under the land surface and a plan for
surface water drainage. The location, size and availability
of municipal utilities shall be provided.
Chapter 12 ZONING
295
4.12075. LOT BOUNDARIES LOCATED. Prior to the issuance of any
permit, the applicant shall establish at the site the actual location
of the boundaries of the lot where the proposed structure is to be
located. In the event the applicant cannot show the lot boundaries by
the location of original monuments or corner pins established by a
land survey of record, then the applicant shall cause the lot to be
surveyed by a registered land surveyor prior to the issuance of any
permit.
Chapter 12 ZONING
296
EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS, INTERPRETATIONS
4.12076. STRUCTURES PERMITTED ABOVE HEIGHT LIMIT. The building
height limitations of this Chapter shall be modified as follows:
1. Chimneys, cooling towers, fire towers, grain elevators,
monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks,
silos, water towers, ornamental towers and spires, radio or
television towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances may
be erected to a height approved by the Board of Adjustment.
2. Public service buildings, hospitals, or schools when
permitted in a district may be erected to a greater height
than otherwise permitted in the district if the building is
set back from each property line, in addition to the
minimum yard requirements, at least one foot requirements
for each two feet of additional building height above the
height limit otherwise provided in the district in which
the building is constructed.
4.12077. DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS. Buildings on double frontage lots
extending through from street to street shall be permitted ingressegress
from only one of the streets.
4.12078. OTHER EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS. Every part of a
required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed with any building
or structure, except for a permitted accessory building in a rear
yard, and except for roof projections and awnings not to exceed
thirty-six inches.
4.12079. UNCONVERTED MOBILE HOMES. Mobile homes, which have not
been converted to real estate as provided by Iowa Code Chapter 135D
shall be located in mobile home parks only.
Chapter 12 ZONING
297
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
298
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS
4.12080. DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Chapter, these
words or terms shall have the following meaning:
Sign - A name, identification, description, display, illustration or
device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon
a building, structure, trailer or land in view of the general public
and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person,
institution or business. A sign does not include the following: flags
of nations, states and cities or organizations; objects or devices
visible through windows; or works of art, except murals, which in no
way identify a commercial product or have a commercial purpose.
Sign, Advertising - An advertising device as defined by Chapter 306C
of the Code of Iowa having the capacity of being visible from any
public right of way.
Sign, Area of - See Sign, Surface Area of.
Sign, Business - A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession of a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered
upon the premises where such a sign is located.
Sign, Display - An advertising sign.
Sign, Flashing - Any illuminated sign on which such illumination is
not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times
where such sign is in use.
Sign, Illuminated - Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes
as a part of the sign.
Sign, Marque - Any sign affixed to any hood, marquee or canopy over
the entrance to a building.
Sign, Nameplate - Any sign which states the name or address or both of
the business or occupant of the lot where the sign is placed.
Sign, Rotating - A sign which revolves or rotates on its axis by
mechanical means.
Chapter 12 ZONING
299
Sign, Surface Area of - The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface, not
including any structural elements outside the limits of such sign and
not forming an integral part of the display. Only one side of a
double-face or V-type sign structure shall be used in computing total
surface area.
Chapter 12 ZONING
300
4.12081. SIGN REGULATIONS. All signs now existing or hereafter
erected or maintained, except official traffic signs shall conform
with the provisions of this regulation.
1. General Provisions for all Zoning Districts:
The following regulations shall apply to all signs hereinafter
permitted in all Districts:
A. Signs shall not be permitted within the public right-of-way
or public easements.
B. Flashing or rotating signs resembling emergency vehicles
shall not be permitted in any district.
C. Any signs not permanently affixed to buildings or
permanently anchored in the ground shall not be permitted
in any zoning district.
D. No signs shall be permitted to obstruct any window, door,
fire escape, stairway or opening intending to provide
light, air or access to any building or structure.
E. Upon notification by the Zoning Administrator that a sign
is rotted, unsafe or unsightly, the owner of said sign or
owner of the property upon which the sign is located shall
remove or repair the sign.
F. The owner, lessee or manager of any sign anchored in the
ground and/or the owner of the land on which the sign is
located shall keep grass or weeds and other growth cut and
debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the ground
surrounding the sign.
G. Political signs may be permitted for a period of not more
than forty-five (45) days before and seven (7) days after
an election.
H. Signs for service clubs and semi-public institutions are
permitted within the public right-of-way, provided that
they are not more than 500 feet from the corporate limits
and further provided that they do not exceed three square
feet in area. These signs are for the purpose of
displaying the emblem of the club or institution and
information on time and location of meetings.
Chapter 12 ZONING
301
I. Except as may be expressly provided by these regulations,
no advertising signs shall be erected or maintained other
than on the premises of the business or other activity
involved.
2. Signs in Residential Districts.
No sign shall be erected in any RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT except:
A. A nameplate sign identifying the owner or occupant of a
building or dwelling unit, provided such sign does not
exceed two (2) square feet in surface area. Such sign
shall not be illuminated.
B. A sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the building or
property provided such sign does not exceed four (4) square
feet in surface area. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
C. A temporary sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in
surface area identifying an engineer, architect,
contractor, or product engaged in or used in the
construction of a building may be erected upon issuance of
the building permit. A temporary sign shall be removed
prior to the occupancy of the building. Such sign shall
not be illuminated except for signs required by State or
Federal law.
D. One identification sign on premises not to exceed twentyfour
(24) square feet in surface area displaying location
information for churches, schools, hospitals, nursing
homes, clubs, offices, libraries or similar use. Such
signs may be illuminated.
E. Directional non-illuminated signs on premises not exceeding
two (2) square feet in surface area displaying directional
information for churches, schools, hospitals, nursing
homes, clubs, libraries or similar uses excluding office or
commercial establishments, provided that each such use
shall be limited to one such sign per thoroughfare
approach.
F. Business signs located in Residential zones as Non-
Conforming or Home Occupations shall not be located in the
front yard. Signs shall be attached to the house and shall
not be illuminated and not larger than two (2) square feet
in surface area.
Chapter 12 ZONING
302
3. Signs in Commercial Districts or Transition Districts.
Signs may be erected in Commercial Districts subject to the
following provisions:
A. The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall
not exceed two (2) square feet per lineal foot of lot
frontage or ten (10) percent of the building frontage area,
or seventy-five (75) square feet, in area whichever is
greater. Signs may be illuminated.
B. Advertising signs shall be on premises and limited to one
sign for a business location of 100 foot frontage or less;
one additional sign for each additional 100 feet of
frontage; or, a minimum of one sign per individual
business. Rear signs on businesses shall be governed by
the same restrictions as those pertaining to frontage.
C. No advertising sign may be erected within one hundred (100)
feet of an adjoining RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Business
identification signs on the same premises may be located up
to thirty (30) feet from a Residential District boundary.
D. For corner lots, the "frontage" used to determine allowable
sign area shall be the least dimension along a street, but
an equivalent sign area shall be allowed facing the
intersecting street.
E. No sign shall project above the highest point of a roof.
F. Signs painted on a building shall be governed by the square
footage limitations specified above. Such signs shall be
maintained in good condition and shall be repainted,
removed, or painted out when, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, such sign is not so maintained.
G. Where a sign is illuminated, the source of light shall not
be visible from any public right-of-way, and such light
shall be directed away from any RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
H. No sign shall project more than one (1) foot perpendicular
from the building face.
Chapter 12 ZONING
303
4. Signs in the I-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
Signs may be erected in the I-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT subject to the
following provisions:
A. Advertising sign shall be limited to one (1) sign for a
business premise of one hundred (100) foot frontage or less
and one (1) additional sign for each additional frontage of
one hundred (100) feet. Such structures shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) feet in length. No advertising sign may
be erected within one hundred (100) feet of a RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT.
B. Sign lighting shall not be directed toward a public rightof-
way or any RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
C. The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall
not exceed three (3) square feet per lineal foot of lot
frontage or twenty (20) percent of the building frontage
area or three hundred (300) square feet in area, whichever
is greater. Such signs may be illuminated.
D. No sign shall project higher than six (6) feet above the
height of the building.
4.12082. NONCONFORMING SIGNS. Any advertising device in
existence on the effective date of this Code which does not conform to
the provisions of this Chapter shall be either brought into conformity
with this Chapter or removed from the premises within five (5) years
after January 1, 1992. Any advertising device in existence on the
effective date of this Code which on that date does conform to the
provisions of this Chapter but which later does not conform to this
Chapter shall be either brought into conformity with this Chapter or
removed from the premises. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter,
the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to order either the
sign owner or the owner of the premises upon which the sign is located
forthwith either to conform a nonconforming advertising device to this
Chapter or to remove the advertising device from the premises.
Chapter 12 ZONING
304
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 12 ZONING
305
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT BUILDING PERMITS
AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
4.12083. ADMINISTRATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT. The provisions of this
Chapter shall be enforced and administered by the Zoning
Administrator. If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the
provisions of this Chapter are being violated, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify in writing the person responsible for such
violations indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it. The Zoning Administrator shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures;
removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions,
alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any
illegal work being done, or shall take any other action authorized by
this Chapter to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.
4.12084. BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED. Buildings or other
structures shall not be erected, added to or structurally altered
without a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. Building permits
shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, or
upon written order from the Board of Adjustment, but shall be null and
void if the purpose for which the permit is issued is not commenced
within six months from date of issuance and completed within twelve
months from the date of issuance. In the instance of a structure or
building removed or demolished, all work must be completed within
three months from the date the permit is issued.
4.12085. APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT. All applications for
building permits shall be accompanied by a site plan in conformance
with Section 4.12061 of this Chapter. The application shall include
existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses
of the building and land; conditions existing on the lot; and such
other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and
provide for the enforcement of this Chapter.
4.12086. CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY FOR NEW, ALTERED OR NONCONFORMING
USES. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the
use or occupancy of any building or premises, or part thereof, which
has been erected, changed, converted, altered or enlarged in its use
or structure until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 12 ZONING
306
Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally with the
application for a building permit and shall be issued after the
completion of the lawful erection or alteration of the building or
other improvements.
A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Zoning
Administrator for a period not exceeding six months during alterations
or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided
that such temporary certificate may require such conditions and
safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates
of occupancy and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person.
Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of
this Chapter and punishable as provided by this Chapter.
4.12087. CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS,
PLANS, PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF ZONING OCCUPANCY. Building permits
or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the
use or construction set forth in such approved plans and
specifications, and no other use or construction. Use or construction
at variance with that authorized by Zoning Administrator shall be
deemed a violation of this Chapter and punishable as provided by this
Chapter.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURE, POWERS AND DUTIES
4.12088. BOARD CREATED. A Board of Adjustment is hereby
established which shall consist of five (5) members. The term of
office of the members of the Board and the manner of their appointment
shall be as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa. Each member
of the Board shall be compensated for meeting attendance at a rate to
be fixed by Resolution of the City Council from time to time and shall
not need to be fixed by City Ordinance.
4.12089. MEETINGS, GENERAL PROCEDURES AND RULES. Meetings,
general board procedures, and rules of the Board shall be in
conformance with and pursuant to Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa as
that Chapter now or hereafter provides.
Chapter 12 ZONING
307
4.12090. APPEALS. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, or board of the City of
Winterset affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such
appeal shall be taken with ten days by filing with the Zoning
Administrator and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to
the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from is taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board after
notice of appeal shall have been filed with the Zoning Administrator
that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the
Administrator's opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of
record on application on notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due
cause known.
4.12091. FEE FOR APPEAL. Before an appeal to the Board of
Adjustment may be considered by the City, the Appellant shall pay the
City a fee in a sum of money fixed by Resolution of the City Council
from time to time and shall not need to be fixed by City Ordinance.
4.12092. HEARINGS, NOTICE. The Board shall fix a reasonable time
for the hearing on the appeal, comply with Chapter 21 of the Code of
Iowa and provide notice to the appellant at least twenty-four hours
prior to the meeting. At the hearing any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney.
4.12093. JURISDICTION AND POWERS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
A. The Board shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by an administrative official in the enforcement of
this Chapter or any supplement or amendment.
2. To hear and decide special use exceptions to the terms of
this Chapter upon which the Board is required to pass under
this Chapter.
Chapter 12 ZONING
308
3. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance
from the terms of this Chapter as will not be contrary to
the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of the Chapter will
result in practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship to
the applicant so that the spirit of the Chapter shall be
observed and substantial justice done.
B. No variance from the provisions of this Chapter shall be
made by the Board unless a written application for a variance is
submitted demonstrating:
1. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved, and
which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district;
2. That literal interpretation of the provisions of this
Chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the
terms of this Chapter;
3. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result
from the actions of the applicant.
4. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this
Chapter to other lands, structures or buildings in the same
district.
C. The Board shall further make a finding that the granting of
the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this Chapter, shall not be in conflict with the
comprehensive Plan, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood
or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
D. In granting any variance or other relief, the Board may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity
with this Chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards,
when made a part of the terms under which the variance or relief
is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter and
punishable as provided by this Chapter.
Chapter 12 ZONING
309
E. Use variances prohibited: Under no circumstances, shall the
Board grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the
terms of this Chapter in the district involved, or any use
expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this
Chapter in said district.
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in
the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures or
buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the
issuance of a variance.
4.12094. DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. In exercising the
above-mentioned powers, the Board may so long as such action is in
conformity with the terms of this Chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement or
determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have powers of
the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken.
The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of this applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this Chapter or to
effect any variation in the application of this Chapter.
4.12095. APPEALS FROM DECISION OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. Any
taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the City or any
person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition,
duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within thirty days after the filing of
the decision in the office of the Board.
Chapter 12 ZONING
310
DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER, BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT, COUNCIL AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL
4.12096. DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT,
COUNCIL AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL. It is the intent of this
Chapter that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be
first presented to the Zoning Administrator and that such questions
shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the
decision of the Zoning Administrator, and that recourse from the
decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as
provided by law.
It is further the intent of this Chapter that the duties of the
Council in connection with this Chapter shall not include hearing and
deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise.
The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this
Chapter. Under this Chapter, the Council shall have only the duties
of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the
repeal of this Chapter as provided by law.
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
MAP REPLACEMENT AND ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS
4.12097. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. These zoning regulations may be
amended only by duly adopted ordinance. The change shall be made by
petition initiated either by the Council or by any other interested
person. Upon filing with the Zoning Administrator, the petition shall
be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Unless initiated by the City, each petition for amendment shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of $25. The fee is nonrefundable.
Petitions to change the zoning of property shall contain the following
information:
1. The legal description and local address of the property.
2. The present zoning classification and the zoning
classification requested for the property.
3. The existing use and proposed use of the property.
4. A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the
present zoning classification is no longer valid.
Chapter 12 ZONING
311
5. A plat showing the locations, dimensions and use of the
applicant's property and all property within two hundred
(200) feet thereof, including streets, alleys, railroads,
and other physical features.
6. Other information as is required by site plans specified
in Section 4.12074 if specific property uses are known at
the time a petition for change is submitted.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a report to the Council
within thirty days from the date of the receipt of such petition. The
Council, after receiving the report of the Commission, shall hold a
public hearing at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. The notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be published as provided in Section 362.3 of the Code of
Iowa except that at least seven (7) days’ notice of the time and place
of hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City. In the case of a change in the zoning
classification of property, notice of the hearing shall be mailed to
the owners of property located within two hundred (200) feet thereof
at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing. In no case
shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting following the published notice.
The Council may impose conditions or restrictions on the property
owner as provided by Section 414.5 of the Code of Iowa. After holding
the public hearing the Council may vote upon the proposed amendment,
supplement or change. In case of a written protest against any
proposed amendment or change filed with the Zoning Administrator and
signed by the owners of twenty per cent or more of the area of the
lots included in the proposed change or repeal, or by the owners of
twenty percent or more of the property which is located within two
hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property for which the
change or repeal is proposed, the change or repeal shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of at least three-fourths of
all the members of the Council. The protest, if filed, must be filed
before or at the public hearing.
Chapter 12 ZONING
312
4.12098. MAP REPLACEMENT. In the event that the Official Zoning
Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because
of use, or requires updating because of annexation or changes in
zoning districts, the Council may by resolution adopt a new Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The
new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor attested by the City Administrator under the following words:
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map
supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted
(date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of
Ordinance No. of the City of Winterset, Iowa".
4.12099. ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS. Any land annexed to the City
after the effective date of this Chapter may assign an intended zoning
district, if known, to the area until the Council has by ordinance
established such zoning district for the property. If a final or
planned zoning district is not known or agreed to at the time of
annexation, then any annexed land shall be zoned A-Agricultural until
the Plan Commission shall have studied the area and adopted a final
zoning plan for the area in accordance with this chapter and the
Council has by ordinance established a different zoning district.
Chapter 12 ZONING
313
COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS
4.12100. COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS. When a violation of
this Chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any aggrieved
person may file with the Zoning Administrator a written complaint
stating fully the causes and basis of the Complaint. The Zoning
Administrator shall promptly investigate the matter and initiate such
action, if deemed necessary, as may be authorized by this Chapter.
This section shall not be construed to restrict the authority of the
Zoning Administrator to apply or enforce the provisions of this
Chapter.
ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
4.12101. ENFORCEMENT. The Zoning Administrator is hereby charged
with the responsibility for the enforcement of this Chapter. Any
permit issued under this Chapter found to be in violation of the terms
of this Chapter shall be null and void from its inception.
4.12102. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. Violation of the provisions of
this Chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall
be a municipal infraction punishable as provided by law. In addition,
any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall upon conviction be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. Each day any such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense and may be the
subject of repeated prosecutions, if so continued.
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part
thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other
person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer
the penalties herein provided.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Chapter 12 ZONING
314
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 13 AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
315
4.1301 PREAMBLE
4.1302 TITLE
4.1303 DEFINITIONS
4.1304 AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
4.1305 USE RESTRICTIONS
4.1306 LIGHTING
4.1307 VARIANCES
4.1308 ENFORCEMENT
4.1309 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
4.1310 APPEALS
4.1311 JUDICIAL REVIEW
4.1312 PENALTIES
4.1313 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS
4.1301. PREAMBLE. This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the
authority conferred by Chapter 329 and 414 of the Code of Iowa. It is
hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property
of users of the Winterset Airport and of occupants of land or to
property in its vicinity, and also, if of obstruction type, in effect
reduces the size of the area available for the landing, taking off and
maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility
of the Winterset Airport and the public investment therein.
Accordingly, it is declared:
(1) that the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a
public nuisance and an injury to the area served by the Winterset
Airport;
(2) that it is necessary in the interest of the public health,
safety and general welfare that the creation or establishment of
airport hazards be prevented; and
(3) that the prevention of these hazards should be accomplished
to the extent legally possible by the exercise of the police
power without compensation. It is further declared that both the
prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards
and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking
and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for
which municipalities may raise and expend public funds, as an
incident to the operation of airports, to acquire land or
property interests therein.
Chapter 13 AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
316
4.1302 TITLE. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as
"The Winterset Airport Height Zoning Ordinance".
4.1303 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter unless the context
otherwise requires:
AIRPORT - the Winterset Airport
AIRPORT ELEVATION - The highest point of an airport's
usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea level,
which elevation is established to be 1100 feet.
AIRPORT HAZARD - Any structure or object of natural growth
located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any
use or land near such airport, which obstructs the airspace
required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff
at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing
or takeoff of aircraft.
AIRPORT PRIMARY SURFACE - Any surface longitudinally
centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially
prepared hard surface the primary surface extends 200 feet
beyond each end of that runway. The width of the primary
surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part
77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the
precise approach existing or planned for either end of that
runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface
is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway centerline.
AIRSPACE HEIGHT - For the purpose of determining the height
limits in all zones set forth in this ordinance and shown
on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level
elevation unless otherwise specified.
RUNWAY - A defined area on an airport prepared for landing
and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway intended solely for the operation
of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no
straight in instrument approach procedures and no
instrument designation indicated on a FAA approved airport
layout plan, a military services approved military airport
layout plan, or by any planning document submitted to the
FAA by competent authority.
Chapter 13 AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
317
4.1304. AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS. In order
to carry out the provisions of this Chapter there are hereby created
and established certain zones which are depicted on the Winterset
Airport Height Zoning Map. A structure located in more than one (1)
zone of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with
the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows:
A. Horizontal Zone- The land lying under a horizontal
plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the
perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000
feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of runway (s) 15-33, and connecting the adjacent
arcs by lines tangent to these arcs.
No structure shall exceed 150 feet above the established airport
elevation in the horizontal zone, as depicted on the Winterset Airport
Zoning Map.
B. Conical Zone-The land lying under a surface extending
outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet. No structure shall penetrate the conical
surface in the conical zone, as depicted on the Winterset
Airport Height Zoning Map.
C. Approach Zone-The land lying under a surface
longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline
and extending outward and upward from
each end of the primary surface. (NOTE: An approach surface
is applied to each end of each runway based upon the type
of approach available or planned for that runway end.)
(1) The inner edge of the Approach Surface is 250
feet wide for Runway (s) 15-31.
(2) The outer edge of the approach zone is 1,250
feet for Runway (s) 15-31.
(3) The Approach Zone extends for a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet at a slope of 20 to 1 for
Runway (s) 15-33.
Chapter 13 AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
318
No structure shall exceed the approach surface to any runway, as
depicted on the Winterset Airport Height Zoning Map.
D. Transitional Zone - The land under those surfaces
extending outward and upward at right angles to the runway
centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of
7 to 1 from the sides of the primary surface and from the
sides of the Approach Surfaces.
No structure shall exceed the Transitional Surface, as depicted
on the Winterset Airport Height Zoning Map.
4.1305. USE RESTRICTIONS. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of Section 4.1304, no use may be made of land or water within the City
in such a manner as to interfere with the operation of any airborne
aircraft. The following special requirements shall apply to each
permitted use:
A. All lights or illumination used in conjunction with
street, parking, signs or use of land and structures shall
be arranged and operated in such manner that it is not
misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from the
Winterset Airport or in the vicinity thereof.
B. No operations from any use shall produce smoke, glare
or other visual hazards within three (3) statute miles of
any useable runway of the Winterset Airport.
C. No operations from any use in the City shall produce
electronic interference with navigation signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft.
4.1306. LIGHTING
A. NOTWITHSTANDING the provisions of Section 4.1304, the
owner of any structure over 200 feet above ground level
must install on the structure lighting in accordance with
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Advisory Circular
70-7460-ID and amendments. Additionally, any structure,
constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance and
exceeding 949 feet above ground level, must install on that
structure high intensity white obstruction lights in
accordance with Chapter 6 of FAA Advisory Circular 7460-ID
and amendments.
Chapter 13 AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
319
B. Any permit or variance granted may be so conditioned
as to require the owner of the structure or growth in
question to permit the City at its own expense to install,
operate and maintain thereto such markers or lights as may
be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an
airspace hazard.
4.1307 VARIANCES. Any person desiring to erect or increase
the height of any structure, or to permit the growth of any tree, or
otherwise use his property in violation of any section of this
Ordinance, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for variance from such
regulations. NO application for variance to the requirements of this
Chapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of
the application has been submitted to the Winterset Airport Authority
or Director of Aeronautics for his opinion as to the aeronautical
effects of such a variance. If the Winterset Airport Authority or the
Aeronautics Director does not respond to the Board of Adjustment
within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the copy of the application,
the Board may make its decision to grant or deny the variance.
4.1308. ENFORCEMENT. It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed
herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator. Applications for action by the Board of
Adjustment shall be transmitted through the Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 13 AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
320
4.1309. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. There is hereby created a Board of
Adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Administrative
Officer in the enforcement of this ordinance.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of
this Chapter upon which such Board of Adjustment under such
regulations may be required to pass.
(3) To hear and decide specific variances.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of the Members of
the Zoning from the Board of Adjustment.
C. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the
Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Administrative Officer or to decide in favor of the
applicant or any matter upon which it is required to pass
under this Chapter or to effect any variation in this
Chapter.
4.1310. APPEALS.
A. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any
decision of the Administrative Officer made in his
administration of this Chapter, may appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
B. All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable
time as provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment,
by filing with the Administrative Officer a written notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
Administrative Officer shall forthwith transmit to the
Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.
Chapter 13 AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
321
C. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the Administrative Officer
certified to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of
appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the
Board of Adjustment on notice to the Administrative Officer
and interested parties and on due cause shown.
D. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the
parties in interest, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney.
E. The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the
provision of this Chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or
in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision, or determination, as may be
appropriate under the circumstances.
4.1311. JUDICIAL REVIEW. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer
affected, by a decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal to the
Court of Record as provided in Chapter 414.15 of the Code of Iowa.
4.1312. PENALTIES. Each violation of this Chapter or of any
regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a
simple misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. Each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
4.1313. CONFLICTING REGULATIONS. Where there exists a conflict
between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this
Chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether
the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the
use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail.
Chapter 13 AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
322
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
Chapter 14 UNFAIR OR DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES
323
4.1401 DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES DEFINED
4.1402 EXEMPTIONS
4.1403 COMPLAINTS FILED
4.1401. DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES DEFINED. It shall be unlawful
discriminatory housing practice to engage in any of the following
acts, if they are based on race, creed, color, age, disability, sex,
national origin, religion or ancestry:
1. Refusing to sell or rent to, deal or negotiate with any
person.
2. Discriminating in terms, conditions or privileges for
buying, renting or transfer of housing.
3. Discriminating by advertising that housing is available
only to persons of a certain race, etc.
4. Denying that housing is available for inspection, sale or
rent when in fact it is so available.
5. For profit, persuading owners to sell or rent housing by
telling them that minority groups are moving into the
neighborhood.
6. Denying or making different rates, terms or conditions for
home loans by commercial lenders, such as banks, savings
and loan associations and insurance companies.
7. Making a record of or making available for public knowledge
in any way a person’s race, etc.
8. Denying to anyone the use of or participation in any real
estate services, such as brokers' organizations, multiple
listing services or other facilities related to the selling
or renting of housing.
Chapter 14 UNFAIR OR DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES
324
4.1402. EXEMPTIONS. Nothing in this section, except for
discrimination based on race, shall be construed to apply to:
1. The sale or rental of single-family houses owned
by a private individual owner of three or fewer such
single-family houses provided:
a. A broker is not used.
b. Discriminatory advertising is not used.
c. No more than one house in which the owner
was not the most recent resident is sold during
any two-year period.
2. Rentals of rooms or units in owner-occupied
multi-dwellings for two to four families, if
discriminatory advertising is not used.
3. Limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of
dwellings which a
Religious organization owns or operates for other than
a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion,
if membership in that religion is not restricted on
account of race, color or national origin.
4. Limiting to its own members the rental or
occupancy of lodgings which a private club owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose.
4.1403. COMPLAINTS FILED. In order to insure that the rights of
all parties will adequately be protected, the following procedures are
available:
1 Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a
discriminatory or unfair practice within the city,
may, by himself or through his attorney make, sign and
file a verified written charge of discriminatory
practice with the Equal Opportunity Officer of the
City.
2. If the local Equal Opportunity Officer is unable
to obtain voluntary compliance, the complainant may
also send a notarized complaint to HUD within 180 days
of the alleged discriminatory act.
Chapter 14 UNFAIR OR DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES
325
3. A person may also take a complaint directly to
the U.S. District Court or State or local court within
180 days of the alleged discriminatory act.
4. Information about possible discrimination in
housing may also be brought to the attention of the
Attorney General.
Chapter 15 EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS FOR DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
326
4.1501 EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS
4.1502 PENALTIES
4.1501. EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS
(a) Excavation left from wrecked or demolished
buildings shall be backfilled with clean dirt or
approved back fill materials to the existing grade
level. Sewers and water lines and other utility pipes
shall be capped or plugged with approved materials and
methods and approved by the Building Inspector or his
agent before back fillings.
(b) Prior to completion of back fill, all
excavations shall be surrounded by flares,
lanterns, barricades or fence, to protect the
general public, to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector or his agent.
(c) Locations of existing sewer and water lines
at the foundation line of the building site shall
be platted on 1/4" graph paper, with accurate
measurements from two permanent points of
reference.
4.1502. PENALTIES. In addition to any other penalties provided by
this Code, any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a municipal infraction with remedies to the City as provided
by this Code.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
327
4.1601 STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE
4.1602 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.1603 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY)DISTRICT
4.1604 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY)DISTRICT
4.1605 ADMINISTRATION
4.1606 DEFINITIONS
4.1601. STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE. The
Legislature of the State of Iowa has a Chapter 414 of the Code of
Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning
regulations to secure safety from flood and promote health and general
welfare.
A. Findings of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of Winterset, Iowa are subject
to periodic inundation which can result in loss of
life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community.
2. These flood losses, hazards; related adverse effects
are caused by: (i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas
by uses vulnerable to flood damages which create
hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated otherwise protected from flooding, and (ii)
the cumulative effect of obstructions on the flood
plain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
B. State of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to protect and preserve the
rights, privileges, and property of Winterset, Iowa and its residents,
and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and
comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood
losses described in Section 4.1601 (B)(2) with provisions designed to:
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
328
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, or property in times of flood or which cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public
facilities which serve such uses, be protected against
flood damage at the time of initial construction or
substantial improvement.
3. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be
suited for intended proposes because of flood hazard.
4. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners
in the community to purchase flood insurance through the
National Flood Insurance Program.
4.1602. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. Lands to which Chapter Apply.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all lands within
the jurisdiction of Winterset, Iowa which are located within the
boundaries of the Flood Plain (Overlay) District as established in
Section 4.1603 of this Chapter.
B. Nonconforming Uses
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage or amendment of this Ordinance, but which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
a. If such use is discontinued for six (6) consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall
conform to this Ordinance.
b. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances
shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
329
2. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is
more than fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance. This limitation does not
include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations or the
cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude
its continued designation.
C. Rules for Interpretation of Flood Plain (Overlay) District.
The boundaries of the Flood Plant (Overlay) District shall be
determined by scaling distances on the official Flood Insurance Rate
Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a
boundary, the Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
D. Compliance.
No structure of land shall hereafter be used and or structure shall be
located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
Chapter.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where
this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
Chapter shall prevail.
F. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the State
statues.
G. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
330
The standards required by this Chapter are considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes. This Chapter does not imply that areas outside
the designated special flood areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of
Winterset, Iowa or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made there under.
H. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by any court, that judicial ruling or decision
shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this Chapter not affected
by such judicial ruling or decision.
4.1603 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT. The areas
within the jurisdiction of the City of Winterset having special flood
hazards are hereby designated as a FLOOD PLAIN (Overlay) District and
shall be subject to the standards of the FLOOD PLAIN (Overlay) District
(as well as those for the underlying zoning district). The FLOOD PLAIN
(Overlay) District boundaries shall be as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Madison County, Iowa and Incorporated Areas, City of
Winterset, Iowa Panels 1912C0150D, 0175D, 0231D, 0232D, 0233D, 0234D,
0251D, 0253D, dated June 21, 2017.
4.1604. STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT. All uses
shall meet the following applicable performance standards. Where
needed, the Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to
compute 100 year flood elevation and floodway data.
A. All development with the Flood Plain (Overlay) District
shall:
1. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
2. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage.
3. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
4. Obtain all necessary permits from Federal, State, and Local
Governmental agencies including approval, when required,
from the Department of Natural Resources.
B. Structures
1. New or substantially improved residential structures shall
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
331
have the first floor (including basement) elevated to a
minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level.
2. New or substantially improved non-residential structures
shall have the first floor (including basement) elevated to
a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level,
or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
flood-proofed to such a level. When flood-proofing is
utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State
of Iowa shall certify that the flood-proofing methods used
are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the 100-year flood, and that the structure
below the 100-year flood level is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A
record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to the North American Vertical
Datum) to which any structures are flood-proofed shall be
maintained by the Administrator.
3. All new and substantially improved structures:
a. Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (Not
including basements) that are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net
area of not less than one (1) square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one (1) foot above grade.
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
4. All such areas shall be used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access and low damage potential
storage.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
332
b. New and substantially improved structures must be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
c. New and substantially improved structures must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other
services facilities that are designed and/or located so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
C. Factory-built Homes.
Factory-built homes, including those placed in existing
factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored
to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Factory-built homes, including those placed in existing
factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated
on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
structure is a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100 year
flood level.
D. Accessory Structures to Residential Uses
1. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are
incidental to a residential use are exempt from the base flood
elevation requirements where the following criteria are
satisfied.
a. The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 sq. ft. in size.
Those portions of the structure located less than 1 foot above
the BFE must be constructed of flood-resistant materials.
b. The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage.
The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
c. The structure shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters.
d. The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
333
e. The structure's service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or flood proofed to at least
one foot above the base flood elevation.
f. The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy
the provisions of Section 4.1604 (B) 3a of this Chapter..
2. Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance coverage of the structure and its contents.
E. Recreational Vehicles
1. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
Section 4.1604(C) of this Chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of
factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied:
a. The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for
less than 180 consecutive days; and,
b. The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready
for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices and has no permanently attached additions.
2. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more
than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy the requirements of Section 4.1604(C) of this Chapter
regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
3. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
F. Subdivisions
Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
334
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimum flood
damage and shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood
hazards. Development associated with subdivisions shall meet the
applicable standards of this section.
G. Utility and Sanitary Systems.
1. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize and eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system as well as the discharge of
effluent into floodwaters.
2. On-site waste disposal system shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
3. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the system.
4. Utilities such as gas and electrical systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage to the systems and the risk associated with such
flood damaged or impaired systems.
H. Watercourse Alteration or Relocation.
Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to
maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion.
I. Storage of Materials and Equipment.
Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive, or
injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited unless
elevated a minimum of one(1) foot about the 100-year flood level.
Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated, or:
1. Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored
to prevent movement due to flood waters, or
2. Be readily removed after flood warning.
J. Flood control structural works
Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc.
shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
335
with a minimum of 3 ft. of design freeboard and shall provide
for adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood
control works shall be approved by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources.
K. Pipeline river and stream crossings
Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the
streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
4.1605. ADMINISTRATION
A. Appointment, duties and responsibilities of Flood Plain Zoning
Administrator.
1. The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to
implement and administer the provisions of this
Chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator
2. Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to the following:
a. Review all flood plain development permit applications to
assure that the provisions of this Chapter will be
satisfied.
b. Review flood plain development applications to assure
that all necessary permits have been obtained from
Federal, State and local governmental agencies including
approval when required from the Department of Natural
Resources for flood plain construction.
c. Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum) of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures in the special flood hazard area.
d. Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum) to which all
new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
e. Notify adjacent communities, county, and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or
relocation of watercourses and submit evidence of such
notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. In
addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by
the Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
336
f. Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the
administration of this Chapter.
B. Flood Plain Development Permit.
1. Construction and Use to be as provided in Application and Plans.
FLOOD PLAIN Development Permits based on the basis of approved
plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications
and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized
shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. The applicant
shall be required to submit certification by a professional
engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the
State of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor
elevations, flood proofing, or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
2. Permit Required.
A Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be
secured prior to any flood plain development (any man-made change to
improve and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, filling grading, paving,
excavation, or drilling operations), including the placement of
factory-built homes.
3. Application for Permit.
Application shall be made on forms furnished by the Administrator
and shall include the following:
a. Description of the work to be covered by the
permit for which application is to be made.
b. Description of the land on which the proposed
work is to be done (i.e. lot, block, tract,
street, address, or similar description) that
will readily identify and locate the work to
be done.
c. Indication of the use or occupancy for which
the proposed work is intended.
d. Elevation (in relation to North American
Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of buildings.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
337
e. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the
estimated cost of improvements and market
value of the building prior to the
improvements.
f. For developments involving more than five (5)
acres, the elevation of the 100-year flood.
g. Such other information as the Administrator
deems necessary for the purpose of the
Chapter.
4. Procedure for Acting on Permit.
The Administrator shall make a determination as to whether the flood
plain development, as proposed, meets the application provisions of
Section 4.1604 and shall approve or disapprove the application. In
reviewing the proposed development, the Administrator shall obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize the available flood plain information
or data from Federal, State or other sources.
5. Variance
1. The Building Code Board of Appeals may authorize upon
request in specific cases such variances from the terms of this
Ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship.
Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
338
a. Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of
good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that
failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that
the granting of the variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
b. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
c. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of
flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily
required by this Ordinance, the applicant shall be
notified in writing over the signature of the
Administrator that: (i) the issuance of a variance will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage
and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and
property.
2. Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board of
Adjustment Shall be Based - In passing upon applications for
Variances, the Board shall consider all relevant factors
specified in other sections of this Ordinance and:
a. The danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
b. The danger that materials may be swept on to
other land or downstream to the injury of others.
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease,
contamination and unsanitary conditions.
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner.
e. The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the City of Winterset.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
339
f. The requirements of the facility for a FLOOD
PLAIN location.
g. The availability of alternative locations not
subject to flooding for the proposed use.
h. The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing development and development anticipated in
the foreseeable future.
i. The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and FLOOD PLAIN management program
for the area.
j. The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
k. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the flood water
expected at the site.
l. The cost of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems), facilities,
streets and bridges.
m. Such other factors which are relevant to the
purpose of this Ordinance.
3. Conditions Attached to Variances - Upon consideration
of the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purpose of this Ordinance.
Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited
to:
a. Modification of waste disposal and water supply
facilities.
b. Limitation of periods of use and operation.
d. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
e. Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
dikes, levees. and other protective measures provided
such are approved by the Iowa Department of Natural
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
340
Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this Ordinance.
f. Flood proofing measures.
4. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or
approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
C. Subdivision Review.
The Administrator shall review all subdivision proposals within the
Flood Plain (Overlay) District to assure that such proposals are consistent
with the purpose and spirit of this Chapter and shall advise the City
Council of potential conflicts. Flood plain development in connection with
a subdivision (including installation of public facilities) shall require
Flood Plain Development Permit as provided in Section V.B1. For proposals
greater than 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less), the subdivider shall
be responsible for providing the 100 year flood elevation data for those
areas within the areas of significant flood hazard.
4.1606. DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as
they have in common usage and so as to give this Chapter its more
reasonable application.
BASEMENT – Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (sub grade) on all sides. Also see
“lowest floor”.
DEVELOPMENT – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling grading, paving, excavation, or drilling
operations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION – Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the first FLOOD
PLAIN management regulations adopted by the City of Winterset.
EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first
FLOOD PLAIN management regulations adopted by the City of Winterset.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
341
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads).
FACTORY-BUILT HOME – Any structure, designed for residential use,
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or
assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation, on a building site. For the purpose of this Chapter,
factory-built- homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes, and
modular homes and also include park trailer, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles places on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days.
FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more factory built home lots for
sale or rent.
FLOOD – A temporary rise in stream’s flow or stage that results in
water overflowing its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the
channel or an unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - The official map prepared as part of
(but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing of the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
342
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places
in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or,
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places
in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified by either (I) an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the
Interior in states without approved programs.
FLOODPROOFING – Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which would preclude the entry of water.
Structural components shall have the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy.
FLOODWAY – The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the flood plain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required
to carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement
of flood flows to the floodway area will not result in substantially
higher flood levels and flow velocities.
LOWEST FLOOR – The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building including a basement except when all the following criteria
are met:
a. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize
hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings
that satisfy the provision of Section IV. B3.a
b. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, dry
walled,
c. etc.) and used solely for damage potential uses such as
building access, parking or storage.
d. Machinery and service facilities (e.g. hot water heater,
furnace, electrical, service) contained in the enclosed
area are located at least one (1) foot above the 100-year
flood level.
e. The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this
section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria a,b,c
and d above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest
enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
343
MINOR PROJECTS - Small development activities (except for
filling, grading and excavating) valued at less than $500.
NEW CONSTRUCTION - (new buildings, factory-built home parks) -
Those structures or development for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the first FLOOD PLAIN
management regulations adopted by the City of Winterset and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
effective date of the first FLOOD PLAIN management regulations adopted
by the City of Winterset and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is:
a. Built on a single chassis;
b. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured
at the largest horizontal projection;
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable
by a light duty truck; and
d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as a temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES B
Repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable
condition that do not trigger a building permit, provided they are not
associated with a general improvement of the structure or repair of a
damaged structure. Such repairs include:
a) Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing,
replacing roofing tiles and replacing siding;
b) Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling,
carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;
c) Basement sealing;
d) Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes; and
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
344
e) Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or
air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA - The land within a community subject
to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
This land is identified as zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
STRUCTURE – Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground including but not limited to buildings,
factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks and other
similar uses.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT – Any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the
structure either (i) before the improvement or repair is started, or
(ii) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition “substantial
improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences whether or not that alternation affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use.
Any addition which increases the original floor area of a
building by 25 percent to more. All additions construction after
March 1, 1992 shall be added to any proposed addition in determining
whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed 25
percent.
VARIANCE - A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
FLOOD PLAIN management regulations.
VIOLATION - The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the City of Winterset FLOOD PLAIN management
regulations.
100 YEAR FLOOD – A flood, the magnitude of which has a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or
which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
345
100-years.
4.1607. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
Violations of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply
with any of the requirements hereof shall constitute a simple
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not
more than thirty (30) days. Nothing herein contained prevent the City
of Winterset from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy violation including a municipal infraction as may be
allowed by law.
4.1608. AMENDMENTS
The regulations and standards set forth in this Chapter may from time
to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment,
supplement, change, or modification shall be effective without prior
approval of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
346
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
347
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 16 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
348
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
TITLE V PUBLIC SERVICES
349
CHAPTER ONE - CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
CHAPTER TWO - GAS UTILITY FRANCHISE
CHAPTER THREE - STREET PAVING PROJECTS-UNDERGROUND CONNECTIONS
CHAPTER FOUR - SEWER DISTRICT
CHAPTER FIVE - COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
350
5.101 TERMS
5.102 GRANT
5.103 TERM
5.104 ACCEPTANCE; EFFECTIVE DATE
5.105 EQUAL PROTECTION
5.106 CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY
5.107 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS
5.108 RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY
5.109 RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF THIRD PARTY
5.110 TRIMMING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY
5.111 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
5.112 AERIAL AND UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION
5.113 REQUIRED EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE
5.114 SUBSCRIBER CHARGES FOR EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE
5.115 SERVICE OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS
5.116 FRANCHISING FEE
5.117 RATES AND CHARGES
5.118 RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE
5.119 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE
5.120 TESTING FOR COMPLIANCE
5.121 BOOKS AND RECORDS
5.122 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
5.123 INDEMNIFICATION
5.124 NOTICE OF VIOLATION
5.125 GRANTEE'S RIGHT TO CURE OR RESPOND
5.126 PUBLIC HEARING
5.127 ENFORCEMENT
5.128 ACTS OF GOD
5.129 DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED AND MADE A PART HEREOF
5.130 PREEMPTION
5.131 ACTIONS OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY
5.132 NOTICE
5.133 DESCRIPTIVE HEADINGS
5.134 SEVERABILITY
5.101 TERMS. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
351
terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings
ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present thence include the future tense, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular
number include the plural number:
a. "Affiliate" means an entity which owns or controls, is
owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with
Grantee.
b. "Basic Cable Service" is the tier of service regularly
provided to all Subscribers that includes the retransmission of
local broadcast television signals.
c. "Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, as amended.
d. "Cable Service" means (i) the one-way transmission to
Subscribers of video programming or other programming service,
and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection of such Video Programming or any other lawful
communication service.
e. "Cable System" means a facility, consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment or other communications
equipment that is designated to provide Cable Service and other
service to Subscribers.
f. "FCC" means Federal Communications Commission or successor
governmental entity thereto.
g. "Franchise" shall mean the initial authorization, or
renewal thereof, issued by the Franchising Authority, whether
such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, which authorizes
construction and operation of the Cable System for the purpose of
offering Cable Service or other service to Subscribers.
h. "Franchising Authority" means the City of Winterset, Iowa,
or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
i. "Grantee" mean Cablevision Franchise or the lawful
successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
352
j. "Gross Revenues" means the monthly Cable Service revenues
received by Grantee from Subscribers of the Cable System;
provided, however, that such phrase shall not include: (i)
revenues received from national advertising carried on Cable
System; (ii) any revenues received from premium pay services,
converter rental, additional outlet charges or program guides;
(iii) any taxes on Cable Service which are imposed directly or
indirectly on any Subscriber thereof by any governmental unit or
agency, and which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of such
governmental unit or agency.
k. "Person" means an individual, partnership, association,
joint stock company, trust corporation, or governmental entity.
l. "Public Way" shall mean the surface of, and the space
above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge,
land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane,
public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, public utility easements,
dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for
compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or
improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the
Franchising Authority in the Service Area which shall entitle
the Franchising Authority and the Grantee to the use thereof for
the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining
the Cable System. Public Way shall also mean any easement now or
hereafter held by the Franchising Authority within the Service
Area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public
service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include
other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use
and meaning entitle the Franchising Authority and the Grantee to
the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting
Grantee's Cable Service or other service over poles, wires,
cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be
ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the Cable System.
m. "Service Area" means the present municipal boundaries of
the Franchising Authority, and shall include any additions
thereto by annexation or other legal means.
n. "Service Tier" means a category of Cable Service or other
services provided by Grantee and for which a separate charge is
made by Grantee.
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
353
o. "Subscriber" means a person or user of the Cable System who
lawfully receives Cable Services or other service therefrom with
Grantee's express permission.
p. "Video Programming" means programming provided by, or
generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a
television broadcast station.
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
354
5.102. GRANT. The Franchising Authority hereby grants to Grantee
a non-exclusive Franchise which authorizes the Grantee to construct
and operate a Cable System and offer Cable Service and other services
in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under, or in any manner
connected with Public Ways within the Service Area and for that
purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct,
maintain, or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, or along any
Public Way and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, such
poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other related
property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the Cable
System.
5.103. TERM. The Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance
shall be for an initial term of fifteen (15) years from the effective
date of the Franchise as set forth in Section 5.104, unless otherwise
lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance.
5.104. ACCEPTANCE; EFFECTIVE DATE. Grantee shall accept the
Franchise granted pursuant hereto by signing this Ordinance and filing
same with the office of City Administrator sixty (60) days after the
passage and final adoption of this Ordinance. Subject to the
acceptance by Grantee, the effective date of this Ordinance shall be
the sixtieth day after its passage and final adoption.
5.105. EQUAL PROTECTION. In the event the Franchising Authority
enters into a Franchise, permit, license, authorization or other
agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than the
Grantee to enter into the Franchising Authority's streets and Public
Ways for the purpose of constructing or operating a Cable System or
providing Cable Service to any part of the Service Area, the material
provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained
herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair
competitive advantage over another and to provide all parties equal
protection under the law.
5.106. CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY. All transmission and
distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment installed
or erected by the Grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be
located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use
of Public Ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who own property that adjoins any of said Public Ways.
5.107. RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS. If during the course of
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
355
Grantee's construction, operation, or maintenance of the Cable System
there occurs a disturbance of any Public Way by Grantee, it shall, at
its expense, replace and restore such Public Way to a condition
reasonably comparable to the condition of the Public Way existing
immediately prior to such disturbance.
5.108. RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. Upon its
receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than five (5)
business days, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, protect,
support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the Public Way, or remove
from the Public Way, any property of the Grantee when lawfully
required by Franchising Authority by reason of traffic conditions,
public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction,
change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers,
drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or
improvements by the Franchising Authority; but, the Grantee shall in
all cases have the right of abandonment of its property. If public
funds are available to any company using such street, easement, or
right-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the
foregoing, such funds shall also be made available to the Grantee.
5.109. RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF THIRD PARTY. The Grantee shall,
on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued
by the Franchising Authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of such building, provided: (a) the expense of such
temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person,
including, if required by the Grantee, making such payment in advance;
and (b) the Grantee is given not less than ten (10) business days
advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
5.110. TRIMMING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY. The Grantee shall have
the authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of
its Cable System in the Service Area so as to prevent branches from
coming in contact with the Grantee's wires, cables, or other
equipment. The Grantee shall reasonably compensate the Franchising
Authority or property owner for any damages caused by such trimming,
or shall, in its sole discretion and at its own cost and expense,
reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any
construction of the Cable System undertaken by Grantee. Such
replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations Grantee may have to
the Franchising Authority or property owner pursuant to the terms of
this section.
5.111. SAFETY REQUIREMENTS. Construction, installation, and
maintenance of the Cable System shall be performed in an orderly and
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
356
workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in substantial
accordance with applicable FCC or other federal, state, and local
regulations. The Cable System, shall not unreasonably endanger or
interfere with the safety of persons or property in the Service Area.
5.112. AERIAL AND UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION. In those areas of
the Service Area where all of the transmission or distribution
facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone
communications and electric services are underground, the Grantee
likewise shall construct, operate, and maintain all of its
transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided that
such facilities are actually capable of receiving Grantee's cable and
other equipment without technical degradation of the Cable System's
signal quality. In those areas of the Service Area where the
transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public
utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are
both aerial and underground, Grantee shall have the sole discretion to
construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities or any part thereof, aerially or underground.
Nothing contained in this section shall require Grantee to construct,
operate, and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances
such as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices
(splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies,
pedestals, or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in this section, in the event that all of the
transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public
utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are
placed underground after the effective date of this Ordinance, Grantee
shall only be required to construct, operate, and maintain all of its
transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given
reasonable notice and access to the public utilities' facilities at
the time that such are placed underground.
5.113. REQUIRED EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE. The Cable System as
constructed as of the date of the passage and final adoption of this
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
357
Ordinance substantially complies with the material provisions hereof.
Grantee is hereby authorized to extend the Cable System as necessary,
as desirable, or as required pursuant to the terms hereof within the
Service Area. Whenever Grantee shall receive a request for service
from at least fifteen (15) Subscribers within 1,320 cable-bearing
strand feet (one-quarter cable mile) of its trunk or distribution
cable, it shall extend its Cable System to such Subscribers at no cost
to said Subscribers for system extension other than the usual connect
fees for all Subscribers; provided that such extension is technically
feasible, and if it will not adversely affect the operation, financial
condition, or market development of the Cable System, or as provided
for under Section 5.114 of this Ordinance. In the event that a
residence does not meet the density requirements of this section, then
the Grantee will use its best efforts to offer a direct broadcast
service in order to offer Video Programming to that residence.
5.114. SUBSCRIBER CHARGES FOR EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE. No
Subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual
circumstances, such as a Subscriber's request to locate his cable drop
underground, existence of more than one hundred fifty (150) feet of
distance from distribution cable to connection of service to
Subscribers, or a density of less than fifteen (15) Subscribers per
1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable, Cable
Service or other service may be made available on the basis of a
capital contribution in aid of construction, including cost of
material, labor, and easements. For the purpose of determining the
amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be borne by
Grantee and Subscribers in the area in which Cable Service may be
expanded, Grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction
and other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator
equals the actual number of potential Subscribers per 1,320 cablebearing
strand feet of its trunk or distribution cable, and whose
denominator equals fifteen (15) Subscribers. Potential Subscribers
will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro
rata basis. Grantee may require that the payment of the capital
contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential
Subscribers be paid in advance.
5.115. SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS. The Grantee shall provide
without charge, one (1) outlet of Basic Service to the Franchising
Authority's office building(s), fire station(s), police station(s),
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
358
and public school building(s) that are passed by its Cable System.
The outlets of Basic Cable Service shall not be used to distribute or
sell Cable Services in or throughout such buildings; nor shall such
outlets be located in common or public areas open to the public.
Users of such outlets shall hold Grantee harmless from any and all
liability or claims arising out of their use of such outlets,
including but not limited to, those arising from copyright liability.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section,
the Grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to such
buildings where the drop line from the feeder cable to said buildings
or premises exceeds one hundred fifty (150) cable feet, unless it is
technically feasible and so long as it will not adversely affect the
operation, financial condition, or market development of the Cable
System to do so, or unless the appropriate governmental entity agrees
to pay the incremental cost of such drop line in excess of 150 cable
feet. In the event that additional outlets of Basic Cable Service are
provided to such buildings, the building owner shall pay the usual
installation fees associated therewith, including, but not limited to,
labor and materials. Upon request of Grantee, the building owner may
also be required to pay the service fees associated with the provision
of Basic Cable Service and the additional outlets relating thereto.
5.116. FRANCHISING FEE.
A. Grantee shall pay to the Franchising Authority a
franchise fee equal to one percent (1%) of Gross Revenues
(as defined in Section 1.1 of the Franchise Agreement)
received by Grantee from the operation of the Cable System
on an annual basis; provided, however, that Grantee may
credit against any such payments: (i) any tax, fee, or
assessment of any kind imposed by Franchising Authority or
other governmental entity on a cable operator, or
Subscriber, or both, solely because of his status as such;
(ii) any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability
which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or
Subscribers (including any such tax, fee, or assessment
imposed, both on utilities and cable operators and their
services), and (iii) any other special tax, assessment, or
fee such as a business, occupation, and entertainment tax.
For the purpose of this section, the 12-month period
applicable under the Franchise for the computation of the
franchise fee shall be the calendar year, unless otherwise
agreed to in writing by the Franchising Authority and
Grantee. The franchise fee payment shall be due and
payable ninety (90) days after the close of the preceding
calendar year. Each payment shall be accompanied by a
brief report from a representative of Grantee showing the
basis for the computation. In no event shall the franchise
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
359
fee payments required to be paid by Grantee exceed five
percent (5%) of Gross Revenues received by Grantee in any
12-month period.
B. LIMITATION ON FRANCHISE FEE ACTIONS. The period of
limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable
hereunder shall be five (5) years from the date on which
payment by the Grantee is due. Unless within five (5)
years from and after said payment due date the Franchising
Authority initiates a lawsuit for recovery of such
franchise fee in a court of competent jurisdiction, such
recovery shall be barred, and the Franchising Authority
shall be stopped from asserting any claims whatsoever
against the Grantee relating to any such alleged
deficiencies.
5.117. RATES AND CHARGES. The Franchising Authority shall not
regulate the rates for the provision of Cable Service and other
services, including, but not limited to, ancillary charges relating
thereto. From time to time, and at any time, Grantee has the right to
modify its rates and charges including, but not limited to the
implementation of additional charges and rates; provided, however,
that Grantee shall give notice to the Franchising Authority of any
such modifications or additional charges thirty (30) days prior to the
effective date thereof.
In the event that Basic Cable Service rate increases are subject to
approval of the Franchising Authority, the Grantee may, at its
discretion and without consent of the Franchising Authority, increase
rates relating to the provision of Basic Cable Service by an amount
which is at least equal to five percent (5%) per year.
5.118. RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE. The Franchising Authority and the
Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Franchising
Authority that relate to the renewal of the Grantee's Franchising
shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of
the Cable Act (as such existed as of the effective date of the Cable
Act), unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth
therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the
provisions of any subsequent provision of federal or state law.
In addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626(a), the
Franchising Authority agrees to notify Grantee of its preliminary
assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community
needs and interests, as well as the past performance of Grantee under
the then current Franchise term. The Franchising Authority further
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
360
agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be provided to the
Grantee prior to the time that the four (4) month period referred to
in Subsection (c) of Section 626 is considered to begin.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section,
the Grantee and Franchising Authority agree that at any time during
the term of the then current Franchise, while affording the public
appropriate notice and opportunity to comment, the Franchising
Authority and Grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations
regarding renewal of the then current Franchise and the Franchising
Authority may grant a renewal thereof. The Grantee and the
Franchising Authority consider the terms set forth in this section to
be consistent with the express provisions of Section 626 of the Cable
Act.
5.119. TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE. Grantee's right, title, or
interest in the Franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, or
otherwise encumbered, other than to an Affiliate, without the prior
consent of the Franchising Authority, such consent not to be
unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however,
for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by
assignment of any rights, title, or interest of Grantee in the
Franchise or Cable System in order to secure indebtedness.
5.120. TESTING FOR COMPLIANCE. The Franchising Authority may
perform technical tests of the Cable System during reasonable times
and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal
business operations of the Grantee or the Cable System in order to
determine whether or not the Grantee is in compliance with the terms
hereof and applicable state or federal laws. Except in emergency
circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving Grantee
reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than two (2) business days,
and providing a representative of Grantee an opportunity to be present
during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that
the Grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material
requirement hereof, the reasonable costs of such testing demonstrates
that Grantee has substantially complied with such material provisions
hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the Franchising
Authority. Except in emergency circumstances, the Franchising
Authority agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more than
two (2) times a year in the aggregate, and that the results thereof
shall be made available to the Grantee upon the Grantee's request.
5.121. BOOKS AND RECORDS. The Grantee agrees that the
Franchising Authority may review such of its books and records, during
normal business hours and on non-disruptive basis, as are reasonably
necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
361
shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records
required to be kept by the Grantee pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set
forth herein, Grantee shall not be required to disclose information
which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature.
The Franchising Authority agrees to treat any information disclosed by
the Grantee to it as confidential and only to disclose it to
employees, representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to
know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof.
5.122. INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS. Grantee shall maintain in full
force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the
Franchise, Comprehensive General Liability Insurance in the amount of
$1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily injury and property
damage. Said insurance shall designate the Franchising Authority as
an additional insured. Such insurance shall be non-cancelable except
upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the Franchising
Authority.
5.123. INDEMNIFICATION. The Grantee agrees to indemnify, save
and hold harmless, and defend the Franchising Authority, its officers,
board and employees, from and against any liability for damages and
for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily
injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the Grantee's
construction, operation, or maintenance of its Cable System,
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
5.124. NOTICE OF VIOLATION. In the event that the Franchising
Authority believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of
the Franchise, it shall notify Grantee in writing of the exact nature
of the alleged noncompliance.
5.125. GRANTEE'S RIGHT TO CURE OR RESPOND. Grantee shall have
thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in Section
5.124: (a) to respond to the Franchising Authority contesting the
assertion of noncompliance or; (b) to cure such default or; (c) in the
event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured
within the Thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy
such default and notify the Franchising Authority of the steps being
taken and the projected date that they will be completed.
5.126. PUBLIC HEARING. In the event that Grantee fails to
respond to the notice described in Section 5.124 pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Section 5.125, or in the event that the
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
362
alleged default is not remedied within sixty (60) days after the
Grantee is notified of the alleged default pursuant to Section 5.124,
the Franchising Authority shall schedule a public meeting to
investigate the default. Such public meeting shall be held at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Franchising Authority which is
scheduled at a time which is no less than five (5) business days there
from. The Franchising Authority shall notify the Grantee of the time
and place of such meeting and provide the Grantee with an opportunity
to be heard.
5.127. ENFORCEMENT. Subject to applicable federal and state law,
in the event the Franchising Authority, after such meeting, determines
that Grantee is in default of any provision of the Franchise, the
Franchising Authority may:
a) Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided
under this Franchise, if any, including without limitation,
any bonds or other surety; provided, however, the
foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such
amount as the Franchising Authority reasonably determines
is necessary to remedy the default.
b) Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek
other equitable relief;
c) In the case of a substantial default of a material
provision of the Franchise, declare the Franchise Agreement
to be revoked; or
(d) Seek specific performance of any provision, which
reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative
to damages.
The Grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply
promptly with any provision of the Franchise by reason of any failure
of the Franchising Authority to enforce prompt compliance.
5.128. ACTS OF GOD. The Grantee shall not be held in default or
noncompliance with the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any
enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or
alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or
other events reasonably beyond its ability to control.
5.129. DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED AND MADE A PART HEREOF. The
following documents shall be incorporated herein by this reference,
and in the case of a conflict or ambiguity between or among them, the
document of latest date shall govern:
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
363
a) Any enabling Ordinance in existence as of the date
hereof;
b) Any franchise agreement between Grantee and
Franchising Authority reflecting the renewal of the
Franchise, if any.
5.130. PREEMPTION. If the FCC, or any other federal or state
body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the Franchise, then to the
extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede or preclude the
exercise of the like jurisdiction by the Franchising Authority, the
jurisdiction of the Franchising Authority shall cease and no longer
exist.
5.131. ACTIONS OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. In any action by the
Franchising Authority or representative thereof mandated or permitted
under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable,
expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where
approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval
or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
5.132. NOTICE. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the
parties, every notice or response to be served upon the Franchising
Authority or Grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have
been duly given to the required party five (5) business days after
having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed
envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a post
office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. Postal
Service.
The notices or responses to the Franchising Authority shall be
addressed as follows:
City of Winterset
Attn: City Administrator
124 W. Court Avenue
Winterset, Iowa 50273
The notices or responses to the Grantee shall be addressed as follows:
Heritage Cablevision, Inc.
310 Commerce Drive
CHAPTER 1 CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
364
Red Oak, Iowa 51566
with a copy to:
TCI Southeast, Inc.
Attn: Director of Franchising
2204 Lakeshore Drive, Suite 325
Birmingham, AL 35209
and a copy to:
Heritage Cablevision, Inc.
Attn: State Manager
2199 Ingersoll Avenue
Des Moines, Iowa 50312-5227
Franchising Authority and the Grantee may designate such other address
or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other.
5.133. DESCRIPTIVE HEADINGS. The captions to sections contained
herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such
captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text
herein.
5.134. SEVERABILITY. If any section, sentence, paragraph, term,
or provision hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid, or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any
state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof,
such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other
section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which
will remain in full force and effect for the term of the Franchise or
any renewal or renewals thereof.
CHAPTER 2 GAS UTILITY FRANCHISE
365
5.201 FRANCHISE GRANTED
5.201. FRANCHISE GRANTED. There is hereby granted to MidAmerican
Energy Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called “Company”,
and to its successors and assigns the right and non-exclusive franchise
to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the City of
Winterset, Iowa, hereinafter called the “City”, a gas distribution
system, to furnish natural gas along, under and upon the streets,
avenues, alleys and public places to serve customers within and without
the City and to furnish and sell natural gas to the City and its
inhabitants. For the term of this franchise the Company is granted the
right of eminent domain, the exercise of which is subject to City
Council approval upon application by the Company. This franchise shall
be effective for a twenty-five (25) year period from and after the
effective date of this ordinance.
Section 2. The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject
to the restrictions and limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa
2003, or as subsequently amended or changed.
Section 3. Company shall have the right to excavate in any public
street for the purpose of laying, relaying, repairing or extending gas
pipes, mains, conduits, and other facilities provided that: a) plans
are provided to the City of Winterset 30 days prior to construction
(except for emergency repairs), and b) the same shall be so placed as
not to interfere with the construction of any water pipes, drain or
sewer or the flow of water there from, which have been or may
hereafter be located by authority of the City.
Section 4. The Company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and
relocate its installations in, on, over or under any public street or
alley in the City in such manner as the City may at any time
reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction,
reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street or alley or any
public improvement of, in or about any such street or alley or
reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such improvement.
Section 5. In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys
and public places for the installation of gas pipes, conduits or
apparatus, Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the
streets and shall replace the surface, restoring the original
condition as nearly as practicable.
CHAPTER 2 GAS UTILITY FRANCHISE
366
Section 6. Company shall indemnify and save harmless City from
any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses on
account of injury or damage to any person or property, caused or
occasioned, or allegedly caused or occasioned, in whole or in part, by
Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation,
operation or maintenance of the gas utilities authorized by this
franchise, provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated
to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any costs or
damages arising from the negligence of the City, its officers,
employees or agents.
Section 7. The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and
operate, and maintain the system in accordance with the applicable
regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors.
Section 8. During the term of this franchise, the Company shall
furnish natural gas in the quantity and quality consistent with
applicable Iowa laws and regulations.
Section 9. The City reserves the right to impose a franchise fee
pursuant to the Iowa Code. The franchise fee shall only be imposed
following a public hearing and adoption of an ordinance authorizing
said franchise fee. The City shall work with the Company to develop a
methodology and timeline to implement the franchise fee.
Section 10. This ordinance and the rights and privileges herein
granted shall become effective and binding upon its approval and
passage in accordance with Iowa law and the written acceptance by the
Company. The Company shall, within (30) thirty days after the City
Council approval of this ordinance, file in the office of the clerk of
the City, its acceptance in writing of all the terms and provisions of
this ordinance. Following City Council approval this ordinance shall
be published in the Winterset Madisonian, the official newspaper for
the City of Winterset, Iowa. The effective date of this ordinance
shall be the date of publication. In the event that MidAmerican Energy
Company does not file its written acceptance of this ordinance within
30 days after its approval by the City Council this ordinance shall be
void and of no effect.
CHAPTER 2 GAS UTILITY FRANCHISE
367
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 3 STREET PAVING PROJECTS UNDERGROUND CONNECTIONS
368
5.301 CONNECTIONS REQUIRED
5.302 WATER CONNECTIONS
5.303 SEWER CONNECTIONS
5.304 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
5.305 NOTICE TO MAKE CONNECTIONS
5.306 CITY INSTALLATION
5.307 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS
5.308 PERMIT TO MAKE CONNECTIONS AFTER PAVING
5.301. CONNECTIONS REQUIRED. Whenever the City shall order any
street, alley or public ground permanently improved by paving, it
shall be the duty of all owners of adjacent and/or abutting property
to make underground connections from sewer and water mains to the
property line of such adjacent and abutting property before said
paving is installed.
5.302. WATER CONNECTIONS. At the time of adoption of a
preliminary resolution for the construction of street improvements,
the City shall notify the Board of Trustees of the Waterworks of the
City of Winterset, Iowa, of the proposed street paving project. The
Board of Trustees shall then report to the City the number of service
line connections necessary to serve private property dependent for
water supply upon water mains located in streets included in the
proposed paving project, along with the legal descriptions of the
private properties to be served by the water connections, and the
names of the property owners.
5.303. SEWER CONNECTIONS. At the time of adoption of a
preliminary resolution for the construction of street improvements,
the City Administrator shall report to the Council the number of sewer
service connections necessary to serve private property dependent for
sewage disposal upon sewer mains located in streets included in the
proposed paving project, along with the legal descriptions of the
private properties to be served by the sewer connections, and the
names of the property owners.
CHAPTER 3 STREET PAVING PROJECTS UNDERGROUND CONNECTIONS
369
5.304. NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING. The City shall then notify
these property owners of the public hearing on the Resolution of
Necessity for the proposed paving project. Notice to these property
owners shall be given at the same time and in the same manner as the
notice given to property owners who are included in the proposed
street assessment district. The notice shall inform the property
owner that they will be required to install connections to the water
and/or sewer mains if the City decides to proceed with the paving
project. For the purposes of the hearing on the Resolution of
Necessity, property owners who are notified of the necessity to
install water and/or sewer main connections, but whose property is not
within the proposed street assessment district, may appear as
interested parties.
5.305. NOTICE TO MAKE CONNECTIONS. If after the public hearing
on the Resolution of Necessity the Council determines to proceed with
the street paving project, the Council shall then adopt a resolution
ordering property owners to install the water and/or sewer main
connections. Notice of this order shall be mailed by certified mail
to the individual property owners. The notice shall also be published
in the official legal newspaper once each week for two consecutive
weeks. The notice shall state that the owner has thirty days from the
date of the first publication to install the necessary connections.
5.306. CITY INSTALLATION. If a property owner has failed to make
the water and/or sewer main connections as ordered within the
prescribed thirty days, the City shall then cause the connection to be
made.
5.307. ASSESSMENT OF COSTS. In the case where the City installed
the water and/or sewer connections because of failure of a property
owner to install the connections, the Council shall adopt a resolution
assessing the cost against the property served by the connections.
The City Administrator shall then mail, by certified mail, a statement
of the total cost to the property owner. If the property owner fails
to make payment within thirty (30) days of the date of the mailing,
the City Administrator shall certify the cost to the County Treasurer
to be assessed against the property and collected in the same manner
as other special assessments. In the event that such an assessment
exceeds fifty (50) dollars the property owner may pay the assessment
in ten annual installments in the manner and with the same interest
rate provided for in Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 3 STREET PAVING PROJECTS UNDERGROUND CONNECTIONS
370
5.308. PERMIT TO MAKE CONNECTIONS AFTER PAVING. In the event
water and sewer main connections are not made before the street, alley
or public ground is permanently improved by paving, and it is
necessary to cut through the pavement to make such connections, no
permit shall be issued for the making of such connections within
twenty-four (24) months after the completion and acceptance of the
project except upon payment of a fee of $50.00 in addition to all
other fees and charges.
CHAPTER 4 SEWER DISTRICT
371
5.401 SEWER DISTRICT CREATED
5.402 SEWER SYSTEM DEFINED
5.403 WHO SHALL PAY RENT
5.404 RATE OF RENT AND MANNER OF PAYMENT
5.405 DETERMINATION AND PAYMENT OF RENT FROM
PREMISES WITH PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS
5.406 FAILURE TO PAY
5.407 SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED
5.408 MAINTENANCE AS A NUISANCE
5.409 CONNECTIONS TO A SEWER
5.410 PERMIT REQUIRED
5.411 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
5.412 DAMAGES
5.413 NONCORPORATE SEWER SERVICES
5.414 WASTE RESTRICTIONS
5.415 STORMWATER DRAINAGE
5.416 RESTRICTED DISCHARGE
5.417 REGULATORY POWERS
5.418 EXCEPTIONS
5.419 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES
5.420 INDUSTRIAL WASTE ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT
5.421 WASTE WATER TESTING
5.422 PENALTIES
5.401. SEWER DISTRICT CREATED. One sewer district
is hereby created which includes all of the City of
Winterset, Iowa.
5.402. SEWER SYSTEM DEFINED. For use within this
ordinance a "sewer system" is composed of main sewers, sewage
pumping stations, treatment and disposal plants, lateral
sewers, drainage conduits or channels and sewer connections
in public streets for private property.
5.403. WHO SHALL PAY RENT. Every person, firm or
corporation whose premises are served by a connection to the
city sewer system shall pay rent to the city at the rate and
in the manner provided in 5.404.
CHAPTER 4 SEWER DISTRICT
372
5.404. SEWER RENTAL, MANNER OF PAYMENT AND RATE REVIEW.
A. RATE OF RENT AND MANNER OF PAYMENT. The rate of rent shall
be:
MINIMUM
CHARGE
USE
CHARGE
BOD HIGH
STRENGTH
SURCHARGE
SS
TKN
Operation,
Maintenance and
Replacement
$3.00/mo $2.65/100
CF
$.24/lb $.21/lb $.88/
lb
Debt Service and
Other
$8.85/mo $3.35/100
CF
TOTAL $11.85/m
o
$6.00/100
CF
$.24/lb
in
excess
of 300
mg/l
$.21/lb
in excess
of 300 mg/l
$.88/
lb
in
exces
s
of 40
mg/l
The sewer usage shall be determined from the net water bill.
High-strength users shall provide and pay the cost of flow
measurement, sampling and analysis to determine the surcharge
and total charges.
The rent shall be billed monthly and rent shall be based on
water consumed during the preceding month and any applicable
surcharges.
The rent shall be paid at the Office of the City
Administrator within twenty (20) days of the billing date and
shall be subject to the same terms and conditions on penalty
for late payment as the electric and water bills policy
established from time to time by the Board of Trustees of the
Municipal Power Plant and Waterworks of the City of
Winterset.
CHAPTER 4 SEWER DISTRICT
373
The user charge system shall generate adequate annual
revenues to pay costs of annual operation and maintenance
including replacement and costs associated with debt
retirement of bonded capital associated with financing the
treatment works which the City may be ordinance designate to
be paid by the user charge system. That portion of the total
user charge which is designated for operation and maintenance
including replacement of the treatment works shall be
established by this chapter.
That portion of the total user charge collected which is
designated for operation and maintenance including
replacement purposes as established herein, shall be
deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the
Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund and will be kept
in two primary accounts as follows:
1. OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT. An account
designated for the specific purpose of defraying operation
and maintenance costs, excluding replacements of the
treatment works.
2. REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT. An account designated for the
specific purpose of ensuring replacement needs over the
useful life of the treatment works. Deposits in the
replacement account shall be made monthly from the operation,
maintenance and replacement revenue in the amount of $30,000
annually which is the average annual amount needed to provide
adequate funds for replacement of treatment works equipment
during a 20-year useful life.
Fiscal year-end balances in the operation and maintenance
account and the replacement account shall be carried over to
the same accounts in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be
used for no other purposes than those designated for these
accounts. Monies which have been transferred from other
sources to meet temporary shortages in the operation,
maintenance and replacement funds shall be returned to their
respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user
charge rates for operation, maintenance and replacement. The
user charge rates shall be adjusted such that the transferred
monies will be returned to their respective accounts within
the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the monies
were borrowed.
CHAPTER 4 SEWER DISTRICT
374
That portion of the total user charge collected which is
designated for reserves shall be deposited in a separate
reserve or capital improvement fund.
Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge
from the City's treatment works, or any user which discharges
any substances which singly or by interaction with other
substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of
operation,
maintenance, or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay
for such increased costs. The charge to each such user shall
be as determined by the City Administrator.
B. RATE REVIEW. The City shall review the user charge
system at least every two (2) years, and revise user charge
rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates
adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and
maintenance including replacement and that the system
continues to provide for the proportional distribution of
operation and maintenance including replacements costs among
user and user classes.
The City will notify each user at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being charged
for operation, maintenance including replacement of the
treatment works.
CHAPTER 4 SEWER DISTRICT
375
The User charge ordinance shall take precedence over any
terms or conditions of agreements or contracts which are
inconsistent with the requirements of Section 204 (b) (1) (A)
of the Federal Clean Water and 40 CFR Part 35.2140 dated
February 17, 1984.
The sewer rates established and stated herein are determined
by the system for development of proportional user charges
set out, with representative computations, as Appendix A to
Chapter 4 of Title V of the Municipal Code of the City of
Winterset, Iowa.
SECTION 2. Chapter 4 of Title V Municipal Code of the City of
Winterset, Iowa, is amended by adopting the attached Appendix
"A".
SECTION 3. The Municipal Code of the City of Winterset, Iowa
is hereby amended to add to Chapter 4 of Title V the new
sections providing as follows:
5.405. DETERMINATION AND PAYMENT OF RENT FROM PREMISES
WITH PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS. Users whose premises have
private water systems shall pay rent in proportion to the
water used as determined by the City Administrator either by
an estimate agreed to by the user or by metering the water
system.
The rates shall be the same as provided in 5.404, applied as
if a city water bill were to be paid. Rent shall be paid at
the same time and place as provided in 5.404.
5.406. FAILURE TO PAY. The City shall have a lien
upon the real estate served by the sewer system for all
charges and interest. The City Administrator shall certify
the amount of the lien to the County Auditor and the amounts
due shall be collected in the same manner as general property
taxes as provided by law.
CHAPTER 4 SEWER DISTRICT
376
5.407. SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED. Wherever a
connection to the sewer system is available, all outdoor
toilets, outhouses, privy vaults, range closets, cesspools,
septic tanks or other similar receptacles used to receive
fecal matter, urine or sewage shall, with their contents, be
immediately and completely removed from the real property
affected and the place where they were located promptly and
properly disinfected. Such appliances shall be replaced by
individual water closets of durable nonabsorbent material,
properly sewer connected, and with individual traps and
properly connected flush tanks providing an ample flush of
water to thoroughly cleanse the bowl. Each such water closet
shall be located inside the dwelling or other building in
connection with which it is to be used in a compartment
completely separated from every other water closet. Such
water closets and all plumbing connection therewith shall be
sanitary in every respect and shall be in accordance with the
ordinances of the City. No water closet shall be placed outof-
doors.
5.408. MAINTENANCE AS A NUISANCE. Outside toilets,
outhouses, privy vaults, range closets, cesspools, septic
tanks or other similar receptacles located or maintained upon
real property in the City of Winterset, Iowa are public
nuisances and may be abated by the procedure set forth in
3.604 of the Winterset Municipal Code of 1989.
5.409. CONNECTIONS TO SEWERS. All connections of
private drains or sewers with the public sewers of the City,
or the construction or modification of appurtenances to
sewers or sewer connections shall be made in accordance with
this Chapter.
CHAPTER 4 SEWER DISTRICT
377
5.410. PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall open, uncover, or in any
manner make any connection with, or lay drain or sewer, or attach or
modify any appurtenance to sewer connections, within the public
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds of the City unless a
permit has been obtained therefore, or operating under a special
contract therefore with the City for such work.
5.411. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. Any person desiring to use any
sewer, do any house drainage, or tap or permit any sewer to be tapped,
shall first file with the Office of the City Administrator an
application for a permit stating the owner, the name of the plumber
making the installation, a description of the premises, for which said
sewer connection is required and the purposes for which the connection
is required. Upon the payment of a permit fee of $50.00, the City
Administrator shall issue to the plumber a permit to connect with the
sewer or to do such house drainage in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the City. All work shall be done under the supervision
and inspection of the City.
5.412. DAMAGES. The plumber or drain layer who makes any
connection with the public sewers shall be held responsible for any
damages caused to the sewers, or the public streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or other public grounds of the City. The plumber shall
restore the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds to the
satisfaction of the City.
5.413. NONCORPORATE SEWER SERVICES. Except as to those premises
already connected to the City sanitary sewer system as of December 22,
1993, no person, firm or corporation shall be in any manner connected
to the City sanitary sewer system unless and until the premises to be
served are within the City corporate boundaries, except as to that
property owned by the City, County, State of Iowa or its political
subdivisions or by nonprofit corporations providing governmentally
related services for the general public benefit on behalf of a
political subdivision under contract with and funded, in whole or in
part, by the Federal or State Governments or the political
subdivisions thereof.
Chapter 4 Sewer District
378
5.414. WASTE RESTRICTIONS. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewers:
a. Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, kerosene, fuel oil,
petroleum derivative, or flammable or explosive liquid,
solid, or gas.
b. Any waters or wastes containing toxic materials and
any other poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance, create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the water pollution control plant, or
cause any violation of water pollution control plant
effluent limitations or permit conditions.
c. Any waters or wastes having a Ph lower than 6.0 or
greater than 10.5 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the wastewater facilities.
d. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers,
or other interference with the proper operation of the
wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, lumber, sticks, newspaper,
coarse paper of any kind, fruit, vegetables, peelings,
cotton, refuse, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshing’s, entrails and paper dishes,
cups and milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
Chapter 4 Sewer District
379
e. Any waters or wastes having (1) 5-day biochemical
oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter, or (2)
containing more than 300 milligrams per liter of suspended
solids, or (3) having an average daily flow greater than 2
percent of the average wastewater flow of the City, shall
be subject to the review of the City Administrator. Where
necessary, in the opinion of the City Administrator, the
owner shall provide, at their expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the biochemical
oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter, or (2) reduce
the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per liter, or (3)
control the quantities and rates of discharge of such
waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other
pertinent information relating to propose preliminary
treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of
the City Administrator and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are
obtained in writing.
f. No person shall increase the use of potable, process or
surface waters in any way, nor mix separate waste streams
for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the standards set forth in this Chapter.
5.415. STORMWATER DRAINAGE. Storm water and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
City Administrator. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on
approval of the City Administrator. No person shall connect a roof
downspout, exterior or interior foundation drain, area drain or other
source of surface water or groundwater to a sanitary sewer or to a
building sewer connected to a sanitary sewer.
Chapter 4 Sewer District
380
5.416. RESTRICTED DISCHARGE. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged the following described substances, materials,
waters, or wastes unless determined in advance by the City
Administrator that such wastes can neither harm the sewers, wastewater
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, nor can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the City Administrator will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment
process, capacity of the water pollution control plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the water pollution control plant, and other
pertinent factors. The substances which are prohibited, unless
approved in writing by the City Administrator prior to any discharge
are:
a. Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per
liter of petroleum oil, no biodegradable cutting oils, or
products of mineral oil origin.
b. Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred
(100) milligrams per liter or containing substances which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between
thirty-two (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees (150°)
Fahrenheit, (O° and 65° Centigrade).
c. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped
with a motor of one (1) horsepower or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the City
Administrator.
d. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether
neutralized or not.
e. Any waters or wastes containing objectionable amounts
of iron, chromium, copper, zinc, nickel, mercury, cadmium
and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree
that any such material received in the composite wastewater
at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the City Administrator for such materials.
Chapter 4 Sewer District
381
f. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations
exceeding limits which may be established by the City
Administrator as necessary, after treatment of the
composite wastewater, to meet the requirements of state,
federal, or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
g. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
City Administrator in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations.
h. Any waters or wastes having a Ph in excess of 10.5.
i. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended or dissolved
solids.
(2) Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(3) Unusual biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen
demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as
to constitute a significant load on the water
pollution control plant.
(4) Volumes of flow, concentrations, or both, which
constitute a "slug".
j. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amendable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater
treatment process employed, or are amendable to treatment
only to such degree that the water pollution control plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
k. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five
degrees Centigrade).
Chapter 4 Sewer District
382
Any person using the sanitary sewer system, whether holding a
discharge permit or not, who causes or allows a prohibited substance
to be discharged into the sewer system without the prior written
approval of the City Administrator shall immediately upon the
occurrence of the prohibited discharge notify the Office of the City
Administrator. The notification shall include the name and address of
the reporting person or agency, the location of the discharge, the
date and time of the discharge, the type of waste involved, the
concentration and volume of the discharge and the corrective actions
taken.
Any person using the sanitary sewer system, whether holding a
discharge permit or not, who discharges prohibited substances into the
sewer system without the prior written approval of the City
Administrator shall be strictly liable to the City for any and all
expense, loss or damage to the City wastewater facilities resulting
from this discharge, which liability shall be in addition to any fines
or other penalties imposed upon the Discharger under federal or state
laws and regulations.
Any person using the sanitary sewer system, whether holding a
discharge permit or not, who discharges prohibited substances into the
sewer system without the prior written approval of the City
Administrator shall thereafter provide and maintain at the
Discharger's cost pre-discharge treatment facilities to prevent
further prohibited discharges as hereafter required unless in the
opinion of the City Administrator such facilities are not necessary.
5.417. REGULATORY POWERS. If any waters or wastes are
discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in Section 5.416 above, and which in the judgment of the
City Administrator, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the
City Administrator may:
a. Revoke or cancel the permit,
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers,
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge, and/or
Chapter 4 Sewer District
383
d. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes
or sewer charges.
If the City Administrator permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment
shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Administrator
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, laws and
regulations.
5.418. EXCEPTIONS. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the City Administrator, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be
of a type and capacity approved by the City Administrator, and shall
be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
5.419. PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES. Where preliminary
treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
5.420. INDUSTRIAL WASTE ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT. When required by
the City Administrator, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required,
shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the City Administrator. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at their expense, and shall be
maintained by them so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Chapter 4 Sewer District
384
5.421. WASTE WATER TESTING. All measurements, tests, and
analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water
and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manholes provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manholes. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to
the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the wastewater facilities and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular
analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a
grab sample or samples should be taken. Biochemical oxygen demand and
suspended solids analysis will be obtained from 24-hour composites of
all outfalls whereas pH analyses will be determined from periodic grab
samples, unless directed otherwise by the City Administrator.
5.422. PENALTIES. Any person violating any provision of this
Chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this
Chapter shall upon conviction be deemed to have committed a municipal
infraction punishable as provided by this Municipal Code and by law.
In addition, any person who violates this Chapter or who fails to
comply with its requirements shall upon conviction be guilty of a
simple misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. Each day any such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense under this
Chapter subjecting the violator, if so continued, to prosecution for
each separate offense.
Chapter 4 Sewer District
385
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
386
5.501 PURPOSE
5.502 DEFINITIONS
5.503 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES
5.504 COLLECTION RULES
5.505 RESIDENTIAL BILLING SERVICES
5.506 SERVICE DISCONTINUED
5.507 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT
5.508 LIEN NOTICE
5.509 CONTAINER SIZES AND CHARGES FOR RESIDENTIAL
PREMISES
5.510 COLLECTION VEHICLES
5.511 LOADING
5.512 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION
5.513 RIGHT OF ENTRY
5.514 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS
5.515 COMMERCIAL PERMIT REQUIRED
5.516 PERMIT PROCEDURE
5.517 PERMIT FEE
5.518 PERMIT CONDITIONS
5.519 COLLECTION METHOD
5.520 VOLUME BASED GARBAGE COLLECTION AND
RECYCLING
5.521 PUBLIC EDUCATION
5.522 ALTERNATE DROP-OFF SITE FOR RECYCLABLES
5.523 APPEALS
5.524 PENALTY
5.501. PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to eliminate
unhealthy, unsanitary and unsightly conditions in the City caused by
the deposit and accumulation of solid waste.
5.502. DEFINITIONS. All words as used in this Chapter shall be
given their usual and customary definitions according to the context
in which the word appears. All technical words, wherever possible,
shall be given their definition as now or hereafter appears in the
Code of Iowa or in the Iowa Administrative Code.
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
387
5.503. SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES. The City shall
provide by contract for the collection of solid waste from residential
premises as herein defined. The owners or operators of commercial,
industrial or institutional premises shall provide for the collection
of solid waste produced upon such premises. For purposes of this
Chapter, commercial premises shall include any premises having more
than four (4) residential dwelling units which are not separate
properties subject to the Horizontal Property Regime Act of the State
of Iowa. The availability of these Collection Services whether or not
such the service is used regularly or at all by the occupant of the
premises is hereby declared a benefit to any such premises at least
equal to the monthly charge specified for the service. Such charge
shall be paid whether or not the occupant uses the solid waste
collection services available to the premises.
5.504. COLLECTION RULES.
A. Every person, firm or corporation owning, occupying,
controlling or renting a residential premises which front
upon or abuts a street or alley upon which the City or the
City’s contract agent maintains a solid waste collection
route and wherein residential solid waste is generated or
accumulates shall cause such solid waste to be placed for
collection either by the City or by the City’s contract agent
pursuant to the collection and disposal Rules and Regulations
of the City and of the laws of the State of Iowa.
B. The City is authorized to adopt Rules and Regulations
necessary to implement the Collections Services provided by
the City or the City’ contract agent(s). A copy of the Rules
and Regulations shall be kept on file in the Office of the
City Administrator and be available to public review and/or
inspection during regular City Hall business hours.
5.505. RESIDENTIAL BILLING SERVICES. The payment for the
collection of Residential Solid Waste Collection shall be in
accordance with the following:
A fee shall be charged to each occupied dwelling unit each month
for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclables,
which fee shall include both the fee paid to the Contractor
authorized to collect the solid waste from the residential
premises and the costs of the City for its services for such
collection activities. The fee shall not be charged when the City
is notified that the dwelling union is vacant for the billing
period. The City fee shall be established by the City.
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
388
The City shall prepare and issue monthly bills to each
residential customer for the collection of the solid waste and
recyclables.
The residential customer bill for each month’ collection service
shall be due and payable at the Office of the City Administrator
on the fifteenth day of the month following the end of the month
in which the service is provided. The City may combine the solid
waste collection billing as part of the general billing made by
the City to the residential customer for other City utility
services.
Any residential customer billing not paid when due shall be
deemed delinquent. A late payment penalty of one and a half
percent (1½%) of the amount due shall be added each month to the
delinquent balance. The City Administrator is authorized to
waive this penalty in instances where the late payment as
determined by the City Administrator is due to reasonable cause
not attributable to the residential customer.
A fee as set forth in the fee schedule established by the City
shall be charged for all bank checks or drafts which are not
honored by the bank upon its presentment.
5.506. SERVICE DISCONTINUED. Collection of residential solid
waste and recyclables shall be discontinued in accordance with the
following:
1. Notice. Following the date that bills for the collection of
residential solid waste and recyclables are due and payable
(i.e. the fifteenth day of the month), the Clerk shall send a
written notice to each delinquent customer that the combined
utility services and/or the collection of residential solid
waste and recyclables may be discontinued if payment,
including late payment charges, is not received within twelve
(12) days from the date the notice is mailed. The notice
shall afford the customer the opportunity to request a hearing
before the City Administrator prior to the discontinuance of
service. Such written notice shall be sent by first class
mail to the customer’s address where the service is provided.
If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of
the property has made written request for such Notice, the
written notice sent to the customer shall also be given to the
owner or landlord.
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
389
2. Service Discontinued. If payment for all of the services
billed by the City on the combined service account is not
received within twelve (12) days following the date the
written notice is sent to the customer and payment
arrangements have not been made pursuant to a hearing before
the City Administrator, the collection of solid waste and
recyclables for this customer may, in the discretion of the
City Administrator, be discontinued for nonpayment of the
services.
5.507. LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served
and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable
for fees for the collection of residential solid waste and recyclable
from the premises. Fees for the collection of residential solid waste
and recyclables, if not paid as provided by this Chapter, shall
constitute a lien upon the premises served and may be certified by the
City Administrator to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner as property taxes. The City Administrator is authorized to
charge the maximum allowable administrative fee for certifying the
delinquent account to the County Treasurer.
5.508. LIEN NOTICE. A lien for delinquent fees for the
collection of residential solid waste and recyclables shall not be
certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of
intent to certify a lien is given to the customer. If the customer is
a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a
written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the
owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate
persons by ordinary mail through the United States Postal Service to
the address shown on the request for notice and/or to the customer’s
address for billing purposes not less than thirty (30) days prior to
certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.
5.509. CONTAINER SIZES AND CHARGES FOR RESIDENTIAL PREMISES.
Container size and charges for solid waste collection and disposal
from residential premises shall be fixed and determined by the City
pursuant to Section 5.504 of this Chapter. Such container size and
charges may from time to time by amendment by the City.
5.510. COLLECTION VEHICLES. Vehicles or containers used for the
collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste
or solid waste containing such materials shall be leak proof, durable
and of easily cleanable construction. Each such vehicle or container
shall be kept clean to prevent offensive nuisances, pollution or
insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
390
5.511. LOADING. Vehicles or containers used for the collection
and transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in
such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak, or spill there
from, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material.
Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately
by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area where the spill or leakage occurred properly
cleaned.
5.512. FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. All solid waste shall be
collected from all premises at least once each week; or, more often as
may be necessary for commercial, industrial or institutional premises.
5.513. RIGHT OF ENTRY. Solid waste collectors are hereby
authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of
collecting solid waste there from as required by this chapter;
however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or
other residential buildings.
5.514. CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS. No person shall engage in the
business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid
waste from residential premises for the City without first entering
into a contract with the City. This section does not prohibit an
owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned,
occupied or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of
properly in an approved sanitary disposal project. Furthermore, a
contract is not required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of
earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities,
provided that all such materials are conveyed in vehicles, trucks or
receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material
being transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
5.515. COMMERCIAL PERMIT REQUIRED. No person or entity shall
collect garbage, rubbish or solid waste from Industrial, Commercial
and Institutional premises within the city corporate limits unless and
until a permit is issued to them by the City as hereinafter provided.
5.516. PERMIT PROCEDURE. Any person or entity desiring to
collect garbage, rubbish or solid waste within the City shall first
file a written application with the City upon forms furnished by the
City for authority to collect this refuse. The application or
accompanying documents shall provide the following:
a. The full name, business address, mailing address (if
different), telephone number and FAX number (if any) of the
applicant;
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
391
b. The type(s) of refuse to be collected by the
applicant;
c. The weekly collection schedule for the applicant;
d. The applicant's plan for recycling services to be
provided to their customers; and,
e. Such other information as may be required by the City
Administrator for administration and oversight of the
purposes of this Chapter.
5.517. PERMIT FEE. Each Permittee shall pay to the City for
each calendar year or portion thereof a fee of Twenty-five dollars
($25.00). The initial permit fee shall accompany the permit
application required in the preceding paragraph and shall be
nonrefundable in all events.
5.518. PERMIT CONDITIONS. The permit issuance shall be
conditioned upon the following:
a. The permittee may surrender the permit at any time
without refund of the permit fee.
b. The City Administrator may revoke the permit at any
time for the permittee's violation of federal, state or
city laws or regulations relating to solid waste collection
within the City. The City Administrator's action may be
appealed to the City Council.
c. Each permittee shall be required to deposit all
garbage, rubbish, refuse and solid waste collected within
the City at the sanitary landfill owned and operated by the
South Central Iowa Landfill Agency.
d. Each permittee shall, on a daily basis, deposit all
garbage collected within the City at the sanitary landfill
owned by South Central Iowa Landfill Agency. No garbage
shall be stored overnight in the permittee's garbage trucks
or on the permittee's premises.
e. The permittee's recycling plan shall contain these
minimum specifications:
1. The permittee must provide the recycling containers;
2. The permittee must specify a collection schedule for its
customers;
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
392
3. The permittee must provide collection of recyclable
materials from each customer at least once per week unless
normal solid waste collection service is provided less
frequently than weekly, in which case the frequency of
collection shall be the same as normal solid waste
collection;
4. The permittee shall own the recyclable materials they have
collected and may market this material as they see fit.
However, the recyclable material may not be disposed
within the City corporate limits without the approval of
the City Administrator;
5. The permittee shall submit an annual report to the City
Administrator on or before January 31 of each year for the
previous calendar year identifying the weight in tons of
all recyclable material collected within the City from its
customers;
6. The permittee must establish and implement a plan to
inform their customers of the recycling services available
and of the federal and state requirements for recycling;
and,
7. The recycling plan shall include all materials now or
hereafter designated as recyclable by the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources.
5.519. COLLECTION METHOD. Except for areas within the Downtown
Commercial Zoning District, all solid waste collection within the City
shall be from the street right of way only. Except for those alleys
in the Downtown Commercial Zoning District, the City alleys shall not
be used by the permittee's garbage trucks to collect refuse.
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
393
5.520. VOLUME BASED GARBAGE COLLECTION AND RECYCLING.
DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Code Section, the following
terms shall have the meanings set forth herein unless otherwise
limited or expanded elsewhere in this Chapter.
Area shall mean the legally defined boundaries of the City of
Winterset, Iowa (hereafter City in this Chapter).
Commercial and Industrial Units/Occupants shall be all locations
within the City which are not considered residential
units/occupants under this Section. Mobile home parks where
water services are metered by a single meter are considered
commercial. All rental units or complexes of four or more
residential rental units are considered commercial units.
Commercial and industrial units are subject to this Section.
Containers or Bins shall mean those containers and bins for
collection of garbage or recyclables.
Curbside shall mean that portion of the right of way adjacent to
paved or traveled City roadways contiguous to the frontage of
properties in the City. Curbside also means at any point further
than five feet from the front line of any dwelling, structure,
business or building. See (f) below and Subparagraph 12 hereof.
Curb Side Collection shall mean the collection of all garbage or
recyclables placed curbside or in front of the house as near to
the street as possible if no curb exists.
Front shall mean that portion of a dwelling, business or other
structure facing any street, highway or other place. A structure
may have more than one front if it faces on more than one street,
highway or other place, for example a corner lot. On a structure
that has no lines parallel to said street, highway or other place
the front shall be that portion or portion most nearly parallel
to the said street, highway or place and if the sides are equally
parallel to the street, highway or other place the two sides
shall both be the front. Where the front line is uneven, front
shall mean the most forward portion of the structure.
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
394
Garbage and Refuse Shall mean every waste accumulation of animal,
fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storage of meat, fish,
fowl, fruit or vegetables. Dead animals are not included in the
term “garbage”. Refuse shall mean all other miscellaneous waste
materials not specifically defined as garbage or specifically
defined as recyclable.
Residential Unit/Occupant shall mean each single family home or
multi family dwelling located within the corporate limits of the
City and occupied by a person or group of person, except mobile
home parks per subparagraph (B). However, all residential rental
structures or residential complexes of four or more rental units
are considered commercial units. Any Home Occupation including
residential day care centers in any Residential Zoning District
as defined by the City zoning laws shall be considered a
residential unit/occupant hereunder for purposes of disposal of
garbage and recyclables generated by the Home Occupation.
Recyclable(s) shall mean those items defined as a recyclable(s)
in subparagraph 4 of this Section.
Unit Based Pricing shall mean a system with an ever-increasing
charge based upon number of containers utilized or upon actual
weight of garbage generated
All individuals or entities holding a license to haul garbage and
refuse in the City of Winterset shall charge its customers based
upon a unit based pricing system, with charges increasing with
each larger size or weight of container. The unit-based prices
shall be based on the size of containers utilized or based upon
actual weight collected. The service levels for the unit based
pricing for residential customers shall include:
one weekly pickup of not more than 35 gallons or 45 pounds
one weekly pickup of not more than 64 gallons or 90 pounds
one weekly pickup of not more than 96 gallons or 135 pounds
Any additional containers shall be charged an additional cost.
The weight of any individual container and contents shall not
exceed 135 pounds.
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
395
Each commercial, industrial and residential unit/occupant in the
City shall recycle those items designated in subparagraph 4 of
this Section. Those items designated as recyclables shall not be
disposed of except by delivery by the commercial, industrial or
residential unit/occupant, or by a licensed recyclable hauler, to
an individual or entity engaging in recycling of the item
involved. No recyclables shall be disposed of by depositing same
with garbage or refuse and no licensed hauler shall pick up any
recyclable commingled with garbage or refuse.
Recyclables under this Section are defined as follows:
(1) Tin
(2) Clear Glass bottles and jars
(3) Plastic milk jugs designated No. 2 H.D.P.E.
(4) Newsprint
(5) Office paper
(6) Cardboard (corrugated)
(7) Magazines, Slicks and Catalogues (no phone books)
(8) Waste oil (in leak-proof containers)
(9) Lead-acid batteries (casing undamaged)
No licensed recyclable hauler is required to pick up items 8 and
9 listed above as part of their regular customer pick up. However,
any licensed recyclable hauler making any scheduled recyclable pick up
shall pick up items numbered 1 through 7.
The City reserves the right to add other items as designated
recyclables at a later date, including but not limited to:
a. Aluminum
b. Bi-mental cans
c. Brown and green glass
d. No. 1 P.E.T.E. plastics and other No. 2 H.D.P.E.
Plastics
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
396
5.521. PUBLIC EDUCATION:
The Recyclable Hauler will develop a plan of education so as to inform
their clientele of this section requirements imposed upon the
collection of garbage, refuse and recyclables. This plan of education
shall be submitted, along with the License Application, for review and
approval as a part of the licensing process. As a part of this
educational effort the Recyclable Hauler will distribute, in printed
form, a statement of their collection schedule as well as a statement
of items, which are recyclable, and an explanation concerning how the
garbage/refuse and recyclable system is to operate. This printed
statement shall be distributed to existing and new customers in either
English and Spanish language form as required. Any cost associated
with the educational effort shall be the exclusive responsibility of
the Recyclable Hauler.
The City shall make available unbelted advertising space, as is
available to the City, without cost for use as part of this
educational effort, and shall provide such other assistance as is
reasonably possible at no cost of the City.
5.522. ALTERNATE DROP-OFF SITE FOR RECYCLABLES:
The alternate drop-off site for recyclable materials shall be located
at the South Central Iowa Landfill located east of Winterset.
5.523. APPEALS. Any person or party aggrieved by the application
of this Code Chapter or any Rules and Regulations adopted by the City
pursuant to this Chapter shall file with the City Administrator a
written grievance setting forth their complaint, which grievance shall
be heard by the Mayor who shall provide reasonable notice to the
Complaintant of the time, date and place of such hearing. The
decision of the Mayor on the grievance shall be final unless the
Complaintant timely appeals the Mayor’s decision to the Iowa District
Court for Madison County upon a Petition for Writ of Certiorari.
5.524. PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by
this Chapter for any particular provision or section, any person
violating any provision of this Chapter or any Rule or Regulation
adopted pursuant to this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment
not to exceed thirty (30) days.
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
397
This Page Left Blank intentionally
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
398
This Page Left Blank intentionally
CHAPTER 5 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
399
CHAPTER ONE - INTRODUCTIONS AND DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER TWO - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER THREE - IOWA CODE CHAPTER ADOPTION BY REFERENCE
CHAPTER FOUR - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
CHAPTER FIVE - SPEED REGULATIONS
CHAPTER SIX - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
CHAPTER SEVEN - PEDESTRIANS RIGHTS AND DUTIES
CHAPTER EIGHT - PARKING
CHAPTER NINE - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
CHAPTER TEN - PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE ON ARREST
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTIONS & DEFINITIONS
400
6.101 PURPOSE
6.102 WORDS AND PHRASES
6.103 STATE CODE DEFINITIONS
6.101. PURPOSE. The purpose of this Title is to regulate
traffic upon and use of the streets of the City of Winterset, Iowa,
and to provide for enforcement of these regulations.
6.102. WORDS AND PHRASES. Where the following words and phrases
are used in this Title, they are hereby defined:
(a) PARK OR PARKING. Means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers.
(b) STAND OR STANDING. Means the halting of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
(c) STOP. When required means complete cessation from movement.
(d) STOP OR STOPPING. When prohibited means any halting even
momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal.
(e) HUMAN POWERED WHEELED VEHICLE. Means the following devices
in which any person or property may be transported upon wheels
upon or across land moved by human power: bicycles, tricycles,
skateboards, roller skates and scooters. Devices not described
are excluded from this definition.
6.103. STATE CODE DEFINITIONS. Any term or word defined in Iowa
Code Chapter 321 as now enacted or hereafter amended is hereby
incorporated into this Title by this reference.
CHAPTER 2 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
401
6.201 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
6.202 ANNUAL REPORTS BY CHIEF OF POLICE
6.203 AUTHORITY OF POLICE
6.204 POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICERS
6.205 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO PROVISIONS OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
6.206 BICYCLES OR ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES
6.201. TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION. Traffic administration is hereby
established under the Chief of Police of this City.
6.202. ANNUAL REPORTS BY CHIEF OF POLICE. Upon request by the
City Council, the Chief of Police shall prepare annually a traffic
report which shall be filed with the City Administrator. Such report
shall contain information on traffic matters in this City concerning
the number of traffic accidents; the number of persons killed and
injured, the number and nature of violations and other pertinent
traffic data including the plans and recommendations for future
traffic safety activities.
6.203. AUTHORITY OF POLICE. Provisions of this Title and the
Iowa law relating to motor vehicles shall be enforced by the City
Police Department.
6.204. POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICERS. The officers of the
police department and of the fire department are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with
traffic laws.
6.205. REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO PROVISIONS OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order or direction of officers of the fire department or
officers of this police department or who shall fail to abide by the
provisions of this Title violates this Title.
6.206. BICYCLES OR ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES. Every person riding a
bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a
roadway shall be subject to the provision of this Title applicable to
the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of this Title which
by their nature can have no application.
CHAPTER 2 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
402
This Page Left Blank intentionally
CHAPTER 2 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
403
This Page Left Blank intentionally
CHAPTER 3 IOWA CODE CHAPTER ADOPTION BY REFEENCE
404
Pursuant to Iowa Code Section 380.10 the City of Winterset does
hereby establish, declare and adopt by reference the following
sections from Iowa Code chapter 321 whose subject matter concerns
motor vehicles and the laws of the road to be applied within the City
of Winterset, Iowa:
MUNICIPAL IOWA
CODE SECTION CODE SECTION SUBJECT MATTER
6.321.1 321.1 Definitions of Words and Phrases
6.321.17 321.17 Operating or permitting operation of
non-registered vehicle
6.321.20B 321.20B Failure to prove security against
liability (Non-accident related)
6.321.32 321.32 Failure to carry registration card
6.321.34 321.34 Registration violation
6.321.37 321.37 Display of Plates
6.321.57 321.57 Failure to have proper plates
(manufacturer, transporter, dealer)
6.321.78 321.78 Injuring or Tampering with Vehicles
6.321.79 321.79 Attempt to Injure
6.321.92 321.92 Altering or Changing Numbers
6.321.98 321.98 Operation Without Registration
6.321.99 321.99 Fraudulent Use of Registration
6.321.104 321.104 Violations - certificate of title
6.321.174 321.174 Operators License - Operation of
Commercial Motor Vehicles
6.321.174A 321.174A Operating with expired license
6.321.180 321.180 Instruction Permits
6.321.180a 321.180a Special Instruction Permit
6.321.180B 321.180B Violation of graduated driver's
license conditions
6.321.181 321.181 Temporary Permit
6.321.193 321.193 Restrictions on Licenses
6.321.194 321.194 Violations of conditions
of minor's school license
6.321.210 321.210 Suspension of Operator's license
6.321.210A 321.210A Suspension of Operator's
license for failure to pay fine,
penalty, surcharge or court costs
6.321.216 321.216 Unlawful Use of License - Penalty
6.321.216B 321.216B Use of Driver's license or nonoperator's
identification Card
by underage person to obtain alcohol
6.321.216C 321.216C Use of Driver's license on non
-operator's identification Card by
underage person to obtain
Cigarettes or tobacco products
6.321.218 321.218 Operating Without Valid Motor Vehicle
CHAPTER 3 IOWA CODE CHAPTER ADOPTION BY REFEENCE
405
License or
When Disqualified - Penalties
6.321.219 321.219 Permitting Unauthorized Minor to Drive
6.321.220 321.220 Permitting Unauthorized Person to
Drive
6.321.228 321.228 Provisions Refer to Highways –
Exceptions
6.321.229 321.229 Obedience to Peace Officers
6.321.231 321.231 Failure of driver of emergency
vehicle to exercise caution
while on emergency
6.321.232 321.232 Radar jamming devices
6.321.234 321.234 Failure to observe seating
requirements
6.321.247 321.247 Golf Cart Operations on City Streets
6.321.256 321.256 Failure to obey traffic control device
6.321.257 321.257 Failure to respond to yellow
(caution) signal
6.321.259 321.259 Unauthorized Signs, Signals or
Markings
6.321.262 321.262 Damage to Vehicles
6.321.263 321.263 Information and Aid - Leaving Scene of
Accident
6.321.264 321.264 Striking Unattended Vehicle
6.321.265 321.265 Striking Fixtures Upon a Highway
6.321.275 321.275 Operation of Motorcycles and Motorized
Bicycles
6.321.277 321.277 Reckless Driving
6.321.277a 321.277a Careless Driving
6.321.278 321.278 Drag Racing Prohibited
6.321.284 321.284 Open containers of alcohol
in motor vehicles
6.321.285 321.285 Excessive speed
6.321.288 321.288 Controller Vehicle-Reduced Speed
6.321.294 321.294 Failure to maintain minimum
speed when directed by officer
6.321.297 321.297 Driving on Right Hand Side of Roadway
- Exceptions
6.321.298 321.298 Meeting and Turning to Right
6.321.299 321.299 Overtaking a Vehicle
6.321.302 321.302 Overtaking on the Right
6.321.303 321.303 Limitations on Overtaking on the Left
6.321.304 321.304 Prohibited Passing
6.321.305 321.305 Violating one-way street designation
6.321.306 321.306 Improper use of lanes
6.321.307 321.307 Following to Closely
6.321.308 321.308 Motor Trucks and Towed Vehicles –
Distance Requirements
6.321.309 321.309 Towing - Convoys – Drawbars
CHAPTER 3 IOWA CODE CHAPTER ADOPTION BY REFEENCE
406
6.321.310 321.310 Unlawful towing of four-wheeled
trailer
6.321.311 321.311 Turning at Intersection
6.321.312 321.312 Turning on Curve or Crest of Grade
6.321.313 321.313 Starting Parked Vehicles
6.321.314 321.314 When Signal Required
6.321.315 321.315 Signal Continuous
6.321.316 321.316 Stopping
6.321.317 321.317 Signal by Hand and Arm or Signal
Device
6.321.318 321.318 Method of Giving Hand and Arm Signals
6.321.319 321.319 Entering Intersections from Different
Highways
6.321.320 321.320 Left Turns - Yielding
6.321.321 321.321 Entering Thru Highways
6.321.322 321.322 Vehicles Entering Stop or Yield
Intersection
6.321.323 321.323 Moving Vehicle Backward on Highway
6.321.324 321.324 Operation on Approach of Emergency
Vehicles
6.321.325 321.325 Pedestrian Subject to Signal
6.321.326 321.326 Pedestrian on Left
6.321.328 321.328 Pedestrian failing to use crosswalk
6.321.329 321.329 Vehicle failing to yield to pedestrian
6.321.333 321.333 Failure to yield to blind person
6.321.340 321.340 Driving in or through safety zone
6.321.353 321.353 Stopped Before Crossing Sidewalk –
Right of Way
6.321.354 321.354 Stopping on Traveled Way
6.321.355 321.355 Disabled Vehicle
6.321.358 321.358 Stopping, Standing or Parking
6.321.359 321.359 Moving Other Vehicle
6.321.360 321.360 Prohibited parking in front
of theaters and hotels
6.321.361 321.361 Parking too far from
curb/angular parking
6.321.362 321.362 Unattended Motor Vehicle
6.321.363 321.363 Obstruction to Driver's View
6.321.365 321.365 Coasting Prohibited
6.321.367 321.367 Following Fire Apparatus
6.321.368 321.368 Crossing Fire Hose
6.321.369 321.369 Putting Debris on Highway
6.321.370 321.370 Removing Injurious Material
6.321.372 321.372 Failure of school bus driver
to use appropriate signals
6.321.381 321.381 Movement of Unsafe or Improperly
equipped Vehicles
6.321.383 321.383 Failure to display reflective
device on slow-moving vehicle
CHAPTER 3 IOWA CODE CHAPTER ADOPTION BY REFEENCE
407
6.321.384 321.384 When Headlights Required
6.321.385 321.385 Insufficient number of headlamps
6.321.386 321.386 Insufficient number of headlamps –
motorcycles and motorized bicycles
6.321.387 321.387 Improper rear lamp(s)
6.321.388 321.388 Improper registration plate lamp
6.321.389 321.389 Improper rear reflector
6.321.390 321.390 Reflector requirements
6.321.392 321.392 Improper clearance lights on truck or
trailer
6.321.393 321.393 Lighting device color and mounting
6.321.394 321.394 No lamp or flag on rear-projecting
load
6.321.395 321.395 Parking on certain roadways without
parking lights
6.321.397 321.397 Improper light on bicycle
6.321.398 321.398 Improper light on other vehicle
6.321.402 321.402 Improper use of spotlight
6.321.403 321.403 Improper use of auxiliary
driving lights
6.321.404 321.404 Improper brake light
6.321.409 321.409 Improperly adjusted headlamp
6.321.415 321.415 Required Usage of Lighting Devices
6.321.419 321.419 Improper head lighting when
night driving
6.321.420 321.420 Excessive number of driving lights
6.321.422 321.422 Lights of improper color-front
and rear
6.321.423 321.423 Failure to use flashing signal
on slow-moving vehicles
6.321.430 321.430 Defective braking equipment
6.321.432 321.432 Horns and Warning Devices
6.321.433 321.433 Sirens and Bells Prohibited
6.321.434 321.434 Bicycles Sirens or Whistles
6.321.436 321.436 Mufflers, Prevention of Noise
6.321.437 321.437 Failure to meet mirror requirements
6.321.438 321.438 Windshield and Windows
6.321.439 321.439 Defective windshield wiper
6.321.440 321.440 Defective tires
6.321.441 321.441 Unauthorized use of metal tire or
track
6.321.442 321.442 Projections on Wheels
6.321.445 321.445 Safety Belts and
Safety Harness Use Required
6.321.446 321.446 Child Restraint Devices
6.321.454 321.454 Width and length violations
6.321.455 321.455 Excessive side projection
of load - passenger vehicle
6.321.456 321.456 Excessive height
6.321.457 321.457 Excessive length
CHAPTER 3 IOWA CODE CHAPTER ADOPTION BY REFEENCE
408
6.321.460 321.460 Spilling loads on highways
6.321.462 321.462 Failure to use required
towing equipment
6.321A.5 321A.5 Security required following
accident-exceptions
6.321A.13 Suspension of Operator's license for
nonpayment of judgments-exceptions
6.321A.17 Proof required upon certain
Convictions
6.321A.31 Surrender of license and registration
6.321A.32(l),(2) 321A.32(1),(2) Driving a motor vehicle upon the
highway while the Driver's license or
registration or nonresident's
operating privileges are suspended,
denied or revoked
under Iowa Code Chapter 321A
6.321A.32A 321A.32A Civil Penalty upon suspension,
revocation or barment of
Operator's license
6.321G.5 321G.5 Display of identification number
6.321G.9 321G.9 Operation on roadway
6.321G.11 321G.11 Mufflers
6.321G.12 321G.12 Lights required and brakes required
6.321G.13 321G.13 Lights and flag
CHAPTER 3 IOWA CODE CHAPTER ADOPTION BY REFEENCE
409
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 3 IOWA CODE CHAPTER ADOPTION BY REFEENCE
410
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
411
6.401 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
6.402 DESIGNATING CROSSWALKS AND MARKING TRAFFIC LANES
6.403 (Left Blank Intentionally)
6.404 PLAY STREETS
6.405 (left blank intentionally)
6.406 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS
6.407 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS REGULATION
6.408 THROUGH STREETS
6.409 AUTHORITY TO ERECT STOP OR YIELD SIGNS
6.410 STOP OR YIELD AT INTERSECTING THROUGH STREETS AND
OTHER INTERSECTIONS
6.411 SPECIAL STOP SIGNS
6.412 SPECIAL YIELD SIGNS
6.413 APPROACHING STOP INTERSECTIONS
6.414 APPROACHING YIELD INTERSECTION
6.415 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED
6.416 SCHOOL ZONES
6.417 STREETS RESTRICTED TO CERTAIN THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC
6.418 "U" TURNS
6.419 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK
6.420 STOP BEFORE ENTERING FROM PRIVATE DRIVE
6.421 SPECIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
6.422 RIGHT TURN ONLY ON TURNING LANES
6.401. AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. The Mayor
shall order the placement and maintenance of traffic-control devices
when and as required under ordinances of this City. During an
emergency or temporary condition the Mayor, as traffic conditions
require, may order the placement and maintenance of additional
traffic-control devices to control such emergency or temporary
condition.
6.402. DESIGNATING CROSSWALKS AND MARKING TRAFFIC LANES. The
Mayor is hereby authorized to:
(1) designate crosswalks at intersections where required by
traffic conditions and to cause such crosswalks to be designated
by marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway;
(2) to cause traffic lanes upon street rights-of-way to be marked
for traffic at such places as traffic conditions may require
consistent with the ordinances of this City.
Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for
the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle
within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
412
6.403. (left blank intentionally)
6.404. PLAY STREETS. The Mayor shall have authority to declare
any street, or part thereof, a play street and to place or have
erected appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating the
street is closed to vehicular traffic. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no
person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof
except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
6.405 . (left blank intentionally)
6.406. TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS. Traffic-control signals shall be
installed and maintained at the following intersections:
(a) First Street at its intersections with Green Street,
Jefferson Street, Court Avenue, and Washington Street.
6.407. TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS REGULATION. Traffic control
signals consisting of colored lights or colored lighted arrows shall
regulate vehicle and pedestrian traffic in the manner provided by Iowa
Code Section 321.257 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
6.408. THROUGH STREETS. Streets or portions of streets described
below are hereby declared to be through streets.
(a) Lane Street from the east line of Fourth Avenue to the west
line of First Street, and from the east line of First Street to
the west line of Tenth Street.
(b) Buchanan Street from the east line of Fifth Avenue to the
west line of Second Avenue.
(c) Filmore Street from the east line of Fifth Avenue to the line
of First Street.
(d) Green Street from the east line of Eighth Avenue to the west
line First Street, from the east line of First Street to the west
line of Tenth Street.
(e) Jefferson Street from the west corporation line to the west
line of First Street and from the east line of First Street to
the west line of Tenth Street.
(f) Court Avenue from the east line of Eighth Avenue to the west
line of First Street and from the east line of First Street to
the east line of Tenth Street.
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
413
(g) Washington Street from the east line of Fourth Avenue to the
west line of First Street.
(h) Fremont Street from the east line of Eighth Avenue to the
west line of Fourth Avenue.
(i) Summit Street from the west corporation line to the west line
of First Street.
(j) North Street from the east line of Eighth Avenue to the west
line of First Street and from the east line of First Street to
the west line of Tenth Street.
(k) Eighth Avenue from the north corporation line to the north
line of Summit Street and from the south line of Summit Street to
the north line of Husky Drive.
(l) Fourth Avenue from the south line of Highway 92/169 to the
north line of Buchanan Street, from the south line of Court
Avenue to the north line of Summit Street, and from the south
line of Summit Street to the south corporation line.
(m) South Street from the east line of First Street to the west
line of Fourth Street and from the east line of Fourth Street to
the west line of Ninth Street.
(n) First Street and any north or south extensions thereof from
the north intersection of Highway No. 92 and Highway 169 to the
south corporation line.
(o) Second Street from the south line of South Street to the
north line of Old Buffalo Road (formerly Highway 169).
(p) Fourth Street from the south line of Court Avenue to the
south line of Summit Street.
(q) Ninth Street from the south line of Court Avenue to the south
line of South Street.
(r) Tenth Street from the north corporation line to the north
line of Court Avenue.
(s) Washington Street from the West intersection line with Fourth
Avenue to the East intersection line of Eighth Avenue; and,
Washington Street from the West intersection line with Tenth
Avenue to the East intersection line of Sixteenth Avenue.
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
414
6.409. AUTHORITY TO ERECT STOP OR YIELD SIGNS. Whenever any
ordinance of this City designates a through street, the Mayor shall
cause to be placed and maintained a stop or yield sign as traffic
conditions may require on each and every non-through street
intersecting such through street.
6.410. STOP OR YIELD AT INTERSECTING THROUGH STREETS AND OTHER
INTERSECTIONS. At the intersections of two through streets or of two
non-through streets, the Mayor is hereby authorized to determine
whether vehicles shall stop or yield at one or more entrances to any
such intersection and to make recommendations to the City Council for
adoption of an implementing ordinance. Upon passage of such ordinance
for such stop or yield device at such intersection, the Mayor shall
cause to be erected stop or yield signs as required by said ordinance.
6.411. SPECIAL STOP SIGNS. Stop signs have been erected at
certain entrances to the following intersections as indicated.
(a) Jefferson Street and Eighth Avenue at all
entrances to the intersection.
(b) Washington Street and Second Street at the north
and south entrances to the intersection.
(c) Grade Street and Third Street at the east entrance
and the west entrance to the intersection.
(d) Summit Street and Third Street at the intersection
controlling the east-west traffic.
(e) Third Avenue and Hutchings Street at the east and
west entrances to the intersection.
(f) South Street and Second Avenue at the west
entrance to the intersection.
(g) Washington Street and Tenth Avenue at the east
entrance to the intersection.
(h) Second Avenue and West Washington Street at the
intersection controlling east-west traffic thereof.
(i) Husky Drive and Eight Avenue at the North and the
West and the East entrances to the intersection.
(j) Husky Drive and Seventh Avenue at the north
entrance to the intersection.
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
415
(k) East Jefferson Street and Second Street at the intersection
controlling the east-west traffic thereof.
(l) West Mills Street and Fourteenth Avenue at the
intersection controlling the east-west traffic thereof.
(m) West Mills Street and Fifteenth Avenue at the intersection
controlling the North bound traffic thereon.
(n) Madisyn Circle and Fifteenth Avenue at the intersection
controlling the East bound traffic thereon.
(o) Mackensie Circle and Fifteenth Avenue at the intersection
controlling the East bound traffic thereon.
(p) West Mills Street and Ninth Avenue controlling the North
bound traffic thereon.
(q) First Avenue and Court Avenue at all entrances to the
intersection.
(r) First Avenue and Jefferson Street at all entrances to the
intersection.
(s) Second Avenue and Court Avenue at all entrances to the
intersection.
(t) Second Avenue and Jefferson Street at all entrances to the
intersection.
(u) Second Street and Court Avenue at all entrances to the
intersection.
6.412. SPECIAL YIELD SIGNS. Yield signs have been erected at
certain entrances to the following intersections as indicated:
(a) South First Avenue and High Street at the east
entrance to the intersection.
(b) Buchanan Street and Sixth Avenue at the south
entrance to the intersection.
(c) Short Street and Seventh Avenue at the east and
west entrance to the intersection.
(d) Grade Street and Second Avenue at the east
entrance to the intersection.
(e) Washington Street and Tenth Avenue at the west
entrance to the intersection.
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
416
(f) Washington Street and Third Street controlling the
north and south traffic.
(g) Buchanan Street and Second Street controlling the
north and south traffic.
(h) Filmore Street and Second Street controlling the
north and south traffic.
(i) Court Avenue and Tenth Avenue at the east entrance
to the intersection.
(j) South Street and First Avenue at the east entrance
to the intersection.
(k) Buchanan Street and First Avenue controlling the
north and south traffic.
(l) Benton Street and First Avenue controlling north
and south traffic.
(m) South Street and Tenth Avenue at the west entrance
to the intersection.
(n) Buchanan Street and Sixth Street at the north and
south entrance to the intersection.
(o) South Street and Third Avenue at the north
entrance to the intersection.
(p) Hutchings Street and Seventh Avenue controlling
the east and west traffic.
(q) Benton Street and Third Avenue controlling the
north and south entrances to the intersection.
(r) South First Avenue and Grade Street at the intersection
controlling the east-west traffic thereof.
(s) West Benton Street and Ninth Avenue at the intersections
controlling the North bound and the South bound traffic thereon.
6.413. APPROACHING STOP INTERSECTIONS. When the driver of a
vehicle approaches the entrance to an intersection where a stop sign
is erected, the driver shall first bring the vehicle to a complete
stop at the entrance to such intersection and, after bringing the
vehicle to a complete stop, proceed cautiously yielding to vehicles
not so obligated to stop which are within the intersection or
approaching so closely as to constitute a hazard.
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
417
6.414. APPROACHING YIELD INTERSECTIONS. When the driver of a
vehicle approaches the entrance to an intersection where a yield sign
is erected, the driver shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the
existing conditions or shall stop, if necessary, to yield the right of
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching so closely as to
constitute a hazard. The driver having so yielded may then proceed
through the intersection with caution.
6.415 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. No driver shall enter an
intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle being operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
6.416. SCHOOL ZONES. School zones are hereby established at the
intersection of Fourth Avenue and West South Street; at the
intersection of West Summit Street and South Third Avenue; at the
intersection of West Summit Street and South Fourth Avenue; at the
intersection of West Summit Street and South Eighth Avenue; at the
intersection of South John Wayne Drive and High Street; at the
intersection of South Seventh Avenue and Husky Drive; and, at the
intersection of First Avenue and West Washington Street. Police
officers, school authorities or persons authorized by them are
authorized to place movable stop signs in the street in any school
zone and no movable stop sign shall be placed or removed from the
street except by authorized persons. When the driver of a vehicle
approaches a movable stop sign placed within a school zone, the driver
shall bring such vehicle to a full stop at a point ten feet from the
approach side of the crosswalk marked by a movable stop sign, and
thereafter proceed slowly and in a careful and prudent manner until
the driver shall have passed such school site.
6.417. STREETS RESTRICTED TO CERTAIN THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC. No
through truck traffic of vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 7
tons shall be allowed upon the following streets:
Third Street between East Benton and East Lane Street, and
East Lane Street between Third Street and Tenth Street.
6.418. "U" TURNS. It shall be unlawful for the motor vehicle
operator to make a "U" turn upon any City street right-of-way, except
within a street intersection, provided, however, that "U" turns are
prohibited at all intersections within the DC Downtown Commercial
Zoning District and at all intersections having automatic traffic
control devices and/or signals. The term "U" turn shall mean a motor
vehicle changing the direction of travel by entering the on-coming
lane of traffic between street intersections for a purpose other than
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
418
to enter a public alley, other public right-of-way, a private driveway
or driveway entrance, or public or private off-street parking lot.
6.419. STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle
emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area
and thereafter he shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when he
can do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and he shall yield the
right of way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which his
vehicle is entering.
6.420. STOP BEFORE ENTERING FROM PRIVATE DRIVE. The driver of a
vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road or
driveway shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving on said
highway and yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said
highway.
6.421. SPECIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. Traffic control devices
shall be erected or posted at certain entrances to the following
intersections as indicated:
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES LOCATION
a. Do Not Enter West Washington Street and Second Avenue at
the South entrance to the intersection.
b. Do Not Enter West Grade Street and Second Avenue at the
North entrance to the intersection.
c. Do Not Enter West South Street and Third Avenue at the
East entrance to the intersection.
These traffic control devices shall control all traffic except
authorized school transportation vehicles during the hours 7:30
o'clock a.m. to 8:30 o'clock a.m. and 2:45 o'clock p.m. to 3:30
o'clock p.m. on Monday through Friday of each week except those
calendar days when school is not in session or at times when school is
dismissed early.
Wherever by this Chapter traffic is regulated on the designated
streets or portion of the streets, it shall be the duty of the Mayor
to cause the appropriate traffic control devices to be posted giving
reasonable notice thereof and these regulations shall not be effective
unless these devices are posted and in place at the time of any
alleged offense. When the traffic control devices are so posted given
reasonable notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions
stated on the devices.
6.422.1 RIGHT TURN ONLY ON TURNING LANES
a. Turning lanes on the following streets are hereby
established as indicated:
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
419
1. The right lane of First Street for northbound
traffic from the alley between East South Street and East
Washington Street North to the intersection with East
Washington Street;
2. The right lane of First Street for southbound
traffic from the alley between East Court Avenue and East
Washington Street South to the intersection with East
Washington Street;
3. The right lane of First Street for northbound
traffic from the alley between East Jefferson Street and
East Green Street to the intersection with East Green
Street; and
4. The right lane of First Street for southbound
traffic from the alley between East North Street and East
Green Street to the intersection with East Green Street.
b. The driver of a vehicle who is at or approaching an
intersection with a right turn lane as herein
established and who makes a right turn at the
intersection shall use the right turn lane for this
right turn.
c. The right turn lane herein established shall be
used exclusively for right turns only. The driver of
a vehicle shall not use the right turn lane herein
established to proceed through the intersection.
d. On all streets having right turn lanes at intersections
as herein established, the driver of a vehicle shall not
make a right turn at the intersection from the left or
through lane of traffic on the street.
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
420
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 4 TRAFFIC – CONTROL DEVICES
421
This Page Left Blank intentionally
CHAPTER 5 SPEED REGULATIONS
422
6.501 SPEED LIMITS
6.502 MINIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS
6.503 EMERGENCY VEHICLES - SPEED
6.504 SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS
6.501. SPEED LIMITS. Except as hereafter provided, the following
shall be the lawful speed and any speed in excess thereof shall be
unlawful:
(a) 20 miles per hour in any business district
(b) 25 miles per hour in any residence or school district
(c) 45 miles per hour in any suburban district
(d) 15 miles per hour in the Winterset City Park, the
Winterset Waterworks, and all roads and streets at
Cedar Lake Park.
6.502. MINIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS. No person shall drive a motor
vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and
reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary
for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace officers are
hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers,
and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision
and refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance
herewith the continued slow operation by a driver shall be a violation
of this Title.
6.503. EMERGENCY VEHICLES-SPEED. The speed limitations set forth
in this chapter shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when
responding to emergency calls and being operated in accordance with
the laws of the State of Iowa.
6.504. SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS. The following shall be
the lawful speed limit on these designated streets within the City and
any speed in excess thereof shall be unlawful:
a. U.S. Highway 169, also known as First Street and also
known as John Wayne Drive: from the intersection with Iowa
Highway 92 to a point 2,400 feet north of said
intersection, shall have a speed limit of 45 mph; from
2,400 feet north of the intersection with Iowa Highway 92
to a point 3,250 feet north of said intersection, shall
have a speed limit of 50 mph; and, from a point 3,250 feet
north of the intersection with Iowa Highway 92 to the north
corporate limits, shall have a speed limit of 55 mph.
CHAPTER 5 SPEED REGULATIONS
423
b. Iowa Highway 92: from the West corporate limits to a
point 1,950 feet west of the intersection with U.S. Highway
169, shall have a speed limit of 55 mph; from a point 1,950
feet west of the intersection with U.S. Highway 169 to a
point 3,000 feet east of the intersection with U.S.
Highway 169, shall have a speed limit of 45 mph; and, from
a point 3,000 feet east of the intersection with U.S.
Highway 169 to the east corporate limits, shall have a
speed limit of 55 mph.
c. First Street from the intersection with North Street,
to the intersection with U.S. Highway 169/Iowa Highway 92,
shall have a speed limit of 30 mph.
d. First Street from its intersection with North Street
to its intersection with South Street shall have a speed
limit of 20 mph.
e. First Street from its intersection with South Street
to its intersection with Summit Street shall have a speed
limit of 25 mph.
f. First Street from its intersection with Summit Street
to its intersection with Third Street shall have a speed
limit of 35 mph; and, First Street from its intersection
with Third Street to the South City Corporate boundary
shall have a speed limit of 45 mph.
g. Summit Street from its intersection with First Street
to its intersection with Fourth Avenue shall have a speed
limit of 25 mph.
h. Summit Street from its intersection with Fourth Avenue
to the West City Corporate boundary shall have a speed
limit of 35 mph.
i. Madison Street shall have a speed limit of 25 mph.
j. Eighth Avenue from its intersection with Husky Drive
to its intersection with U.S. Highway 169/Iowa Highway 92
shall have a speed limit of 25 mph.
k. Eighth Avenue from its intersection with U.S. Highway
169/Iowa Highway 92 to the north City corporate boundary
shall have a speed limit of 45 mph.
l. Tenth Street from its intersection with Court Avenue
to its intersection with U.S. Highway 169/Iowa Highway 92
shall have a speed limit of 25 mph.
CHAPTER 5 SPEED REGULATIONS
424
m. Tenth Street from its intersection with U.S. Highway
169/Iowa Highway 92 to the north City Corporate boundary
shall have a speed limit of 45 mph.
n. Sixteenth Avenue from its intersection with Summit
Street north to its intersection with U.S. Highway 169/Iowa
Highway 92 shall have a speed limit of Thirty-five (35)
miles per hour.
o. Court Avenue East of Tenth Street to the east City
Corporate boundary shall have a speed limit 35 mph.
CHAPTER 6 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
425
6.601 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
6.602 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
6.601. AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
Whenever any street or alley is designated as a one-way street or
alley the Mayor shall cause to be placed and maintained signs giving
notice thereof and no such regulation shall be effective unless such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings,
signs, barriers, or other devices so placed in accordance with this
section.
6.602. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS. Upon the following streets
and alleys vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction:
(a) From north to south in the north-south alley
located in the block bordered by Jefferson Street,
Second Street, Court Avenue and First Street.
(b) From east to west in the east-west alley located
in the block bordered by Jefferson Street, Second
Street, Court Avenue and First Street.
(c)From west to east in the alley located in the block
bordered by Jefferson Street, Second Street, Green
Street and First Street.
(d)From east to west in the east-west alley located in
the block bordered by Jefferson Street, Second Avenue,
Court Avenue and Third Avenue.
(e) Mackensie Circle and Fifteenth Avenue for West bound
traffic shall only move on the northerly portion of
Mackensie Circle from the intersection of these two
streets.
(f) Mackensie Circle and Fifteenth Avenue for East bound
traffic shall only move on the southerly portion of
Mackensie Circle from the intersection of these two
streets.
(g) Madisyn Circle and Fifteenth Avenue for West bound
traffic shall only move on the northerly portion of Madisyn
Circle from the intersection of these two streets.
CHAPTER 6 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
426
(h) Madisyn Circle and Fifteenth Avenue for East bound
traffic shall only move on the southerly portion of Madisyn
Circle from the intersection of these two streets.
CHAPTER 7 PEDESTRIANS RIGHTS AND DUTIES
427
6.701 PROHIBITED CROSSING
6.702 PEDESTRIANS ON LEFT
6.703 PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO SIGNALS
6.701. PROHIBITED CROSSING. Pedestrians crossing a street in the
business district shall cross in the crosswalks only.
6.702. PEDESTRIANS ON LEFT. Where sidewalks are provided it
shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an
adjacent roadway. Where sidewalks are not provided, pedestrians shall
at all times when walking on or along a roadway, walk on the left side
of such roadway.
6.703. PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO SIGNALS. Pedestrians shall obey
traffic-control signals at intersections that are established by this
Title.
CHAPTER 7 PEDESTRIANS RIGHTS AND DUTIES
428
This Page Left Blank intentionally
CHAPTER 8 PARKING
429
6.801 PARKING CLOSE TO CURB
6.802 SIGNS OR MARKING INDICATING ANGLE PARKING
6.803 OBEDIENCE TO PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS
6.804 STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED
6.805 PAINTED CURBING AND ERECTION OF NO PARKING SIGNS
6.806 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES
6.807 PARKING-EXCESSIVE SIZE VEHICLES
6.808 PARKING PROHIBITED
6.809 HANDICAPPED PERSONS-PARKING
6.810 SNOW ORDINANCE
6.811 NO PARKING - ONE SIDE
6.812 PROHIBITED PARKING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
6.813 PROHIBITED PARKING ON FIRST STREET ALSO KNOWN
AS JOHN WAYNE DRIVE
6.814 ENFORCEMENT
6.801. PARKING CLOSE TO CURB. No person shall park a vehicle in
a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in
the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand
wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches of the curb or edge of
the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle
parking.
6.802. SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING. The Mayor, as
traffic conditions require, shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall cause those streets, or portions
thereof, to be marked or signs erected indicating angle parking.
6.803. OBEDIENCE TO PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS. Upon these
streets, or portions of streets, which have been signed or marked for
angle or parallel parking, no person shall park a motor vehicle other
than at an angle to or parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, as
indicated by the markings or signs; and, all persons shall park their
vehicles within the painted boundaries of said angle or parallel
parking space.
6.804. STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED. No person shall
stop or park a vehicle of any kind, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with Other traffic Or in compliance with the
directions of a peace Officer or traffic control device, in any
of the following places;
CHAPTER 8 PARKING
430
(a) In any public alley, unless the public alley has been
closed to through traffic by Resolution of the City Council
and the Mayor has directed under Municipal Code Sections
6.401 and 6.404 that public parking in that public alley be
authorized; and, except commercial carriers loading or
unloading cargo in the Downtown Commercial (DC) Zoning
District notwithstanding the provisions of Municipal Code
Section 6.808.
(b) In any private alley in such a manner that ingress or
egress of fire apparatus to or from such alley might be
blocked.
(c) On a sidewalk
(d) In front of a public or private driveway
(e) Within five feet of a fire hydrant
(f) On a crosswalk
(g) Within twenty feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance
to any fire station within seventy-five feet of said
entrance when properly sign posted.
(h) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing, or parking would
obstruct traffic.
(i) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.
(j) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or
parking.
CHAPTER 8 PARKING
431
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 8 PARKING
432
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 8 PARKING
433
6.805. PAINTED CURBING AND ERECTION OF NO PARKING SIGNS. The
Mayor, as traffic conditions require, may cause curbing to be painted
with yellow color or cause signs to be erected prohibiting parking,
prohibiting parking between designated hours, imposing a parking time
limit or prohibiting the parking of certain types of vehicles. When
curbings are so painted or signs so posted, it shall be unlawful for
the driver of any vehicle to park a vehicle in violation of the
restrictions on such signs or markings.
6.806. AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES. The City is hereby
authorized to remove, or have removed, a vehicle from a street, public
alley or highway to the nearest storage yard designated by the City
under the following circumstances:
(a) When a vehicle is upon a roadway and is disabled.
(b) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is
illegally parked.
In addition to the penalties hereinafter provided, the owner or driver
of any vehicle impounded for violation of any of the provisions of
this ordinance shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing
charges and storage.
6.807. PARKING-EXCESSIVE SIZE VEHICLES. No person shall park any
vehicle or trailer nor shall any owner of any vehicle or trailer cause
or allow such vehicle or trailer to be parked upon the streets and
alleys of the City for more than two hours if such vehicle is licensed
for a gross weight of seven (7) tons or more or if the trailer has a
total length of Twenty-five feet (25') or more.
No person shall angle park any vehicle that is either over twenty (20)
feet in length or licensed for a load over four (4) tons on the
following streets:
(1) Jefferson Street from First Avenue to First Street.
(2) Court Avenue from Second Avenue to Second Street.
(3) First Avenue from Jefferson Street to Washington Street.
(4) First Street from Jefferson Street to Court Avenue.
This section shall not be construed as suspending parking limitations
or restrictions which would otherwise be applicable under this Code.
6.808. PARKING PROHIBITED. No person shall park any vehicle or
trailer upon the streets and alleys of the City for a period of time
longer than 24 hours.
CHAPTER 8 PARKING
434
6.809. HANDICAP PERSONS PARKING. Spaces for the parking of motor
vehicles being used by the handicapped, either as operator or
passenger, shall be provided as required by Chapters 321L of the Code
of Iowa or as designated by the Mayor as traffic conditions require.
Such spaces must be plainly marked or posted as such and, when so
marked or posted, may only be used as hereinafter provided.
Only motor vehicles displaying a handicapped-parking permit approved
by the Iowa Department of Transportation may be parked in areas
designated for the handicapped. The use of such parking spaces, if
located on either public or private property, by a motor vehicle not
displaying such a handicapped parking permit; or, by a motor vehicle
displaying such a handicapped parking Permit but not being used by a
person in possession of a motor vehicle license with a handicapped
designation or a nonoperator's identification card with a handicapped
designation, other than a person issued a permit or being transported
in accordance with Iowa Code Section 321L.2, subsection 1, paragraph
"b"; or, by a motor vehicle in violation of Iowa Code Chapter 321L or
of the rules adopted by the Iowa Department of Transportation under
Iowa Code Section 321L.8, shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable
upon conviction by a fine of $100.00 for each violation. Violation of
this section which are admitted shall be charged and collected upon
notice of summons as hereinafter provided and no costs or other
charges, other than the fine, shall be assessed. Violation which are
not paid within 30 days of the date of the offense shall be deemed
denied and may be charged by the same summons before the Court the
same as other traffic violations under Iowa Code Chapter 805 and court
cost shall be assessed.
6.810. SNOW ORDINANCE. Except as to the area within the
downtown commercial (DC) zoning district, no persons shall park,
abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any city street, alley, or
city owned off-street parking during periods of snow or ice
accumulation unless the snow or ice accumulations have been removed or
plowed from the city street, alley or parking area and during any
period of time when city snow removal operations upon the city
streets, alleys and parking areas are in progress. In the area within
the downtown commercial (DC) zoning district, no person shall park,
abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public street, alley,
or city owned off-street parking area at any time between the hours of
1:00 A.M. until 5:00 A.M. daily.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this Code Section shall be subject
to being towed and impounded; and, their owners or drivers shall be
required to pay the reasonable cost of the towing and storage prior to
recovering the vehicle as provided by Section 6.806 of this Code.
CHAPTER 8 PARKING
435
No person shall at any time place, leave or deposit snow or ice on the
traveled portion of any city street or alley, except as to the area
within the downtown commercial (DC) zoning district.
Any person who violates this Code Section shall be subject to a fine
of $50.00 plus any court costs for each violation in the manner
provided by Section 6.814 of this Code. Under this Code Section each
calendar day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
6.811. NO PARKING-ONE SIDE. The Mayor, as traffic conditions
require, shall designate no parking zones by causing signs to be
erected on the South half of streets running generally in an East-West
direction within the residential districts and on the East half of
streets running generally in a North-South direction within the
residential districts. When such signs have been erected, no person
shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on the South half
of streets running generally in an East-West direction within the
residential districts and on the East half of streets running
generally in a North-South direction within the residential districts.
6.812. PROHIBITED PARKING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY. No
person shall drive, stop, or park in a vehicle onto or upon privately
or publicly owned property, or any area developed as an off-street
parking facility, contrary to the direction or consent of the owner,
lessee or person in charge of such property or facility. The City or
its designee pursuant to Section 6.806 of this Code may impound
vehicles when stopped or parked in violation of this section.
6.813. PROHIBITED PARKING ON FIRST STREET ALSO KNOWN AS JOHN
WAYNE DRIVE. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle at any
time on First Street also known as John Wayne Drive for either
southbound or northbound traffic from the alley between Green Street
and North Street North to the North four-way stop sign at the
intersection of Highways 169 and 92.
CHAPTER 8 PARKING
436
6.814. ENFORCEMENT. A police officer, or other parking
enforcement official authorized by the City, upon discovering a
vehicle parked or stopped in violation of any provision of this
Chapter, shall attach a written summons to such vehicle. The summons
shall contain the date and time of the violation, the vehicle license
number, location of the vehicle, and the number or name of the police
officer or parking enforcement official issuing the summons. The
owner or driver of such vehicle within thirty (30) days of the date
upon which the violation occurred shall pay to the City a fine of Ten
Dollars ($10.00) for all violations of this Chapter including Section
6.805, except for the snow route parking violations under Section
6.810 in which case the fine shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00) and for
the handicapped parking violations under Section 6.809 in which case
the fine shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). The payment of the
fine to the City within thirty (30) days of the date of violation
shall be deemed an admission of the violation and no other costs or
charges other than the fine shall be collected. Violations which are
not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the violation shall
be deemed denied and may be charged by the same summons before the
Court the same as other traffic violations under Iowa Code Chapter
805 and court costs shall be assessed. All fines shall be increased
by Five Dollars ($5.00) if not paid within thirty (30) days of the
date of the violation.
CHAPTER 8 PARKING
437
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 9 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
438
6.901 VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALK
6.902 CLINGING TO VEHICLES
6.903 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED
6.904 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION
6.905 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION
6.906 LOAD RESTRICTIONS UPON VEHICLES USING CERTAIN STREETS
6.907 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT
6.908 RECKLESS DRIVING
6.909 DRAG RACING
6.910 MOTORCYCLES, MOTORBIKES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS PROHIBITED
IN CEMETERIES
6.911 HUMAN POWERED WHEELED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC
STREETS AND DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
6.912 EXCESSIVE VEHICULAR NOISE PROHIBITED
6.901. VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALK. The driver of a
vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at an
established driveway access.
6.902. CLINGING TO VEHICLES. No person shall drive a motor
vehicle on the streets of this City unless all passengers of said
vehicle are inside said vehicle in the place intended for their
accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor
vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying
passengers. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, sled, or human powered wheeled vehicle shall attach the same
or themselves to any vehicle upon a roadway.
6.903. PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED. No person shall
park a vehicle upon the roadway for the principal purpose of (1)
displaying such vehicle for sale, (2) for washing, greasing, or
repairing such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an
emergency, (3) displaying advertising, (4) selling merchandise from
such vehicle except in a duly established market place or when so
authorized and licensed under the ordinances of this City, (5)
storage, or as junkage or dead storage for more than 24 hours.
6.904. DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION. No driver of
any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession. This provision shall not apply at
intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals
or police officers.
6.905. DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION. Each driver in a funeral or
other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the
roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is
practical and safe.
6.906. LOAD RESTRICTIONS UPON VEHICLES USING CERTAIN STREETS.
When signs were erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate
any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on
such signs at any time.
CHAPTER 9 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
439
6.907. PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Police Chief
shall, upon application in writing and good cause being shown
therefore, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant
to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or
weight or load exceeding the maximum specified by state law or this
Title over those streets named in the permit which are under the
jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is responsible for
maintenance.
CHAPTER 9 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
440
6.908. RECKLESS DRIVING. Any person who drives any vehicle in
such manner as to indicate either a willful or a wanton disregard for
the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.
6.909. DRAG RACING. No person shall engage in any motor vehicle
speed contest or exhibition of speed on any street or highway of this
City and no person shall aid or abet any motor vehicle speed contest
or speed exhibition on any street or highway of this City, except that
a passenger shall not be considered as aiding and abetting. Motor
vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed are defined as one or
more persons competing in speed in excess of the applicable speed
limit in vehicles on the public streets or highways.
6.910. MOTORCYCLE, MOTORBIKES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS PROHIBITED IN
CEMETERIES. No person shall operate a motorcycle, motorbike or motor
scooter within any public or private cemetery located within the city
limits of the City.
6.911. HUMAN POWERED WHEELED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC
STREETS AND DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. No person shall use or
operate a human-powered vehicle, except bicycles, upon the portion of
any public street traveled by motor vehicles within the City; and, no
person shall use or operate any human-powered wheeled vehicle upon or
along any sidewalk or alley within the Downtown Commercial (DC) Zoning
District of the City.
A peace officer or other designee of the City upon discovering a
violation of this section is authorized to issue a written summons to
the operator of such vehicle. The summons shall contain the date,
time and location of the violation; the identity of the vehicle
operator; and, the name or assigned number of the peace officer or
designee issuing the summons. Violations of this section which are
admitted by the offender shall be charged a fine of two dollars
($2.00) payable to the City Administrator or designee at City Hall
within seventy-two (72) hours of the time of violation. In the event
of an admitted violation, no costs or other charges shall be assessed
against the offender. All alleged violations for which summons are
issued shall be deemed denied unless the fine is paid to the City
Administrator or designee within seventy-two (72) hours of the time of
violation. Violations of this section which are denied shall be
charged and proceed before a court the same as other traffic
violations and court costs shall be assessed as provided in Iowa Code
Section 805.6, subsection 1, paragraph "a" for parking violation
cases.
Notwithstanding any other ordinance, or provisions thereof, these
violations may be prosecuted under the provisions of Iowa Code
Sections 805.6 to 805.13 or as any other traffic violation.
6.912. EXCESSIVE VEHICULAR NOISE PROHIBITED. No person shall
operate a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the City of
Winterset, Iowa so as to accelerate or decelerate the vehicle in such
a manner as to cause excessive noise from the friction of the tires of
the vehicle on a city street or alley or other hard surfaced areas
except when such acceleration or deceleration is reasonable necessary
to avoid a collision.
CHAPTER 9 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
441
This Page Left Blank intentionally
CHAPTER 9 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
442
This Page Left Blank intentionally
CHAPTER 9 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
443
This Page Left Blank intentionally
CHAPTER 10 PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE ON ARREST
444
6.1001 PENALTY
6.1002 ARREST AND NOTICE TO APPEAR
6.1003 CITATIONS PLACED ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE
6.1004 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING
6.1001. PENALTY. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this Title shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a simple misdemeanor
punishable as provided by law.
6.1002. ARREST AND NOTICE TO APPEAR. Whenever a peace officer
has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any
provision of this Title, such officer may either arrest such person or
issue a citation in lieu of arrest all in accordance with the
procedures provided in the Code of Iowa. The City or its designee is
authorized to use the uniform citation and complaint forms approved by
the Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety for any violations of this
Title.
6.1003. CITATIONS PLACED ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE. Whenever
any motor vehicle without driver is parked or stopped in violation of
this Title, the City or its designee shall attach a written citation
to such vehicle in a conspicuous place and the driver of such vehicle
shall be held to appear at the time and place designated in the
citation.
6.1004. PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any
proceeding charging a parking violation, a prima facie presumption
that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which such
violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
(a) The particular vehicle described in the complaint or citation
was parked in violation of this Title; and,
(b) The defendant named in the complaint or citation was the
registered owner at the time in question.
CHAPTER 10 PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE ON ARREST
445
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
CHAPTER 10 PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE ON ARREST
446
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
447
APPENDIX A
EFFECTIVE ORDINANCES VACATING STREETS AND ALLEYS
ORDINANCE #33 An ordinance vacating a part of East Summit Street along
part of the north side of Block 2 of Kirkwood Addition to
the City of Winterset, Iowa, and the alley running north
and south through Block 2 of Kirkwood Addition to the City
of Winterset, Iowa, and providing for conveyance to the
State of Iowa of the real estate vacated.
ORDINANCE #63 An ordinance vacating West High Street between the west
line of South First Avenue and the east line of South
Second Avenue in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #66 An ordinance vacating the part of the alley running east
and west through Block Two (2) of Wilsey's Addition to the
City of Winterset, Iowa, which lies between Lots 3 and 4 on
the north side thereof, and Lots 5 and 6 on the south side
thereof.
ORDINANCE #70 An ordinance vacating the part of East High Street between
the west line of South Ninth Street and the east line of
South Eighth Street in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #105 An ordinance vacating the part of East Adair Street between
Lot 8 in Block 2 and Lot 2 in Block 3 of Kirkwood's
Addition, and the part of Arnold Street between Lots 1 and
2 in Block 2 and Lots 1 and 2 in Block 3 of Jenkins
Addition in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #107 An ordinance vacating the part of Arnold Street which lies
between Lots 3, 4 and 5 in Block 2, and Lots 3, 4 and 5 in
Block 3 of Jenkins Addition in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #109 An ordinance vacating the part of East Summit Street which
lies between the east line of South Fourth Street and the
east line of South Fifth Street, including the intersection
of East Summit Street and South Fifth Street, in the City
of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #116 An ordinance vacating the alley running east and west
through Block 2 of Pitzer and Knight's Addition in the City
of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #121 An ordinance vacating the alley running north and south in
Block 17 of West Addition, in the City of Winterset, Iowa,
between Lots 5, 6 and 7 on the west side of said alley and
Lots 10, 9 and 8 on the east side of said alley, in said
block.
448
ORDINANCE #124 An ordinance vacating the alley running north and south in
Block 6 of West Addition in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #155 An ordinance vacating the alley running north and south
through Block 2 of Adkison's Addition to the Town of
Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #176 An ordinance vacating Arnold Street running between Third
and Fourth Avenues between Blocks Two and Three of Jenkins
Addition to the Town of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #188 An ordinance vacating the east-west alley running between
Ninth and Tenth Streets in Block Four (4) of Danforth's
Second Addition to Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #193 An ordinance vacating the East 254 feet of the east-west
street extending between First Street and First Avenue
across the South 50 feet of the real estate described as
Commencing at a point 33 feet West and 276 feet North of
the Southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter (1/4) of the
Northeast Quarter (1/4) of Section 36, in Township 76
North, Range 28 West of the 5th P. M. and running thence
West 314 feet, thence North 384 feet, thence East 314 feet,
thence South 384 feet, to the point of beginning.
ORDINANCE #194 An ordinance vacating Arnold Street running between Second
Avenue and Third Avenue and between Blocks One (1) and Four
(4) of Jenkins Addition to the Town of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #209 An ordinance vacating a portion of First Avenue and
vacating the north-south alley in Block Three (3) and the
north-south alley in Block Four (4) of Hornback and
Bevington's Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #215 An ordinance vacating the east-west alley in Block Three of
Wilsey's Addition to the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #241 An ordinance vacating Adair Street between Lot One (1) in
Block Four (4) and Lot Eight (8) in Block One (1) of
Kirkwood's Addition to the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #280 An ordinance vacating alley located in Block Five (5) of
the West Addition to the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #282 An ordinance vacating alley located in Block Two (2) of
Hornback and Bevington Addition to the City of Winterset,
Iowa.
449
ORDINANCE #385 The East-West alley located in Block Ten (10) of Laughridge
& Cassiday's to the City of Winterset, Madison County,
Iowa, is hereby vacated.
450
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
451
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
452
APPENDIX B
EFFECTIVE ORDINANCES ESTABLISHING AND CHANGING STREET,
ALLEY AND SIDEWALK GRADES
CHAPTER XVIII - An ordinance in relation to grades on streets, avenues,
highways, and alleys in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #131 An ordinance to establish or re-establish the curb grades
on certain streets and avenues within the city of
Winterset, Iowa, and repealing all ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict herewith.
ORDINANCE #133 An ordinance to establish or re-establish the curb grades
on certain streets and avenues within the city of
Winterset, Iowa, and repealing all ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict herewith.
ORDINANCE #156 An ordinance establishing a street grade on West Jefferson
Street, West from 8th Avenue, in the city of Winterset,
Iowa.
ORDINANCE #157 An ordinance repealing Section 50 of Chapter XVIII of the
Revised Ordinances of the city of Winterset, Iowa, of 1931,
and establishing a street grade on South Fourth Avenue,
south from Summit Street, in the city of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #164 An ordinance in relation to grades on certain streets and
avenues in the city of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #167 An ordinance establishing certain street grades.
ORDINANCE #170 An ordinance in relation to grades on certain streets and
avenues in the city of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #172 An ordinance in relation to grades on a certain portion of
West Buchanan Street in the city of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #174 An ordinance in relation to grades on certain streets and
avenues in the city of Winterset.
ORDINANCE #192 Establishing permanent grades on portions of the following
designated streets and avenues in the city of Winterset,
Iowa.
ORDINANCE #201 An ordinance repealing Ordinance No. 200 of the Ordinances
of the City of Winterset, Iowa, and establishing the datum
plane and bench marks from which streets and sidewalks
shall be measured.
453
ORDINANCE #210 An ordinance establishing permanent grades on portions of
the following designated streets and avenues in the City of
Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #233 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
alleys in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #246 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #279 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #284 An ordinance establishing grades on W. Benton Street
extension in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #312 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #322 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #341 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #371 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #404 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
Avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #450 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
Avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #482 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
Avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #501 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
Avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #518 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
Avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #536 An ordinance establishing grades on certain streets and
Avenues in the City of Winterset, Iowa.
454
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
455
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
456
APPENDIX C
EFFECTIVE MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE #166 An ordinance fixing and establishing controlled access
facilities and regulation of traffic on the Primary Road
NO. Iowa 92 within the City of Winterset, Iowa, described
as follows: From the north jct. U. S. 169 and Iowa 92
(station 2+02); thence north and east to the north
corporation line (station 21+07.1); thence along the north
corporation line to the east corporation line (station
40+08). Also from the west corporation line (station
617+07) thence east 1893 ft. to station (636+00), a point
near Fourth Avenue.
Regulating ingress or egress from and across such
controlled-access facilities to or from abutting land,
designating points at which access may be permitted,
regulating traffic, and providing penalties for the
violations thereof.
ORDINANCE #205 An ordinance providing for the issuance of sewer
construction bonds.
ORDINANCE #216 An ordinance establishing connection fees for connection to
the trunk sanitary sewer main extending west on the north
side of Summit from Seventh Avenue, thence north to Tenth
Avenue.
457
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
458
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
459
APPENDIX D
EFFECTIVE ORDINANCES RECLASSIFYING LAND
ORDINANCE #408 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot Two (2) of Block Thirty-one
(31) of the Original Town of Winterset, from R-2
Residential to Commercial land use Zoning District.
ORDINANCE #415 An Ordinance Reclassifying A parcel of land located in the
Southwest Quarter (¼) of the Southeast Quarter (¼) of
Section Thirty-one (31), Township Seventy-six (76) North,
Range Twenty-seven (27) West of the 5th Principal Meridian,
Madison County, Iowa, more particularly described as
follows:
Commencing at the South Quarter Corner of Section Thirtyone
(31), Township Seventy-six (76) North, Range Twentyseven
(27) West of the 5th P.M., Madison County, Iowa;
thence, along the West line of the Southeast Quarter (¼) of
said Section Thirty-one (31), North 00°00'00" 481.96 feet
to the Point of Beginning; thence, continuing along said
West line, North 00°00'00" 633.95 feet; thence North
89°55'23" East 346.79 feet; thence South 02°31'14" East
637.35 feet; thence North 89°38'45" West 374.82 feet to the
Point of Beginning. Said parcel of land contains 5.262
acres.
A parcel of land located in the Southwest Quarter (¼) of
the Southeast Quarter (¼) of Section Thirty-one (31),
Township Seventy-six (76) North, Range Twenty-seven (27)
West of the 5th Principal Meridian and in the Northwest
Quarter (¼) of the Northeast Quarter (¼) of Section Six
(6), Township Seventy-five (75) North, Range Twenty-seven
(27) West of the 5th Principal Meridian, all in Madison
County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the South Quarter Corner of Section Thirty-one
(31), Township Seventy-six (76) North, Range Twenty-seven
(27) West of the 5th P.M., Madison County, Iowa; thence,
along the West line of the Southeast Quarter (¼) of said
Section Thirty-one (31), North 00°00'00" 481.96 feet;
thence South 89°38'45" East 257.81 feet; thence South
09°29'59" West 902.63 feet; thence South 90°00'00" West
118.44 feet to the West line of the Northeast Quarter (¼)
of Section Six (6), Township Seventy-five (75) North, Range
Twenty-seven (27) West; thence, along said West line, North
01°20'34" East 410.00 feet to the Point of Beginning. Said
parcel of land contains 3.796 acres, from A-Agriculture to
C-Commercial land use Zoning District.
460
ORDINANCE #416 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots Six (6), Seven (7) and
Eight (8) in Block Nine (9) of the Original Town of
Winterset, Madison County, Iowa, from C-Commercial to R-3
Residential land use Zoning District.
ORDINANCE #420 An Ordinance Reclassifying Land Use from the C-Commercial
Zoning District to the I-Industrial Zoning District as
follows:
Parcel "C" located in the Northeast Fractional Quarter (NE
Fr. ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼) of Section Thirty-one
(31), Township Seventy-six (76) North, Range Twenty-seven
(27) West of the 5th of P.M., City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the Southwest Corner of Lot Ten (10), Block
Two (2) of Watts and Corkrean Addition, City of Winterset,
Madison County, Iowa; thence, along the South line of the
Northeast Fractional Quarter (NE Fr. ¼) of the Northwest
Quarter (NW¼) of Section Thirty-one (31), Township Seventysix
(76) North, Range Twenty-seven (27) West of the 5th
P.M., North 88°37'00" West 241.50 feet; thence North
00°31'02" East 290.41 feet; thence South 88°37'00" East
241.95 feet to the Northwest corner of said Lot Ten (10);
thence South 00°36'24" West 290.40 feet to the Point of
beginning. Said Parcel "C" contains 1.611 acres.
ORDINANCE #459 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots Two (2), Three (3) and Four
(4) in Block Sixteen (16) of the Original Town of
Winterset, Madison County, Iowa
ORDINANCE #463 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots 1 and 3 of the Lanny Wenck
Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa,
plus the North 60 feet of a parcel of land commencing at
the Southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of the
Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of Section 36, Township 76 North,
Range 28 West of the 5th PM, Madison County, Iowa, thence
North 89°33'00" West 347 feet; thence North 00°00'00" 132
feet to the point of beginning: thence North 89°33'00" West
302.8 feet; thence North 01°44'36" West 292.88 fet; thence
South 89°33'00" East 312.05 feet; thence South 00°00'00" to
the point of beginning.
461
ORDINANCE #464 The South Half (½) of the Northwest Quarter (1/4) of the
Northwest Quarter (1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (1/4) of
Section Thirty six (36), Township Seventy-six (76) North,
Range Twenty-eight (28) West of the 5th P.M., Madison
County, Iowa, except Lot One (1) of Northwest Development
Plat-2, said Lot One (1) more particularly described as:
Commencing at the North Quarter Corner of Section
Thirty-six (36), Township Seventy-six (76) North, Range
Twenty-eight (28) West of the 5th P.M., Madison County,
Iowa; thence South 00°00'00" 394.06 feet along the West
line of the Northeast Quarter (1/4) of said Section
Thirty-six (36); thence South 90°00'00" East 50.00 feet to
the point of Beginning; thence South 00°00'00" 270.00 feet,
thence South 89°43'03" East 300.00 feet along the North
line of the Northwest Development Plat I; thence North
00°00'00" 270.00 feet; thence North 89°43'03" West 300.00
feet to Point of Beginning, said excepted parcel of land
containing 80,999 square feet.
ORDINANCE #467 An Ordinance reclassifying the following described real
estate to R-2 Residential Zoning District, to-wit: East 132
feet of the North 135 feet of Lot 20 of the Original Out
Lots South Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #474 An Ordinance reclassifying Block Four (4) of the Original
Town of Winterset, Madison County, from I-Industrial Zoning
Classification to C-Commercial Zoning District
Classification.
ORDINANCE #475 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots One (1), Two (2), Three
(3), Four (4) and Five (5) of Block Nine (9) of the
Original Town of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa from C
Commercial Zoning Classification to R-2 Residential Zoning
District.
AND
An Ordinance reclassifying Lots Five (5), Six (6), Seven
(7), and Eight (8) of Block Five (5) of the Original Town
of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa from C Commercial Zoning
Classification to the R-2 Residential Zoning District.
ORDINANCE #476 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots One (1)and Two(2) of Block
Twenty-one (21) of Pitzer and Knight Addition to the City
of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa;
ORDINANCE #478 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot Four (4) of Block Eleven
(ll) of the Laughridge and Cassiday's Addition to the Town
of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa;
462
ORDINANCE #479 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot Three (3), Four (4), Five
(5) and the West Half (W½) of Lot Six (6)of Block Ten (l0)
of the Laughridge and Cassiday's Addition to the Town of
Winterset, Madison County, Iowa;
ORDINANCE #480 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot Two (2) of the Replat of
Corkrean & Watts Addition Plat No. 1, an Addition to the
City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa;
ORDINANCE #484 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots 1 & 2, Block 1, Kellison an
Keeling Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison County,
Iowa
ORDINANCE #486 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots 4 & 5 in Block 3, and the
S. 36 feet of Lots 4 & 5 in Block 2, Jenkins Addition to
the City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa; and a tract
commencing at the Southwest corner of said Lot 5 in Block 2
of Jenkins Addition, thence South 60 feet, thence East 132
feet, thence North 60 feet to the Southeast corner of said
Lot 4, thence West 132 feet to the point of beginning.
(Area formerly known as Arnold Street between Lots 4 & 5 in
Block 2, and Lots 4 & 5 in Block 3, Jenkins Addition to the
City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.)
ORDINANCE #487 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot Five (5) and the West
Sixteen (16) feet of Lot Six (6) in Block Twenty-six (26)
of the Original Town Plat of Winterset, Madison County,
Iowa.
ORDINANCE #500 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot Six (6) and
Seven (7) of Block Four (4) of the Guiberson’s
Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #502 An Ordinance reclassifying South Half (S2) of the Southwest
Quarter (SW3) of the Southwest Quarter (SW3); and, the
South Half (S2) of the Southeast Quarter (SE3) of the
Southwest Quarter (SW3), except the East 330 feet thereof;
in Section 36, Township 76 North, Range 28 West of the 5th
P.M., City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
AND:
A parcel of land described as commencing at the
Southeast corner of Section 35, Township 76 North,
Range 28 West of the 5th P.M., City of Winterset,
Madison County, Iowa; thence North 0107'48" West 60
feet along the East line of said Section 35 to the
point of beginning; thence West 264.68 feet along the
North right of way line of old Iowa Highway No. 92 to
a property line fence recorded as being 270 feet West
of the East line of said Section 35; thence North
01103'34" West 489 feet; thence South 88157'57" East
272.68 feet to the East line of said Section 35;
thence South 0107'48" East 484 feet to the point of
beginning.
463
ORDINANCE #508 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot Three (3) of Block One
(1) of the Danforth First Addition to the Town of
Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #513 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots Six (6) of C & C Allen’s
Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #520 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot Two (2) of Plat No. 3
of the Helen McCall Huntoon Addition to the City of
Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #521 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots Three (3), Four (4),
Five (5) and Six (6) of Block Nineteen (19) of the
Original Town of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #522 An Ordinance reclassifying A parcel of land in the
North Half of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast
Quarter of Section 1, Township 75 North, Range 28
West of the 5th P.M., City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the Northeast Corner of the Northwest
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 1,
Township 75 North, Range 28 West of the 5th P.M.,
City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa thence South
00º13'44" West 655.10 feet along the East line of
said Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter to
the Point of Beginning; thence North 89º26'17" West
546.40 feet along the South line of the North Half of
said Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter;
thence North 00º09'45" West 330.00 feet; thence South
89º26'25" East 548.66 feet to the East line of said
Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter; thence
South 00º13'44" West 330.00 feet to the Point of
Beginning. Said parcel is made up of a Lot, which
contains 3.791 acres and South 4th Avenue
right-of-way, which contains 0.357 Acres.
ORDINANCE #524 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots One (1), Two (2),
Three (3) and Four (4) of Block One (1) of Birchwood
Estates Plat No. 1 Addition to the City of Winterset,
Madison County, Iowa.
And:
Lot Five (5) of Block One (1) and Lots One (1), Two
(2) and Four (4) of Block Six (6) of Birchwood
Estates Plat No. 1 Addition to the City of Winterset,
Madison County, Iowa.
And:
Lot Ten (10) of Block Five (5) and Lots Three (3) and
Five (5) of Block Six (6) of Birchwood Estates Plat
No. 1 Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa.
464
ORDINANCE #526 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot 15 of the C & C Allen
Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison County,
Iowa.
ORDINANCE #531 An Ordinance reclassifying Lots Five (5), Six (6), Seven
(7) and Eight (8) of Block Thirty-two (32) in the Original
Town of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa; and, Lots One (1),
Two (2), Three (3), Four (4), Five (5), Six (6), Seven (7)
and Eight (8) of Block Three (3) in Bowlsby’s Addition to
the City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #534 An Ordinance reclassifying The West 44 rods in width of the
Northeast Fractional Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter
(¼) of Section Six (6), in Township Seventy-five (75)
North, Range Twenty-Seven (27) West of the 5th P.M, Madison
County, Iowa, EXCEPTING there from a tract described as
follows: Commencing at the Southwest Corner of said
Northeast Fractional Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter
(¼), running thence North 44 rods, thence East 8 rods,
thence South 44 rods, thence West 8 rods to the place of
beginning; and ALSO EXCEPTING a strip 30 feet in width
along the entire North line of said excepted tract; AND
EXCEPT Parcel “A” located in the West 44 rods of the
Northeast Fractional Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter
(¼) of said Section Six (6) containing 2.00 acres, as shown
in Plat of Survey filed Book 2, Page 388 on February 16,
1999, in the Office of the Recorder of Madison County,
Iowa.
ORDINANCE #537 An Ordinance reclassifying The West 900 feet in width of
the South Half (½) of the Southeast Quarter (¼) of the
Southeast Quarter (¼) and the Southeast triangular half of
the Southeast Quarter (¼) of the Southwest Quarter (¼) of
the Southeast Quarter (¼) of Section Eighteen (18), and the
South east Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) and
East half (½) of the Southeast Quarter (¼) of the Southwest
Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) and West Half (½)
of the Northeast Quarter (¼) of the Southwest Quarter (¼)
and East Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the
Southwest Quarter (¼) and Northeast Quarter (¼) of the
Southwest Quarter (¼) of the Southwest Quarter (¼) and
Northwest triangular half of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of
the Southeast Quarter (¼) of the Southwest Quarter (¼) and
North 3/4 of the East Half (½) of the Northeast Quarter (¼)
and East Half (½) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the
Northeast Quarter (¼) and East Half (½) of the Southwest
Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the Northeast
Quarter (¼) and North Half (½) of The Southwest Quarter (¼)
of the Northeast Quarter (¼) and Southwest Quarter (¼) of
the Southwest Quarter (¼) of the Northeast Quarter (¼) and
Northwest triangular half of the Southeast Quarter (¼) of
the Southwest Quarter (¼) of the Northeast Quarter (¼), and
a tract commencing at the Northeast corner of the South
Half (½) of the Southeast Quarter (¼) of the Northeast
Quarter (¼), thence West 500 feet, thence Southeast to a
point 100 feet South of the Southeast corner of said
Northeast Quarter (¼), thence North to the point of
beginning, of Section Nineteen (19), and all that part of
the South Half (½) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the
Southwest Quarter (¼) of Section Twenty (20) lying
Northerly and Westerly of the center line of the existing
465
highway, containing 1.78 acres, more or less, and more
particularly described as follows: Beginning at the
Northwest corner of the South Half (½) of the Northwest
Quarter (¼) of the Southwest Quarter (¼) of said Section
Twenty (20), thence Easterly 568.0 feet along the Northerly
line of the South Half (½) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of
the Southwest Quarter (¼) of said Section Twenty (20) to a
point on the center line of the existing highway, thence at
an angle of 116º - 53’ to the right from the line last
described a distance of 60.6 feet to a point on the center
line of said highway, thence at an angle of 26º -49’ to the
right from the line last described a distance of 81.3 feet
to a point on the center line of said highway, thence at an
angle of 22º -52’ to the right from the line last described
a distance of 149.8 feet to a point on the center line of
said highway, thence at an angle of 4º -05’ to the right
from the line last described a distance of 333.0 feet to a
point on the center line of said highway which point is
also on the Westerly line of said Section Twenty (20),
thence Northerly a distance of 191.9 feet along the
Westerly line of said Section Twenty (20)to the place of
beginning, and a tract of land containing approximately
3.96 acres, more or less, being described as all that part
of the East half (½) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the
Northwest Quarter (¼) of the Southwest Quarter (¼) of said
Section Twenty (20), lying North and West of the existing
road, as now established, except a triangular shaped parcel
of land in the Northeast corner of said East Half (½) of
the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of
Southwest Quarter (¼) of said Section Twenty (20),
described as follows: beginning at the Northeast corner of
the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of
the Southwest Quarter (¼) of said Section Twenty (20) ,
thence along the East and West center line of said Section
Twenty (20) Westerly for a distance of 183.5 feet, thence
Southeasterly for a distance of 394.9 feet, to the East
line of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter
(¼) of the South west Quarter (¼) of said Section Twenty
(20), thence Northerly for a distance of 352.0 feet along
said East line to the point of beginning, and the West 800
feet in width of the North Half (½) of the Northwest
Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) and West Half (½)
of the Southwest Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼)
of the Northwest Quarter (¼) and West Quarter (¼) of the
Southwest Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) and the
West Half (½) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the Northwest
Quarter (¼) of the Southwest Quarter (¼) of said Section
Twenty (20), all in Township Seventy-six (76) North Range
Twenty-seven (27) West of the 5th P.M., Madison County,
Iowa.
ORDINANCE #538 An Ordinance reclassifying The Southeast Quarter (¼) of
Section 18 excepting there from the Southeast Half (½) of
the Southeast Quarter (¼) of the Southwest Quarter (¼) of
466
said Southeast Quarter (¼) and the West 900 feet of the
South Half (½) of the Southeast Quarter (¼) of said
Southeast Quarter (¼); AND the Northwest Quarter (¼) of the
Northwest Quarter (¼) of the Northeast Quarter (¼) and the
West Half (½) of the Southwest Quarter (¼) of the Northwest
Quarter (¼) of the Northeast Quarter (¼) of Section 19: ALL
in Township Seventy-six (76) North, Range Twenty-seven (27)
West of the 5th P.M., Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #542 An Ordinance reclassifying East Half (E½) of Lot 7 and Lot
8, Block 33 of Original Town, City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #546 An Ordinance reclassifying West 108.915 feet of Lot 9 of
Lindsey’s Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa, except the north 6 feet thereof.
ORDINANCE #551 An Ordinance reclassifying All that part of Northwest
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section Thirty-one
(31), Township Seventy-six (76) North, Range Twenty-seven
(27, West of the 5th P.M., City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa, lying North of the public highway running
East and West through said forty-acre tract and connecting
with Court Avenue in Winterset, Iowa, and South of the
right-of-way of the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railway
Company (excepting there from a tract 30 feet in width off
of the West side thereof and a tract 550 feet in width off
of the East side thereof ) and excepting from the above
described tract 175 feet in length from East to West and
100 feet in width from North to South lying in the
Northwest corner thereof, and also excepting a tract
described as follows: Commencing at a point 10 feet South
of the point of intersection of the South line of Jefferson
Street in Winterset, Iowa, extended East, with the west
line of said Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter,
running thence East 8 rods, thence North 10 rods, thence
West 8 rods thence South 10 rods to the place of beginning,
subject to easement for railroad right-of-way purposes and
for use as railroad right-of-way in the following described
tract, to-wit: beginning at a point 550 feet West of and
198 feet South of the Northeast corner of the West Half of
the Southeast Quarter of said Section Thirty-one (31),
thence West 150 feet, thence Southeasterly 212.14 feet,
more or less, the West line of the East 550 feet of the
West half of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 31,
thence North 150 feet to the place of beginning;
And also excepting the East 233 feet of the entire primary
tract above described;
And also excepting the following described tract; Beginning
at a point 298.0 feet South of the Northwest corner of the
Southeast Quarter of said Section Thirty-one (31), thence
East 113.0 feet, thence South 281.25 feet, thence West
113.0 feet, thence North 281,25 feet to the point of
beginning, and continuing 0.54 acres, more or less,
exclusive and excepting there from a tract 30.0 feet in
width off of the West side thereof for road purposes;
And also excepting the following described tract;
Commencing at the northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter
of said Section Thirty-one (31), thence on an assumed
bearing of North 90°00’00” East along the North line of
467
said Southeast Quarter 232.27 feet; thence South 00°17’16”
East 198.00 feet to the southerly line of the former rightof-
way of the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad and
the point of beginning; thence continuing South 00°17’16”
East 858.38 feet to the centerline of the existing Madison
County highway; thence North 89°44’17” East along the
centerline of the existing Madison County highway 281.58
feet; thence North 00°09’49” West 857.08 feet to the
southerly line of said former railroad right-of-way; thence
North 90°00’00” West 283.44 feet along said former right of
way line to the point of beginning and containing 5.56
acres more or less, including 0.36 acres of highway rightof-
way over the southerly 55.00 feet thereof;
ORDINANCE #553 An Ordinance reclassifying A portion of the Northwest
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter and the Northeast Quarter
of the Southwest Quarter all in Section 1, Township 75
North, Range 28 West of the 5th P.M., City of Winterset,
Madison County, Iowa more particularly described as
follows:
Commencing at the Northeast Corner of the Northwest Quarter
of the Southeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 75 North,
Range 28 West of the 5th P.M., City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa thence South 00°26’22” West 324.97 feet along
the East line of said Northwest Quarter of the Southeast
Quarter; thence North 89°18’13” West 47.28 feet to a point
on the West right-of-way of 4th Avenue which is the Point of
Beginning; thence North 89°18’13” West 500.95 feet; thence
South 00°08’19” West 329.46 feet; thence North 89°11’25”
West 772.35 feet to a point on the West line of the
Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of said Section
1; thence North 00°15’29” East 194.49 feet along said West
line; thence North 88°49’02” West 153.22 feet; thence North
00°08’09” East 140.00 feet; thence North 88°49’02” West
10.00 feet; thence North 00°08’09” East 66.00 feet; thence
South 88°52’34” East 934.32 feet; thence South 89°11’33”
East 501.49 feet to a point on the West right-of-way line
of 4th Avenue; thence South 00°11’57” East 66.00 feet to the
Point of Beginning containing 8.567 acres.
ORDINANCE #560 An Ordinance reclassifying the South Quarter Corner of
Section 25, Township 76 North, Range 28 West of the 5th
P.M., City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa thence North
00°02’51” East 140.04 feet along the West line of the
Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section
25 to the Point of Beginning which is at the North right
468
-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 169/Iowa Highway No. 92;
thence continuing North 00°02’51” East 399.66 feet; thence
South 89°09’41” East 1319.90 feet to a point on the East
line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter;
thence South 00°08’28” West 399.75 feet along said East
line to a point on the North right-of-way line of U.S.
Highway No. 169/Iowa Highway No. 92; thence North 88°29’54”
West 416.63 feet along said North right-of-way line; thence
North 89°27’41” West 902.66 feet to the Point of Beginning
containing 12.03 acres.
ORDINANCE #567 An Ordinance reclassifying Lot 2 and Lot B of Plat 3,
Nelson Acres Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison
County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #574 An Ordinance reclassifying The land use classification of
the following described real estate is hereby changed from
the C-Commercial Zoning District to the I-Industrial Zoning
District, to-wit:
The East Half (E½) of Lot 4 of Helen McCall Huntoon
Addition Plat 1, City of Winterset, Madison County,
Iowa.
ORDINANCE #577 An Ordinance reclassifying the land use classification of
the following described real estate is hereby changed to
the TD-1 Residential-Commercial Zoning District, for
property located at 804 N. 1st Street and more particularly
described as:
Commencing at a point 33 feet west of the Southeast corner
of the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of the Northeast Quarter
(NE ¼) of Section Thirty-six (36), in Township Seventy-six
(76) North, Range Twenty-eight (28) West of the 5th P.M.,
Madison County, Iowa, and running thence North 132 feet;
thence West 132 feet; thence South 132 feet; thence East
132 feet to the place of beginning.
ORDINANCE #579 An Ordinance reclassifying the land use classification of
the following described real estate is hereby changed to
the R-2 Residential Zoning District, for property legally
described as: Lot 2 of Block 6, Birchwood Estates Plat No.
1, City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #583 An Ordinance reclassifying the land use classification of
the following described real estate is hereby changed to
the DC–Downtown Commercial Zoning District for real estate
legally described as:
Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 & 8 of Block 30, Original Town of the
City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #587 An Ordinance reclassifying the land use classification of
the following described real estate is hereby changed to
the R-2 Residential Zoning District for property located at
601 S. 7th Street and 623 S. 7th Street, and more
particularly described as:
Lot 1 & Lot 2 of Peterson Subdivision, City of Winterset,
Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #590 An Ordinance reclassifying the land use classification of
the following described real estate is hereby changed to
the I-Industrial Zoning District for property described as:
South 625 feet of Lot 15 of C & C Allen’s Addition to the
City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
469
ORDINANCE #592 An Ordinance reclassifying the land use classification of
the following described real estate is hereby changed to
the R-3 Multi-Family Residential District for property
described as: Lot 4, Block 6, Birchwood Addition to the
City of Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #595 An Ordinance reclassifying the land use classification is
hereby changed to the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zoning
District for the real estate legally described as: Lot 4,
Block 6, Birchwood Estates Plat 1, City of Winterset,
Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #598 An Ordinance reclassifying the land use classification of
the following described real estate is hereby changed from
the A-Agriculture Zoning District to the PUD Planned Unit
Development Zoning District, to-wit:
A PART OF THE SOUTHWEST QUARTER OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER OF
SECTION 25, TOWNSHIP 76 NORTH, RANGE 28 WEST OF THE FIFTH
PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN IN THE CITY OF WINTERSET, MADISON
COUNTY, IOWA AND MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
BEGINNING AT THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF NORTH STONE VILLAGE
PLAT 3, AN OFFICIAL PLAT; THENCE NORTH 89°10'11" WEST,
33.00 FEET TO THE WEST LINE OF SAID SOUTHWEST QUARTER OF
THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER; THENCE NORTH 00°03'17" EAST ALONG
SAID WEST LINE, 244.57 FEET TO THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF
PARCEL ‘F’ AS SHOWN ON THE PLAT OF SURVEY RECORDED IN BOOK
2005 PAGE 4170; THENCE SOUTH 89°44'22" EAST ALONG THE SOUTH
LINE OF SAID PARCEL ’F’, 229.89 FEET TO THE SOUTHEAST
CORNER OF SAID PARCEL ‘F’; THENCE NORTH 00°33'19" EAST
ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID PARCEL ’F’ AND THE NORTHERLY
EXTENSION THEREOF, 531.89 FEET TO THE NORTH LINE OF SAID
SOUTHWEST QUARTER OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER; THENCE SOUTH
89°42'33" EAST ALONG SAID NORTH LINE, 425.99 FEET; THENCE
SOUTH 00°16'53" WEST, 124.84 FEET; THENCE SOUTH 89°43'07"
EAST, 106.82 FEET; THENCE SOUTH 00°16'53" WEST, 50.00 FEET;
THENCE SOUTHWESTERLY ALONG A CURVE CONCAVE SOUTHEASTERLY
WHOSE RADIUS IS 25.00 FEET, WHOSE ARC LENGTH IS 39.03 FEET
AND WHOSE CHORD BEARS SOUTH 45°33'20" WEST, 35.19 FEET;
THENCE SOUTH 00°49'47" WEST, 583.92 FEET TO THE NORTHEAST
CORNER OF STREET LOT ‘B’, NORTH STONE VILLAGE PLAT 1, AN
OFFICIAL PLAT; THENCE NORTH 89°10'11" WEST ALONG THE NORTH
LINE OF SAID STREET LOT ‘B’ AND THE NORTH LINE OF NORTH
STONE VILLAGE PLAT 3, AN OFFICIAL PLAT, 700.72 FEET TO THE
POINT OF BEGINNING AND CONTAINING 10.19 ACRES (443,885
SQUARE FEET).
ORDINANCE #599 An Ordinance reclassifying The zoning classification
of the following described real estate is hereby
changed from the TD-1 Residential-Commercial
Transition District to the C-Commercial District, towit:
470
The South 47? feet of Lot 1, Lot 2 and Lot 3 of Block
20 of the Pitzer & Knight Addition to the Town of
Winterset, Madison County, Iowa.
And
The zoning classification of the following described
real estate is hereby changed from the R-2 Residential
District to the C-Commercial District, to-wit:
Lot 6 and the South 47? feet of Lot 5 of Block 20 of
the Pitzer & Knight Addition to the Town of Winterset,
Madison County, Iowa.
ORDINANCE #600 An Ordinance reclassifying The zoning classification
of the following described real estate is hereby
changed from A-Agricultural District to the R-2
Residential District for property legally described
as: Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Stover Addition Plat 1, an
Addition to the City of Winterset, Madison County
Iowa.
ORDINANCE #620 An Ordinance reclassifying the zoning classification of the
following described real estate is hereby changed from CCommercial
District to the TD-1 Residential-Commercial
Transition District for property legally described as: A
tract of land commencing at a point 231 feet West of the
Southeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter (¼) of the
Northeast Quarter (¼) of Section 36, Township 76 North,
Range 28 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Madison County
Iowa, and running thence North 132 feet, then West 66 feet,
thence South 66 feet, thence East 66 feet to a point of
beginning.
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
471
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
472
This Page Left Blank Intentionally
473
This Page Left Blank Intentionally