6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 1/687
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Prepared by: L. Twedt, West Des Moines Development Services, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265, 515-222-3620
When Recorded, Return to: City Clerk, City of West Des Moines, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265-0320
ORDINANCE NO. 2333
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA 2014 BY AMENDINGTITLE 9 (ZONING), TO ALLOW FOR MULTI-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL USE AND BUILDINGS WITHIN THE PROFESSIONAL COMMERCE PARK (PCP) ZONING DISTRICT
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
Section 1. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 3 (General Zoning Provisions), Section 7 (Yards ) Subsection A is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted strikethrough text and adding the bolded
italicized text:
9-3-7: YARDS:
A. Front Yard:
1. Unless provided elsewhere within this title or defined within a Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Specific Plan Ordinance (ZCSP), in In any residential district in which residential
dwellings are allowed, there shall be a minimum front yard depth required as stated in the yard requirements for this the particular district; provided, however: a) any replat in any residential
district adjacent to an existing plat with dwellings located thereon, the front yard depth for the lots in the replat shall not be less than the smallest front yard depth of existing dwellings located
within two hundred feet (200') of the replat, but in no event shall the front yard depth be less than the smallest front yard depth of the existing dwelling immediately adjacent thereto which fronts
on the same side of the street; b) no front yard depth of any existing lot without a dwelling shall be less than the smallest front yard depth of any lot with existing dwelling immediately adjacent
thereto and within two hundred feet (200') fronting on the same side of the street.
2. Nothing in this regulation shall be interpreted as to permit a front yard depth which is less than the minimum required front yard depth for the district in which it is located.
Section 2. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 6 (Commercial Office and Industrial Zoning District), Section 4 (Specific Use Regulations), Subsection A-3 is hereby amended by adding the bolded
italicized text:
3. Unless allowed elsewhere in this title or defined within a Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Specific Plan Ordinance (ZCSP), residential uses shall be prohibited within the commercial,
office and industrial districts. Residential uses located above nonresidential uses and single-family detached dwellings in the Valley Junction Historical Business District and Valley Junction
Commercial District may be permitted in accordance with Building, Fire and Rental Codes. Residential uses are not allowed on the first floor of a mixed-use building in the Valley Junction
Historical Business District and Valley Junction Commercial District. Multi-family residential uses are permitted within the Support Commercial Zoning District when incorporated and approved
by the City Council as part of a mixed use building and/or development. Multi-family residential uses shall be permitted within the Professional Commerce Park (PCP) Zoning District when
the only use within a standalone building and approved by the City Council.
Section 3. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 7 (Setback and Bulk Density Regulations), Section 4 (Setback and Bulk Density Regulations) Table 7.9 (Bulk Regulations for Principal and Accessory
Structures in Industrial, Office and Open Space Districts) is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted strikethrough text and adding the bolded italicized text:
TABLE 7.9
BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN INDUSTRIAL, OFFICE AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 2/687
Required Standards BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP5 OS
Minimum lot area1 20,000 square feet 7,250 square feet 10,000 square feet 20,000 square feet 10,000
square feet
60,000
square
feet
20 acres
Minimum setback (feet)2
- Front yard 50 15 30 40 30 50 50
- Rear yard
If abuts like zoning district
50 10 (from alleyway) 35
15
35 35
15
50
25
50
- Side yard
If abuts like zoning district
If abuts residential zoned or used property
50 10
0
10
20
0
35
0
10
0
50
25
50
Minimum lot width (feet) 75 50 75 75 80 150 200
Maximum height (feet) 603 15
304
603 603 363 603 603
Open space required (minimum percentage) 35 20 20 20 25 35 75
Notes:
1. Except for condominium ownership.
2. Refer to setback definitions in the zoning ordinance.
3. Additional 12 feet of height allowed for each additional 10 feet of setback.
4. Maximum height of 30 feet allowed with a building setback of 20 feet.
5. See chapter 11 of this title for regulations of multi-family residential buildings in PCP district.
(Codifier: only change to table is superscript addition of ‘5’ to PCP title in top row of table)
Section 4. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 11 (PCP Professional Commerce Park District), Section 2 (Use Regulations) is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted strikethrough text and
adding the bolded italicized text:
9-11-2: USE REGULATIONS:
For the purpose of this Section, it shall be recognized that the name of a use is not so important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. Further, in the interest of general community welfare, it
is recognized that the community should be beautiful as well as financially prosperous, spacious as well as efficient; physically balanced as well as regulated. Therefore, it is considered impractical, if
not impossible, to accurately enumerate those uses which would be beneficial or detrimental to the community; and that it is intended only that this District shall not be used indiscriminately to permit
any use which might violate the general welfare of the community; but that it shall be restricted and confined to only those integrated professional-commerce uses which produce net gain to the
community in both aesthetic and material quality.
Certain uses not considered professional-commerce and certain inherent physical characteristics are considered compatible or incompatible with the intent of this District as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 3/687
A. Any enterprise or service which is specifically intended to augment, facilitate, be subsidiary and be accessory to the planned principal uses shall be permitted, providing such use shall be physically
accomplished in an aesthetically compatible manner and shall comply with all restrictions or performance standards applicable to the principal uses.
B. Any residential use shall be prohibited, except for caretakers' quarters incidental to the principal permitted use. Accessory apartment or transient quarters planned as an integral subsidiary element of
the principal use may be authorized by special permit. Multi-family residential buildings shall be allowed as standalone buildings in close proximity to existing employment and commercial
areas, (generally meaning within acceptable walking distance), only when 2/3 of the properties bordering the multi-family property have already been developed with office and/or commercial
use buildings and when compliant with all performance standards specified within this chapter and approved by the City Council. The total amount of multi-family residential within a PCP
zoning district shall be secondary to the amount of commercial and office use within the PCP zoned area.
C. Any retail commercial use shall be prohibited, except as provided in subsection A of this Section.
D. Any enterprise, regardless of professional-commerce category, which cannot wholly enclose its functions within the principal structures or otherwise effectively conceal its functions from public
observation, shall be prohibited except as otherwise identified in this Title.
Section 5. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 11 (PCP Professional Commerce Park District), Section 3 (Performance Standards), Subsection B is hereby amended by adding the following bolded
italicized text:
B. The principal of spacious separation and adaptation of the manmade elements to be harmonious with the natural environment shall dominate the central design theme of the site and structural
planning. To accomplish this objective, the following standards shall be considered as minimum acceptable standards:
1. The total ground area devoted to open space for natural landscape and landscape beautification shall be not less than thirty five percent (35%) of the total land area within the immediate site
under ownership and consideration. Such open space shall be free of all drives, parking areas, structures, buildings, etc., except for those walkways, monuments, ornamental structures, etc.,
considered to be necessary but essential to the central landscape theme.
2. Pedestrian pathways to facilitate resident’s movement from residential buildings to and between offices, retail, recreational, and commercial areas shall be provided.
Section 6. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 11 (PCP Professional Commerce Park District), Section 4 (Height Regulations) is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted strikethrough text and
adding the bolded italicized text:
9-11-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The Unless provided elsewhere within this title or defined within a Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Specific Plan Ordinance (ZCSP), height regulations in the PCP district shall be as designated
in chapter 7, "Setback And Bulk Density Regulations", of this title. In addition, no building or structure shall be constructed to a height which may create an air traffic hazard to the approach or
departure of an existing airport within a fifteen (15) mile radius of the building or structure.
Section 7. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 11 (PCP Professional Commerce Park District), is hereby amended by deleting the existing section 5 in its entirety and replacing with a new Section 5
(Bulk Regulations) with the following bolded italicized text:
9-11-5: SITE PLANS, LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Site Plans: No site plan shall be less than twenty (20) acres in area, exclusive of road rights of way.
B. Lot Area: There shall be no minimum lot area.
C. Lot Frontage And Yard Requirements: No lot shall be less than three hundred fifty feet (350') in width and no building shall be placed, located, constructed or erected within fifty feet (50') of any
boundary line of the lot under ownership.
D. Exception: Subsections A, B and C of this section shall not prohibit the multiple use of a planned complex park on a minimum lot providing that the control of those facilities and uses which must be
installed and maintained for the joint use of the users of the property shall be legally enforceable and acceptable to the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 4/687
9-11-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Unless provided elsewhere within this title or defined within a Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Specific Plan Ordinance (ZCSP), bulk regulations for the development of office and
commercial use buildings shall abide by the minimum requirements specified in chapter 7 of this title.
B. Unless provided elsewhere within this title or defined within a Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Specific Plan Ordinance (ZCSP), bulk regulations for the development of standalone
multi-family residential use buildings shall abide by the following minimum requirements:
1. Minimum lot area shall be 60,000 square feet
2. Principal and Accessory building setbacks shall be as follows:
a. Front Yard = 50’
b. Rear Yard = 50’
c. Side Yard = 50’
3. Minimum lot width = 150’
4. Minimum street frontage on one frontage = 150’
5. Minimum separation between principal buildings = 30’; buildings over three (3) stories in height shall provide an additional ten feet (10’) of building separation
6. Minimum separation between accessory buildings = 20’; buildings over three (3) stories in height shall provide an additional ten feet (10’) of building separation
7. Maximum building height = 60’; an additional twelve feet (12’) of height shall be allowed for each additional ten feet (10’) of building setback.
Section 8. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 9. Savings Clause. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 10. Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa.
Section 11. Other Remedies. In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or corporation for violation
of any section or subsection of this Ordinance.
Section 12. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
Passed by the City Council on the 26th day of December, 2018, and approved this 26th day of December, 2018.
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
Ryan T Jacobson
City Clerk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 5/687
The foregoing Ordinance No. 2333 was adopted by the Council for the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, on December 26, 2018, and was published in the Des Moines Register on January 4, 2019.
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Prepared by: B. Portz, West Des Moines Development Services, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265, 515-222-3620
When Recorded, Return to: City Clerk, City of West Des Moines, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265-0320
ORDINANCE NO. 2334
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014, TITLE 9 (ZONING), CHAPTER 6 (COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, AND INDUSTRIAL
ZONING DISTRICT) TO ALLOW APPLIANCESTORES IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL AND SUPPORT COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
Section 1. Amendment. Title 9: Zoning, Chapter 6: Commercial, Office and Industrial District, Section 6, Commercial, Office, and Industrial Use Regulations, Subsection C, Table 6.1, Division G –
Retail Trade, is hereby amended by adding text in bold, italicized lettering:
SIC
CODES
RC CMC NC CVC SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
572
Household
Appliance
Stores (no
outdoor
storage or
display)
P P P P P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 6/687
Section 2. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 3. Savings Clause. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 4. Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa.
Section 5. Other Remedies. In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or corporation for violation
of any section or subsection of this Ordinance.
Section 6. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
Passed by the City Council on the 26th day of December, 2018, and approved this 26th day of December, 2018.
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
Ryan T Jacobson
City Clerk
The foregoing Ordinance No. 2334 was adopted by the Council for the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, on December 26, 2018, and was published in the Des Moines Register on January 4, 2019.
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 7/687
ORDINANCE NO. 2335
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014, BY AMENDING PROVISION PERTAINING TO
THE TRAFFIC CODE RELATING TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA,
SECTION 1. TITLE 6: (MOTOR VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC), CHAPTER 9: SECTION 6-9-2: THROUGH STREETS STOP REQUIRED: is hereby amended by
revising the following paragraph:
Add:
Street From To
Grand Prairie Parkway (South) Raccoon River Drive Southern Terminus of Grand
Prairie Parkway (South)
SECTION 2. REPEALER. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY. If any section, provisions, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional,
such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 4. VIOLATION. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished with a fine not to exceed $100.00
plus applicable surcharge and court costs.
SECTION 5. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, adoption, and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 26th day of December, 2018.
_______________________
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
___________________________
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
Published in the Des Moines Register this 4th day of January, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2336
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 8/687
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014, BY AMENDING PROVISION PERTAINING TO
THE TRAFFIC CODE RELATING TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA.
SECTION 1: TITLE 6 (MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC), CHAPTER 9, SECTION 6-9-5-1: NO PARKING ZONES: is hereby amended by the following
changes:
Delete:
Street From To Side
93rd Street (South) Stagecoach Drive 200 feet south of centerline West
of Stagecoach Drive
Add:
Street From To Side
93rd Street (South) 250 feet north of centerline 200 feet south of centerline West
of Stagecoach Drive of Stagecoach Drive
SECTION 2. REPEALER. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY. If any section, provisions, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional,
such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 4. VIOLATION. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished with a fine not to exceed $100.00
plus applicable surcharge and court costs.
SECTION 5. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, adoption, and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 26th day of December, 2018.
_______________________
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
___________________________
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
Published in the Des Moines Register this 4th day of January, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 9/687
ORDINANCE NO. 2337
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014, BY AMENDING PROVISION PERTAINING TO
THE TRAFFIC CODE RELATING TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA.
SECTION 1: TITLE 6 (MOTOR VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC), CHAPTER 9, SECTION 6-9-10: SPECIAL SPEED ZONES: is hereby amended by adding the
following paragraphs:
Add: Street From To Speed
\
Grand Prairie Raccoon River Drive Southern Terminus of 40 mph
Parkway (South) Grand Prairie Parkway
(South)
SECTION 2. REPEALER. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY. If any section, provisions, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional,
such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 4. VIOLATION. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished with a fine not to exceed $100.00
plus applicable surcharge and court costs.
SECTION 5. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, adoption, and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 26th day of December 2018.
_______________________
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
___________________________
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
Published in the Des Moines Register this 4th day of January, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2339
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 10/687
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014, TITLE 7, “PUBLIC WAYS AND
PROPERTY” BY ADDING CHAPTER 2A, “INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF SMALL CELL BROADBAND INFRASTRUCTURE”
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA THAT:
Title 7, “Public Ways and Property” is hereby amended by adding Chapter 2A, “Installation and Operation of Small Cell Broadband Infrastructure.”
SECTION 1:
7-2A-1: PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish general procedures and standards, consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, for the siting,
construction, installation, colocation, modification, relocation, operation and removal of small cell wireless technology within the City's right of way
and on public property. This ordinance shall:
A. Provide standards, technical criteria and details for small cell facilities in the City's right of way and on public property to be uniformly
applied to all applicants and owners of small cell facilities or support structures for such facilities.
B. Enhance the ability of wireless communications carriers to deploy small cell wireless technology in the City quickly, effectively and
efficiently so that residents, businesses and visitors benefit from ubiquitous and robust wireless service availability.
C. Preserve the character of the City's neighborhoods and corridors.
D. Ensure that small cell facilities and support structures conform with all applicable health and safety regulations and will blend into their
environment to the greatest extent possible.
E. Comply with, and not conflict with or preempt, all applicable state and federal laws.
7-2A-2: DEFINITIONS
Abandoned means any small cell facilities or wireless support structures that are unused or inoperable for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365)
days without the owner or operator notifying the City and receiving the City's approval to maintain the facility or structure at the existing location.
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives radio frequency signals in the provision of wireless service.
Applicant means any Person applying for a Permit hereunder.
City means the City of West Des Moines.
City property means property other than right of way owned by the City.
Colocation or Colocate means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on a wireless support structure.
County means Polk, Dallas, Warren or Madison County, Iowa.
Decorative Pole means a pole, arch, or structure other than a street light pole placed in the right of way specifically designed and placed for
aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments have been placed except for any of the following (a) electric lighting; (b)
specially designed informational or directional signage; (c) temporary holiday or special event attachments.
Designated District or Districts means City-designated or federally-designated Historic Districts, Landmark Sites and Conservation Districts as well
as National Register of Historic Places Historic Districts and Sites.
Industrial Area means an industrially-zoned area.
Operator means a wireless service provider, cable operator, or a video service provider that operates a small cell facility and provides wireless
service. Operator includes a wireless service provider, cable operator, or a video service provider that provides information services as defined in
the "Telecommunications Act of 1996," 110 Stat. 59, 47 U.S.C. 153(2) and services that are fixed in nature or use unlicensed spectrum.
Ornamental Pole means a pole or structure placed in the right of way to support traffic signals and/or streetlights which has been specifically
·designed and placed for aesthetic purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 11/687
Ornamental Poles often include appurtenances or attachments for flags, planters and/or otheraesthetic features.
Permit means the non-exclusive grant of authority issued by the City of West Des Moines to install a small cell facility and/or a wireless support
structure in a portion of the right of way in accordance with these guidelines.
Permittee means the owner and/or operator who has been issued a Permit pursuant to these guidelines.
Person means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether forprofit
or not-for-profit.
Retail and Commercial Areas means an area zoned for commercial or retail use.
Residential Area means an area zoned for residential use.
Right of Way means the surface of, and the space within, through, on, across, above, or below, any public street, public road, public highway,
public freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public easement,
and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible public use, which is owned or controlled by the City of West Des Moines.
Small Cell Facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following requirements:
(1) Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume.
(2) All other wireless equipment associated with the facility that is cumulatively not more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume. The
calculation of equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes,
grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
State means the State of Iowa.
Toll means the pause or delay of the running of the required time period.
Traffic Signal Pole means a City owned or operated pole or structure designed for or used for the placement of traffic control signals and/or
devices.
Utility Pole means a structure that is designed for, or used for the purpose of carrying lines, cables, or wires for electric or telecommunications
service. "Utility pole" excludes street signs and decorative poles.
Wireless Support Structure means a pole, such as a monopole, either guyed or self-supporting, street light pole, fifteen (15) foot or taller sign
pole, or utility pole capable of supporting small cell facilities. Wireless Support Structure excludes (a) a utility pole or other facility owned or
operated by a municipal electric utility; (b) a utility pole or other facility used to supply traction power to public transit systems, including railways,
trams, streetcars and trolley buses; or c) a traffic signal pole.
7-2A-3: REQUIREMENT TO COMPLY
Placement, modification, operation, relocation and removal of a small cell facility and/or wireless support structure shall comply with this ordinance
and all relevant and applicable City of West Des Moines ordinances consistent with this ordinance at the time the permit for installation,
modification, relocation or removal is approved and as amended from time to time.
7-2A-4: LOCATIONS OF SMALL CELL FACILITIES, RELATED GROUND EQUIPMENT, AND WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES
Most Preferable Locations
The following are the most preferred areas for new small cell facilities:
A. Industrial Areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, or Designated District.
B. Highway Rights of Way areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area or Designated District.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 12/687
C. Retail and Commercial Areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area or Designated District.
Colocation Preference
It is the City's strong preference that whenever an applicant proposes to place a new wireless support structure with a small cell facility within two
hundred fifty (250) feet from an existing wireless support structure, the applicant either co-locate with the existing facility or demonstrate that a
colocation is either not technically feasible or space on the existing facility is not potentially available.
Least Preferable Locations
The following are the least preferred areas for new small cell facilities:
A. Residential Areas
B. Municipal Parks
C. Designated Districts
Maps, which may be updated from time to time, showing the boundaries of the above areas are available on the City's website at
http://www.wdm.iowa.gov.
Order of Preference for Wireless Support Structures
The following list indicates the order of preference for wireless support structures for small cell facilities. Images of the Municipal Service Poles
are attached in Exhibit A.
A. Existing Utility Poles: It is the City's preference that small cell facilities be installed on existing utility poles (electric or telephone) or lashed
onto existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles.
B. Non-Ornamental Municipal Service Poles: If the applicant does not have the right to use existing utility poles or lines under reasonable
terms and conditions or the utilization imposes technical limits, the City prefers that the applicant consider existing non ornamental
municipal street light poles.
C. New Poles: If the first two (2) items are unavailable, preference should be given to the installation of a new pole to serve as a wireless
support structure.
D. Ornamental Municipal Service Poles: The use of ornamental municipal street lights as wireless support structures is discouraged. These
should only be proposed if the three (3) items listed above are unavailable or when requested by the City based on the proposed location.
E. Sign Poles (15feet or taller): The only sign poles that may be considered are those that are at least fifteen (15) feet tall. These are the least
preferred option for a wireless support structure.
7-2A-5: CONSIDERATION OF ALTERNATE LOCATIONS
The City reserves the right to propose an alternate wireless support structure to the one proposed in the application. The City may also propose an
alternate location for a new wireless support structure within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed location or within a distance that is equivalent
to the width of the right of way in or on which the new wireless support structure is proposed, whichever is greater, which the operator shall use if it
has the right to use the alternate location on reasonable terms and conditions and the alternate location does not impose technical limits or
additional costs.
7-2A-6: GUIDELINES ON PLACEMENT
Generally, an applicant shall construct and maintain small cell facilities and wireless support structures in a manner that does not (1) obstruct,
impede or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a right of way; (2) obstruct the legal use of a right of way by other utility providers; (3) violate
nondiscriminatory applicable codes; (4) violate or conflict with this or any relevant and applicable City of West Des Moines ordinance; and (5)
violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act.
The City desires to promote cleanly organized and streamlined facilities using the smallest and least intrusive means available to provide wireless
services to the community. Generally, a small cell facility and/or wireless support structure shall match and be consistent with the materials and
finish of the adjacent municipal poles of the surrounding area adjacent to their location. In the absence of adjacent municipal poles, the wireless
support structure shall match the materials and finish of the adjacent utility poles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 13/687
Antennas on Existing or Replaced Utility Poles
The antenna(s) associated with collocation on existing or replaced utility poles must have concealed cable connections, antenna mount and other
hardware. The maximum dimensions for antennas shall not be more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, including any enclosure for the antenna.
Right of Way
Small cell facilities and wireless support structures and related equipment shall be placed, as much as possible, in line with other utility features
and in a location that minimizes any obstruction, impediment or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a right of way.
Height Above Ground
Small Cell Facilities: Small cell facilities shall be installed at least eight (8) feet above the ground. If a small cell facility attachment is projecting
toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the City may require the attachment to be installed no less than
sixteen (16) feet above the ground.
New wireless support structures: In areas where there is no wireless support structure or utility pole taller than thirty (30) feet in height above
ground level and the maximum allowable height for building construction in the underlying zoning district is thirty (30) feet in height above
ground level or less, the overall height of a new wireless support structure and any co-located antennas shall not be more than thirty (30) feet in
height above ground level.
In all other areas, the overall height of a new wireless support structure and any co-located antennas shall not be more than forty (40) feet in
height above ground level.
Existing wireless support structures: For an existing wireless support structure, the antenna and any associated shroud or concealment material
are permitted to be co-located at the top of the existing wireless support structure and shall not increase the height of the existing wireless support
structure by more than five (5) feet.
Protrusion
No protrusions from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole shall be more than two (2) feet. The pole and all attachments to the
pole that are projecting, or any equipment or appurtenance mounted on the ground, shall comply with Americans with Disabilities Act and shall not
obstruct an existing or planned sidewalk or walkway. The City, at its option, may waive the requirement to limit the protrusion to no more than two
(2) feet.
Location of Equipment - General
Small cell facilities and related equipment shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the right of way. If any small cell facility or wireless
support structure is installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the City, impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic
and/or or does not comply or otherwise renders the right of way non-compliant with applicable laws, including the Americans with Disabilities Act,
then the operator shall promptly remove the small cell facilities and/or wireless support structure. If the operator does not complete removal in a
reasonable timeframe, the City will remove it and bill the operator for the cost of the removal.
The applicant is required to incorporate ambient noise suppression measures and/or required to place the equipment in locations less likely to
impact adjacent residences or businesses to ensure compliance with all applicable noise regulations.
Utility Lines: Service lines must be placed underground whenever feasible to avoid additional overhead lines. For metal poles, undergrounded
cables and wires must transition directly into the pole base without any external junction box.
Spools and Coils: To reduce clutter and deter vandalism, excess fiber optic or coaxial cables for small cell facilities shall not be spooled, coiled or
otherwise stored on the pole except within an approved enclosure such as a cage or cabinet.
Above-Ground Conduit: On wood poles, all above-ground wires, cables and connections shall be encased in the smallest section or smallest
diameter PVC channel, conduit, u-guard, or shroud feasible, with a maximum dimension of four (4) inches in diameter. Such conduit shall be
finished in zinc, aluminum or stainless steel, or colored to match those metal finishes.
Location of Ground Mounted Equipment
Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive. It should be placed to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the
usual travel or public safety on a right of way, maximize the line of sight required to add to safe travel of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and
maximize that line of sight at street corners and intersections and minimize hazards at those locations. The City may deny a request that
negatively impacts vehicular and/or pedestrian safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 14/687
The equipment shroud or cabinet must contain all the equipment associated with the facility other than the antenna. All cables and conduits
associated with the equipment must be concealed from view, routed directly through the metal pole (with the exception of wood power poles) and
undergrounded between the pole and the ground-mounted cabinet.
Location of Pole Mounted Equipment
All pole-mounted equipment must be installed as flush to the pole as possible. Equipment attached to metal poles must be installed using stainless
steel banding straps. Equipment attached to wood poles may be bolted to the pole or installed using stainless steel banding straps. When the
straps are attached to a metal pole, they must match the color of the pole. Through bolting or use of lag bolts is prohibited. All pole mounted
equipment shall be located as close together as technically possible and if possible, on the same side of the pole.
When pole-mounted equipment is either permitted or required, all equipment other than the antenna(s), electric meter and disconnect switch must
be concealed within an equipment cage. An equipment cabinet may not extend more than twenty-four (24) inches from the face of the pole. The
equipment cabinet must be non-reflective, colored to match the existing pole if attached to a metal pole, and in the color of brushed aluminum if
attached to a wood pole. Equipment cabinets should be mounted as flush to the pole as possible. Any standoff mount for the equipment cabinet
may not exceed four (4) inches.
Electric Meter: The City strongly encourages site operators to use flat-rate electric service when it would eliminate the need for a meter. When a
meter is necessary, site operators shall use the smallest and least intrusive electric meter available. Whenever permitted by the electric service
provider, the electric meter base should be painted to match the pole.
Telephone/Fiber Optic Utilities: Cabinets for telephone and/or fiber optic utilities may not extend more than twenty-four (24) inches from the face
of the pole, and must be painted, wrapped or otherwise colored to match the pole. Microwave or other wireless backhaul is discouraged when it
would involve a separate and unconcealed antenna.
Undergrounded Equipment Vaults
Equipment in an environmentally controlled underground vault may be required in some areas where technologically feasible and appropriate for
the location.
New Wireless Support Structures
Spacing: The City strongly discourages more than one (1) new wireless support structure per block and will not approve more than one (1) per two
hundred fifty (250) feet on each side of the street to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to roadways and minimize visual clutter and distractions
to vehicular traffic. An exemption may be granted if the applicant can demonstrate that this restriction has the effect of preventing wireless service to
this location. Wireless support structures shall be spaced apart from utility poles or wireless support structures supporting small cell facilities at the
same spacing between utility poles in the immediate proximity.
If multiple requests are received to install two (2) or more poles that would violate the spacing requirement or to co-locate two (2) or more small
cell facilities on the same wireless support structure, priority will be given to the first request received that meets these guidelines.
Alignment with Other Poles: The centerline of any new wireless support structure must be aligned, as much as possible, with the centerlines of
existing poles on the same street segment, but only if the new structure's height does not conflict with overhead power utility lines and facilities.
General Restrictions on New Wood Poles: In all locations, the City reserves the right to require a metal pole rather than a wood pole based on the
built and/or natural environmental character of the proposed site location. The City, at its discretion, may deny approval of any new wood poles in a
Designated District.
Wood Pole Footings and Foundations: All new wood poles must be direct buried to a depth determined, stamped, sealed and signed by a
professional engineer licensed and registered by the State of Iowa, and subject to the City's review and approval.
Metal Pole Footings and Foundations: All new metal poles must be supported with a reinforced concrete pier. The design including the pier,
footings and anchor bolts shall be stamped, sealed and signed by a professional engineer licensed and registered by the State of Iowa, and
subject to the City's review and approval. All anchor bolts must be concealed from public view with an appropriate pole boot or cover subject to
the City's prior approval.
Metal Pole Material: All metal poles must be constructed from hot-dip galvanized steel or other corrosion-resistant materials approved by the City
and finished in accordance with these guidelines to avoid rust stains on adjacent sidewalks, buildings or other improvements.
Metal Pole Finish: Metal poles must be painted black unless otherwise waived by the City. The applicant may select a paint or powder coat system
in compliance with ATSM standards.
Lighting, Planters, Flags, Banners: The City may require the applicant to install functional streetlights and/or brackets to hold hanging flower
planters, flags and/or banners when technically feasible and the City determines that such additions will enhance the overall appearance and
usefulness of the proposed facility. The City may install hanging flower planters, flags and/or banners utilizing the brackets.
City-Owned Wireless Support Structures
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 15/687
Required Load Analysis: Installations on all City-owned poles shall have an industry standard pole load analysis completed, sealed and signed by
a Professional Engineer licensed and registered by the State of Iowa and submitted to the City with each permit application indicating that the Cityowned
pole to which the small cell facility will to be attached will safely support the load.
Height of Attachments: All attachments on all City-owned poles shall be at least eight (8) feet above grade and if a small cell facility is projecting
toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the City may require the attachment to be installed no less than
sixteen (16) feet above the ground.
Power Source: A small cell facility on a City-owned wireless support structure may use the same power source that provides power for the original
purpose of the wireless support structure.
The City will provide a proposed flat rate for anticipated annual cost of power.
Installations on Street Lights: Installations on all street lights must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise
the safety of the public. The installation must not interfere with other existing uses on the pole such as street lights, hanging flower planters,
flags, and/or banners. Installation of small cell facilities on any street light shall (a) be encased in a separate conduit than the street light
electronics; (b) have a separate electric power connection than the street light structure; and (c) have a separate access point than the street
light structure.
Installations on Sign Poles (15feet or taller): Installations on sign poles may only occur if the sign pole is fifteen (15) feet or taller.
Reservation of space for future public safety or transportation uses: An application for space on a City owned or operated wireless support
structure that conflicts with space reserved for future public safety or transportation uses documented in an approved plan in place at the time of
the application will be denied unless the operator pays for the replacement of the pole or wireless support structure and the replaced pole or
wireless support structure will accommodate the future use and the small cell facility.
7-2A-7: UNDERGROUNDING REQUIREMENTS
The City may deny requests to install structures and facilities in the right of way or on City property in an area where the City has required all
structures and facilities except those owned by the City to be placed underground or elsewhere in the right of way or a utility easement.
These areas are easily identifiable as those locations where electric has been placed underground; however, if an applicant is uncertain as to
whether such facilities have been placed underground in the area, the applicant should contact the City for clarification before applying for or
installing any wireless support structures and/or small cell facilities in the area. The applicant may request a waiver if the operator is unable to
achieve its service objective using a location in the right of way or on City property where the prohibition does not apply, in a utility easement the
operator has the right to access, or in or on other suitable locations or structures made available by the City at reasonable rates, fees and terms.
7-2A-8: GENERAL AESTHETIC REQUIREMENTS
Concealment
New Wireless Support Structures: It is the City's preference that all new wireless support structures be camouflaged, except, at the City’s
discretion, those structures located in an area that is predominantly
industrial. The applicant shall submit its proposal for camouflage with the permit application.
Small Cell Facilities: Small cell facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may
include ventilation openings. Unless approved by the City in writing, there shall be no external cables and wires hanging off a pole. Approved
external cables shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized to the extent possible.
Equipment Enclosures: Equipment enclosures, including electric meters, shall be as small as possible. Ground-mounted equipment shall
incorporate concealment elements into the proposed design. Concealment may include, but shall not be limited to, landscaping, strategic
placement in less obtrusive locations and placement within existing or replacement street furniture.
Landscaping: Landscape screening shall be provided and maintained around ground mounted equipment enclosures. The planting quantity and
size should be such that 100% screening is achieved within two years of installation. The City may grant an exemption from this landscaping
requirement based on the characteristics of the specific location for the equipment enclosure. Tree "topping" or the improper pruning of trees is
prohibited. Any proposed pruning or removal of trees, shrubs or other landscaping already existing in the right of way must be noted in the
application and must be approved by the City.
When underground vaults are proposed, they shall be located to minimize disruption to the placement of street trees. Adequate planting depth
shall be provided between the top of the vault and the finished grade to allow plants to grow in a healthy condition.
Allowed Colors
All colors shall match the background of any wireless support structure that the facilities are located upon. In the case of existing wood poles,
finishes of conduit shall be zinc, aluminum or stainless steel, or colored to match those metal finishes and equipment cabinets shall be the color of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 16/687
brushed aluminum. Ground mounted equipment cabinets shall be the color of brushed aluminum.
Signage/Lights/Logos/Decals/Cooling Fans
Signage: Operator shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the small
cell facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed 4" x 6", unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF
ground notification signs) or the City. If no cabinet exists, the signage shall be placed at the base of the pole.
Lights: New small cell facilities and wireless support structures shall not be illuminated, except in accord with state or federal regulations, or
unless illumination is integral to the camouflaging strategy such as design intended to look like a street light pole.
Logos/Decals: Unnecessary equipment manufacturer decals shall be removed or painted-over. New small cell facilities and wireless support
structures shall not include advertisements and may only display information required by a federal, state or local agency. The smallest and lowest
visible radio-frequency (RF) warning sticker required by government or electric utility regulations shall be utilized. The RF sticker shall be placed
as close to the antenna as possible.
Cooling Fans: In the event that a cooling fan is needed, in residential areas the fan shall have a low noise profile.
7-2A-9: AESTHETIC REQUIREMENTS
The City of West Des Moines prefers that wireless support structures be located on existing utility poles, with secondary preference given to the
placement on non-ornamental municipal street light poles. Ornamental municipal poles should be avoided if possible.
The City strongly discourages the use of any ornamental streetlight or pole as a wireless support structure, with use occurring only when no other
options exist, including the ability to install a new wireless support structure. If used, the height may not be increased more than five (5) feet, the
light fixture must be located at the top of the pole, and the smallcell facility must not interfere with the attachment of flags, hanging planters and/or
banners.
If existing utility poles are not available for colocation, operators may propose a new
wireless support structure. New wireless support structures that will be more than twenty (20) feet in height shall match the design of the City's
existing traffic signal mast arms. New wireless support structures that will be twenty (20) feet or less in height shall match the City's streetlights.
Information on the manufacturer and model identification, and detailed drawings of these support structures are available from the Engineering
Department.
New Wireless Support Structures
Residential Areas: In residential areas, new wireless support structures should be located to avoid obstructing the view of building facades by
placing the wireless support structure at a corner, intersection or along a lot line. New wireless support structures should be located in the yard
location where other overhead utilities are located unless it is not technically feasible to do so. Applicants shall clearly explain the rationale for
requests that deviate from this expectation.
In order to meet the service needs of operators, the City will consider requests to locate small cell facilities on other municipal property such as
municipal parking lots.
7-2A-10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Tree Maintenance
The Operator, its contractors and agents shall obtain written permission from the City before trimming trees in the right of way hanging over its
small cell facility and/or wireless support structure to prevent branches of such trees from contacting attached small cell facility. When trimming
such trees on private property, the operator, its contractors, and agents shall notify the City and obtain written permission from the property
owner. When directed by the City, operator shall trim under the supervision and direction of the City. The City shall not be liable for any damages,
injuries, or claims arising from operator's actions under this section.
Graffiti Abatement
As soon as practical, but not later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date operator receives notice thereof, operator shall remove all
graffiti on any of its small cell facilities and/or wireless support structures located in the right of way. The City may agree to an extension of time
for abatement when necessitated by the need to order replacement equipment when such equipment is ordered in a timely manner.
Minor Technical Exceptions
The City recognizes that in some circumstances strict compliance with these guidelines may result in undesirable aesthetic outcomes and that
minor deviations should be granted when the need for such deviation arises from circumstances outside the applicant's control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 17/687
Waivers
In the event that any applicant justifiably asserts that strict compliance with any provision in these guidelines, as applied to a specific proposed
small cell facility, would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, the City Manager may grant a limited, one-time exemption
from strict compliance.
SECTION 2. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, adoption, and publication as required
by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 7th day of January, 2019.
_______________________________
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________________
Ryan T. Jacobson, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Prepared by: Rod Van Genderen, City of West Des Moines, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265-0320 (515) 222-3630
When Recorded, Return to: City Clerk, City of West Des Moines, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265-0320
ORDINANCE NO. 2340
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA (2014) BY AMENDING TITLE 9 “ZONING” BY
AMENDING CHAPTER 1, “ENTITLEMENTS – PROCESS AND PROCEDURES” AND CHAPTER 12, “FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT” AND
AMENDING TITLE 8, “BUILDING REGULATIONS”
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT. Title 9, “Zoning”, Chapter 1, “Entitlements – Process and Procedures” , section 13, “Floodplain Development Permit” is
hereby amended by deleting the following highlighted strike through text and adding the bolded italicized text:
9-1-13 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Requirements for floodplain development permits, and all associated information, provisions,
and stipulations shall be as described in the floodplain management ordinance adopted in its entirety in chapter 12 of this title Title 8, “Building
Regulations”, Chapter 8, “Floodplain Management.”
SECTION 2. AMENDMENT. Title 9, “Zoning”, Chapter 12, “Floodplain Management” is hereby amended by repealing and deleting all of Chapter 12.
Chapter 12 shall be reserved for future use.
SECTION 3. AMENDMENT. Title 8, “Building Regulations” is hereby amended by adding a new Chapter 8, “Floodplain Management” and adopting the
following language:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 18/687
SECTION:
8-8-1: Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact and Purpose
8-8-2: Definitions
8-8-3: General Provisions
8-8-4: Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) Districts
8-8-5: Floodway (Overlay) District FW
8-8-6: Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District FF
8-8-7: General Flood Plain (Overlay) District FP
8-8-8: Administration
8-8-9: Nonconforming Uses
8-8-10: Penalties for Violation
8-8-11: Amendments
8-8-1: CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
A. Authority:
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the powers and duties maintained by the city of West Des Moines as expressed in State of Iowa Code Chapter
364.1 and the statutory authority established by State of Iowa Code Chapter 414 to preserve the rights, privileges and property of the city and of its
residents and to enact regulations to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare.
B. Findings of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of West Des Moines are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment
of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
2. These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by: (i) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flooding and (ii) the cumulative
effect of obstructions on the flood plain causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
3. This ordinance relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the
Department of Natural Resources.
C. Statement of Purpose:
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the city of West Des Moines and its residents and to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Section IB1 of this Ordinance with provisions designed to:
1. Reserve sufficient flood plain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 19/687
3. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
4. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
5. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
8-8-2 DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this Ordinance it’s most reasonable application.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE – A structure which is on the same parcel of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
BASE FLOOD - The flood having one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See 100-year flood).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) – The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
BASEMENT - Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see "lowest floor."
DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. “Development” does not include “minor projects” or “routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities” as defined in this section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filling or grading.
DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT: A building, a portion of a building or one or more habitable rooms providing living facilities including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, but does not include hotels, motels, and nursing or convalescent homes.
ENCLOSED AREA BELOW LOWEST FLOOR – The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
a. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
(SECTION 6(B)4a) of this Ordinance, and
b. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, dry walled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage, and
c. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation, and
d. The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION - Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the City's Flood Insurance Rate
Map. May also be referred to as "existing structure".
EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the flood plain management regulations adopted by the community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 20/687
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY BUILT OR MODULAR STRUCTURE: A structure which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site. For the purpose of this title, a Factory Built or Modular Structure would not include a
Manufactured or Mobile Home constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. § 5403 (United States Code – Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards).
FLOOD - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FIVE HUNDRED (500) YEAR FLOOD – A flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths (0.2) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year or which, on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every five hundred (500) years.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - The official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) – A report published by FEMA for a community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
FLOOD PLAIN - Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT - An overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
flood plains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and flood plain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING - Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY - The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood by more than one (1) foot.
FLOODWAY FRINGE - Those portions of the Special Flood Hazard Area outside the floodway.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE – The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or,
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either i) an
approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 21/687
LOWEST FLOOR - The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when the criteria listed in the definition of Enclosed
Area below Lowest Floor are met.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME: A structure which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. § 5403 (United States Code –
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards) and is intended to be long term living quarters, permitted and taxed as real property. It is not
constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and
which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A Manufactured or Mobile Home must be on a permanent foundation
with permanent connections to utility services. Mobile Homes constructed prior to 1976 shall be considered this type of structure.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land under common ownership upon which two (2) or more Manufactured
or Mobile Homes reside as a land-leased community. A Manufactured or Mobile Home Park does not include Manufactured or Mobile Homes or Park
Homes placed on a temporary basis due to a disaster emergency.
MAXIMUM DAMAGE POTENTIAL USES – City facilities including public services, emergency services, and similar structures that are critical to
maintaining City functions in an emergency; other facilities that the City has determined would serve as an emergency shelter or support location for
reparations. Hospitals and like institutions; Buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or instruments of great public value; Buildings or
building complexes containing materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; Power installations needed in emergency or other buildings or
building complexes similar in nature or use.
MINOR PROJECTS - Small development activities (except for filling, grading and excavating) valued at less than $500.
NEW CONSTRUCTION - (new buildings, factory-built home parks) - Those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the effective date of flood plain management regulations adopted by
the community.
PARK HOME OR PARK MODEL: A trailer which is 400 or less square feet in gross trailer area, certified by it manufacturer as complying with the ANSI
A119.5 standard for recreational park trailers or constructed to comply with 2018 International Residential Code, Appendix V, and is intended for long term
placement of temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or seasonal use purposes only, permitted and taxed as a trailer. A Park Home may have
wheels and is not placed on a permanent foundation, however must be anchored to the ground to resist code designated wind forces. Park Homes will
not have permanent connections to utility services.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A single chassis trailer or motor vehicle which is 400 or less square feet when measured at the largest horizontal projection
and is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable, permitted and taxed as a trailer or motor vehicle. Recreational Vehicles are designed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational or camping, travel or seasonal use purposes only. Recreational Vehicles will not have permanent
connections to utility services.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES – Repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do
not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
a. Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing tiles and replacing siding;
b. Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;
c. Basement sealing;
d. Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
e. Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA - The land within a community subject to the "base flood". This land is identified as Zone A, A1-A30, AE, AH, AO, AR
and/or A99 on the City's Flood Insurance Rate Map.
START OF CONSTRUCTION - Includes substantial improvement and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 22/687
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities and other similar uses.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to the before damage condition
would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any improvement to a structure which satisfies either of the following criteria:
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either (i) before the "start of construction" of the
improvement, or (ii) if the structure has been "substantially damaged" and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not however include any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any alteration of an
"historic structure" provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's designation as an "historic structure.”
Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after February 16, 2006 shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether
the total increase in original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
TINY HOME: A structure which is 400 or less square feet in floor area excluding any lofts, constructed to comply with the 2018 International Residential
Code, Appendix V and is intended to be a single-family dwelling, permitted and taxed as real property. A Tiny Home must be on a permanent foundation
with permanent connections to utility services. A structure of 400 or less square feet in floor area excluding any lofts that has any wheels or axles attached
to its body or frame would be defined as a Park Home.
TRAILER: Any structure used for temporary human habitation, business or storage purposes, having no permanent foundation, but is supported by
wheels, blocks, or jacks, and which is or was equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place.
VARIANCE - A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the flood plain management regulations.
VIOLATION - The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations.
8-8-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands to Which Ordinance Apply
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of West Des Moines shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map
as being within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Flood Plain and Shallow Flooding (Overlay) Districts, as established in Section
8-8-4 of this chapter.
B. Establishment of Official Flood Plain Zoning Map
The Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Polk County and incorporated areas, City of West Des Moines,
Panels 19153C0295F, 0305F, 0310F, 0315F, 0320F, 0326F, 0327F, 0328F, 0329F, 0340F, 0457F, 0476F dated February 1, 2019, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the Flood Insurance Study
are also declared to be a part of this ordinance.
C. Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 23/687
The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is
needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Community Development Director shall make the necessary interpretation. The Board of Adjustment
shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Community
Development Director in the enforcement or administration of this Ordinance.
D. Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance
imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this Ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
F. Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
G. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The standards required by this Ordinance are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the
designated Flood Plain (Overlay) District areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City
of West Des Moines or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that occur from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
H. Severability
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
8-8-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS:
The flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this ordinance are hereby divided into the following districts:
Floodway District (FW)
Floodway Fringe District (FF)
General Flood Plain District (FP)
The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. Within these districts all uses not allowed as Permitted Uses or permissible as
Conditional Uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this ordinance is granted after due consideration by the Board of Adjustment.
8-8-5: FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FW)
A. Permitted Uses
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 24/687
The following uses shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning
district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of material or equipment, or
the excavation or alteration of a watercourse.
1. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming
and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
3. Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges,
hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
4. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
5. Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above uses.
B. Conditional Uses
The following uses which involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a
watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided in Section 8-8-7(C) of this
chapter. Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the Floodway District Performance Standards.
1. Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
2. Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises.
3. Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and billboards.
4. Extraction of sands, gravel and other materials.
5. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves.
6. Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.
7. Other uses similar in nature to uses described in A or B of this section which are consistent with the provisions of section of this section and the
general spirit and purpose of this ordinance.
C. Performance Standards
All Floodway District uses allowed as a Permitted or Conditional Use shall meet the following standards.
1. No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that would result in any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the effects of any
development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
2. All uses within the Floodway District shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 25/687
a. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
b. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
3. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage
facility or system.
4. Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District
and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
5. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not be for human habitation.
6. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other
material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District within the time available after flood warning.
7. Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
8. Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
9. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
8-8-6: FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FF:
A. Permitted Uses
All uses within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning
district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District.
B. Performance Standards
All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance standards.
1. All structures shall:
a. Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
b. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
2. Residential Structures - All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a
minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than 1.0 ft.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 26/687
above the base flood elevation and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods
of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed subject to favorable consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street
grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand
the various forces and hazards associated with flooding.
All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood.
3. Non-residential Structures - All new or substantially improved non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate
to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure,
below the base flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the
specific elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum, 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the
Administrator.
4. All new and substantially improved structures:
a. Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage.
b. New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
c. New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated or floodproofed to a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
5. Factory-built homes:
a. All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
b. All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
6. Utility and Sanitary Systems:
a. On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.
b. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well
as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 27/687
protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
c. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation.
d. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
7. Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to
major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time available
after flood warning.
8. Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a base flood with a minimum of 3 ft. of
design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources shall approve structural flood
control works.
9. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition,
the Department of Natural Resources must approve such alterations or relocations.
10. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of
public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this Ordinance. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide
all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five
(5) acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas located within the Flood Plain (Overlay) District.
11. Accessory Structures to Residential Uses
a. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied.
(1) The structure shall not be used for human habitation. The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential purposes such as
vehicle parking and limited storage.
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet. Those portions of the
structure located less than one (1) foot above the BFE must be constructed of flood-resistant materials.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement which may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation.
(6) The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the provisions of
8-8-6(B) subsection 4(a) of this Ordinance.
b. Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage
of the structure and its contents.
12. Recreational Vehicles
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 28/687
a. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection B(5) of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
(1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than 180 consecutive days, and,
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.
b. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy
requirements of subsection B(5) of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
13. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to
channel degradation and meandering.
14. Maximum Damage Potential Uses (see definitions)– All new or substantially improved maximum damage potential uses shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the elevation of the 500-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary
systems be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the
floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with the 0.2% annual chance flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2% annual chance flood elevation, is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification must indicate the specific elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum
1988).
8-8-7: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FP:
A. Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted within the General Floodplain District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying
zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, the storage of materials or
equipment, or the excavation or alteration of a watercourse.
1. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming
and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
3. Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges,
hinting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
4. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
B. Conditional Uses
Any uses which involve placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or
alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in subsection 8-
8-7C of this chapter. All such uses shall be reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources to determine (i) whether the land involved is either
wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and (ii) the base flood elevation. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department
of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination.
C. Performance Standards
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 29/687
1. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay) District (section 8-8-5).
2. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (section 8-8-6 of the chapter).
8-8-8: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Zoning Administrator
1. The Building Official is hereby appointed to implement and administer the provisions of this Ordinance and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
2. Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following:
a. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that the provisions of this Ordinance will be satisfied.
b. Review flood plain development applications to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for flood plain construction.
c. Record and maintain a record of: 1) the elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum, 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new or substantially improved structures or 2) the elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
d. Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse
and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
e. Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
f. Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
g. Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
h. Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are consistent with the purpose of this ordinance and advise the City Council of
potential conflict.
i. Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps when;
(1.) Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District results in any of the following:
a) An increase in the Base Flood Elevations, or
b) Alteration to the floodway boundary
(2.) Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base elevation; or
(3.) Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within 6 months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter
of Map Revision.
j. Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards of this Ordinance.
k. Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment for consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the Board of Adjustment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 30/687
B. Flood Plain Development Permit
1. Permit Required - A Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any flood plain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations), including the placement of factory-built homes.
2. Application for Permit - Application shall be made on forms furnished by the Administrator and shall include the following:
a. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made.
b. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will readily
identify and locate the work to be done.
c. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
d. Base Flood Elevation
e. Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum, 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.
f. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
g. Location and dimensions of all buildings and building additions
h. Suchother information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
3. Action on Permit Application - The Administrator shall, within a reasonable period of time, make a determination as to whether the proposed flood
plain development meets the applicable standards of this Ordinance and shall approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the
applicant shall be informed in writing of the specific reasons for the disapproval. The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as
directed by the City Board of Adjustment.
4. Construction and Use to be as Provided in the Application and Plans: Flood Plain Development Permits based on approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use,
arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction without authorization shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. The
applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that
the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
C. Conditional Uses, Appeals and Variances
1. Duties of The Board of Adjustment – The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide:
a) Applications for Conditional Uses upon which the Board is authorized to pass under this ordinance; b) Appeals; and c) Requests for variances
to the provisions of this ordinance and shall take any other action which is required of the Board.
2. Conditional Uses - Requests for Conditional Uses shall be submitted to the Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Such requests shall include information ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information deemed
necessary to the Board of Adjustment.
3. Appeals - Where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement of this ordinance, the aggrieved party may appeal such action. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 31/687
with the official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken
shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
4. Variance - The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from the terms of this Ordinance that will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
a. Variances shall only be granted upon: 1) a showing of good and sufficient cause; 2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 3) a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
b. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result.
Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would
be allowed for similarly situated lands.
c. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this Ordinance, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that: 1) The issuance of a variance may or will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance; and 2) Such construction may increase the risk to life and property.
e. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
5. Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
a. Hearings. Upon the filling with the Board of Adjustment of an Appeal, an application for a Conditional Use or a request for a Variance, the
Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to
parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The board may
require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance
and/or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources.
b. Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an Appeal, Conditional Use or Variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an
Appeal, the Board may, as long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision in writing setting forth the findings of fact and the
reasons for its decision. In granting a Conditional Use or Variance, the board shall consider such factors as contained in this section and all
other relevant sections of this ordinance and may prescribe such conditions as contained in subsection C(5)(b)(2) of this section.
(1) Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board of Adjustment Shall be Based: In passing upon applications for Variances, the Board
shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this Ordinance and:
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
(b) The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the injury of others.
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(e) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City.
(f) The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 32/687
(g) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
(h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(i) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for the area.
(j) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
(l) The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
(sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
(m) Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this Ordinance.
(2) Conditions Attached to Variances - Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily
be limited to:
(a) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(b) Limitation of periods of use and operation.
(c) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(d) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved
by the Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purpose of this Ordinance.
(e) Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The Board of
Adjustment shall require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular
area.
6. Appeals to the Court - Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a
court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality.
Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
8-8-9: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this Ordinance, but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
1. If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this Ordinance.
2. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 33/687
3. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty (50)
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. Except as provided in subsection A(2), above, any use which has been permitted as a Conditional Use or Variance shall be considered a conforming
use.
8-8-10 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Violations of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of Conditional Uses or Variances) shall constitute a municipal infraction as provided by Title 1, Chapter 4 of this
Code. Any person who violates this Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be subject to the maximum civil penalty as provided by
Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code and state law. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained prevent
the City of West Des Moines from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy violation.
8-8-11 AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards set forth in this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment,
supplement, change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
SECTION 4. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 5. SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall be punished as set
forth in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
SECTION 7. OTHER REMEDIES. In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section herein, the City may proceed in law
or equity against any person, firm, or corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance.
EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, adoption, and publication as required by law.
Passed by the City Council on the 21st day of January 2019, and approved this 21st day of January 2019.
______________________________
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________________
Ryan T. Jacobson, City Clerk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 34/687
The foregoing Ordinance No. 2340 was adopted by the Council for the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, on January 21, 2019, and was published in the Des
Moines Register on January 25, 2019.
ATTEST:
______________________________
Ryan T. Jacobson, City Clerk
Seal of City required for FEMA Certification of Ordinance
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
CITY OF WEST DES MOINES
CITY COUNCIL MEETING COMMUNICATION
DATE: January 21, 2019
ITEM: First reading of proposed Ordinance to amend Title 2, Chapter 12, Section 3 2 of the Municipal code to decrease the City’s Bicycle Advisory Commission
from nine (9) to seven (7) members
FINANCIAL IMPACT: None
BACKGROUND: This proposed Ordinance will decrease membership on the City’s Bicycle Advisory Commission from nine (9) to seven (7) members. All but one of
the City’s boards and commissions have seven or fewer members, and staff feels that this number is adequate to perform the duties of the Commission. Two of the
current Commissioners will be reaching the end of their terms on March 31st, so if this Ordinance is approved they would not be replaced.
OUTSTANDING ISSUES: None
RECOMMENDATION: That the Council approve the first reading of this proposed Ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 35/687
Lead Staff Member: Sally Ortgies, Director of Parks & Recreation
STAFF REVIEWS
Department Director Sally Ortgies, Director of Parks & Recreation
Appropriations/Finance Tim Stiles, Finance Director
Legal Richard Scieszinski, City Attorney
Agenda Acceptance
PUBLICATION(S) (if applicable) SUBCOMMITTEE REVIEW (if applicable)
Published In Committee
Dates(s)
Published Date Reviewed
Recommendation
ORDINANCE NO. ___________2342
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014, BY AMENDING TITLE 2, “BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS”, CHAPTER 12, “BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMISSION”, SECTION 32, “MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM”
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
SECTION 1: Title 2, Chapter 12, Section 3 2 is hereby amended by deleting strike through text and adding underline text.
2-12-32: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM: The commission shall consist of nine (9) seven (7) members, appointed by the mayor with the approval
of the city council. The appointment of each member of the commission shall be for staggered terms of three (3) years. At the time of the initial
appointment, the mayor shall designate the length of term for each member to provide for staggered terms.
SECTION 2. REPEALER. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase,
or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.’
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, adoption, and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this _______ 4th day of ____________________, February, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 36/687
___________________________________
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________________________
Ryan T. Jacobson, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2343
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014, BY AMENDING PROVISION PERTAINING TO
THE TRAFFIC CODE RELATING TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA.
SECTION 1: TITLE 6 (MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC), CHAPTER 9, SECTION 6-9-5-1: NO PARKING ZONES: is hereby amended by the following
changes:
Add:
Street From To Side
Ninety Fourth Street University Avenue Bishop Drive West
Ninety Sixth Street University Avenue Bishop Drive West
SECTION 2. REPEALER. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY. If any section, provisions, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional,
such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 4. VIOLATION. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished with a fine not to exceed $100.00
plus applicable surcharge and court costs.
SECTION 5. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, adoption, and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 4th day of February 2019.
.
_______________________
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 37/687
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
___________________________
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
Published in the Des Moines Register this 8th day of February, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Prepared by: L. Twedt, West Des Moines Development Services, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265, 515-222-3620
When Recorded, Return to: City Clerk, City of West Des Moines, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265-0320
ORDINANCE NO. 2344
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA 2014 BY AMENDINGTITLE 9 (ZONING), CHAPTER 5 (AGRICULTURAL/OPEN
SPACE AND RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT) AND CHAPTER 10 (PERFORMANCE STANDARDS) TO ELIMINATE GARAGE REQUIREMENT FOR MULTI-FAMILY
CONDOMINIUM REGIME DEVELOPMENTS
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
Section 1. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 5 (Agricultural/Open Space and Residential Zoning District); Section 7 (Building Form Regulations and Zoning District Compatibility for Residential
Districts), Subsection B-2-c is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted strikethrough text:
B. Building Type:
2. Multi-Family Detached (MF-D):
a. Unit Arrangements: One unit, no attachment.
b. Property Regime: May have ownership of unit structure and real property or just unit envelope. Will have common property providing services to units (i.e., utilities, access).
Maintenance and management provided by an association.
c. Garages:Minimum of one and one-half (11/2) car garage required (attached or detached).
Section 2. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 5 (Agricultural/Open Space and Residential Zoning District); Section 7 (Building Form Regulations and Zoning District Compatibility for Residential
Districts), Subsection B-3-d is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted strikethrough text:
B. Building Type:
3. Multi-Family Attached Horizontal (MF-AH):
a. Unit Arrangements: Units are attached only horizontal, no stacked units. Units may be attached along side walls or attached along the side and rear wall.
b. Property Regime:
(1) May have ownership of unit structure and real property (this is the typical ownership form for townhomes) or just unit envelope (this is the typical ownership form for
condominiums). Has common property providing services to units (i.e., utilities, access). Maintenance and management provided by an association.
(2) One owner of building and property with no property ownership associated with the units (this is the typical ownership form for apartments). Maintenance and management
provided by the property manager.
c. Entry Type: Individual unit entry, no common entry element.
d. Garages:Minimum of one car garage per unit required (attached or detached) for the property regime in subsection B3b(1) of this section. No garage requirement for the property
regime in subsection B3b(2) of this section.
Section 3. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 5 (Agricultural/Open Space and Residential Zoning District); Section 7 (Building Form Regulations and Zoning District Compatibility for Residential
Districts), Subsection B-4-d is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted strikethrough:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 38/687
B. Building Type:
4. Multi-Family Attached Vertical (MF-AV):
a. Unit Arrangements: Units attached vertically. Units may be attached along side wall or rear wall.
b. Property Regime:
(1) Ownership of unit envelope (this is the typical ownership form for condominiums). Has common property providing services to units (i.e., utilities). Maintenance and
management provided by an association.
(2) One owner of building and property with no property ownership associated with unit (this is the typical ownership form for apartments). Maintenance and management
provided by the property manager.
c. Entry Type:
(1) Individual: Individual unit entry, no common entry element.
(2) Shared: Some type of common entry element either conditioned or nonconditioned space.
d. Garages: Minimum of one car garage per unit required (attached or detached) for the property regime in subsection B4b(1) of this section. No garage requirement for the property
regime in subsection B4b(2) of this section.
Section 4. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 10 (Performance Standards), Section 4 (Special Use Regulations) Subsection B is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted strikethrough text and
renumbering subsequent subsections accordingly:
B. The Following Standards Shall Apply to All Residential Districts:
1. For the purpose of this subsection an "enclosed parking space" or reference to a "garage" shall mean a covered space fully surrounded by walls, including windows, doors and similar
openings or architectural features.
2. For any detached single-family residential dwelling, a minimum of one enclosed garage parking space shall be required for the use. This garage may be attached or detached but shall be
of a minimum twenty foot by fourteen foot (20' x 14') size to accommodate one vehicle and additional storage.
3. For any single-family attached dwelling intended as owner occupied, a minimum of one enclosed parking space shall be required for each unit. This parking space shall be a minimum of
nineteen feet by nine feet (19' x 9') and may be designed as a freestanding garage, attached garage or multiple garage spaces within an enclosure.
4. Any existing detached single-family residence and any single-family attached dwelling intended as owner occupied shall be required to comply with the enclosed garage space if the
residence is proposed to be remodeled, enlarged, expanded or modified and the cumulative value of the alterations of the structure since the adoption date hereof exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the current valuation of the structure.
For the purpose of determining the valuation of the building, the current assessor's tax roll shall be used. The valuation shall be measured on a cumulative basis for all alterations made
since the adoption date hereof rather than evaluating each alteration independently against the current valuation.
5. Any existing detached single-family residence and any single-family attached dwelling intended as owner occupied which is damaged or destroyed by catastrophe or act of God to the
extent equaling fifty percent (50%) or more of its total assessed value, shall be exempt from the provisions of this Code regarding the garage requirement as a part of the reconstruction
of the damage to the residential structure due to the catastrophe or act of God.
6. Any existing single-family attached dwelling which has not previously been operated as owner occupied and intends to convert to an owner-occupied program shall be required to
comply with the provisions of this subsection.
7. For single family zoning districts in or adjacent to developed areas, buildings should be designed to be consistent with its surrounding architectural context or historic character of the
area with comparable architectural design, materials and details, including building mass and roof slope.
Section 5. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 6. Savings Clause. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 7. Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa.
Section 8. Other Remedies. In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or corporation for violation
of any section or subsection of this Ordinance.
Section 9. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
Passed by the City Council on the 19th day of February, 2019, and approved this 19th day of February, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 39/687
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
Ryan T Jacobson
City Clerk
The foregoing Ordinance No. 2344 was adopted by the Council for the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, on February 19, 2019, and was published in the Des Moines Register on March 1, 2019.
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
Disclaimer:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 40/687
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Prepared by: B. Portz, West Des Moines Development Services, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265, 515-222-3620
When Recorded, Return to: City Clerk, City of West Des Moines, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265-0320
ORDINANCE NO. 2349
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014, TITLE 9 (ZONING), CHAPTER 6 (COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, AND
INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT) TO MODIFY THE PERMITTED USES AND PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES ALLOWED IN THE PROFESSIONAL COMMERCE PARK AND
OFFICE ZONING DISTRICTS
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
Section 1. Amendment. Title 9: Zoning; Chapter 6: Commercial, Office and Industrial Zoning District; Section 6, Commercial, Office, and Industrial Use Regulations; Subsection C: Table 6.1 – Use
Matrix; Division E and Division I is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted strikethrough text and adding text in bold, italicized lettering.
SIC CODES RC CMC NC CVC SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
DIVISION E – TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
4226 Document
and office
records storage
P P P P P Pc
4522
Heliport/helistop
(ancillary to a
primary use)
Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
DIVISION I - SERVICES
701 Hotels and
motels (without
an event venue)
P P P P P1 P
701 Hotels and
motels (with an
P P P P Pc1 Pc
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 41/687
event venue)
726 Funeral
Service (except:
crematories)
Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
79 Amusement
and recreational
services – Event
venue 5,000 sq.
ft. or less
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
79 Amusement
and recreational
services – Event
venue greater
than 5,000 sq. ft.
Pc Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
7997
Membership
sports and
recreation clubs
Pc Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc Pc
806 Hospitals Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
8062 General
medical and
surgical
hospitals
P P P P
8063 Psychiatric
hospitals
Pc Pc Pc Pc
8069 Specialty
hospitals
-Substance
abuse hospitals
Pc Pc
-Chronic disease
hospitals
P P P P
-Respiratory
hospital
P P P P
-Children's
hospital, eye,
ear, nose and
throat hospital,
geriatric
hospital,
maternity
hospital,
orthopedic
hospital
P P P P
1 Except when the property shares a property line with a single family or medium density zoned or utilized property, then the use is not permitted.
Section 2. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 42/687
Section 3. Savings Clause. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 4. Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa.
Section 5. Other Remedies. In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or corporation for violation
of any section or subsection of this Ordinance.
Section 6. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
Passed by the City Council on the 4th day of March, 2019, and approved this 4th day of March, 2019.
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
Ryan T Jacobson
City Clerk
The foregoing Ordinance No. 2349 was adopted by the Council for the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, on March 4, 2019, and was published in the Des Moines Register on March 8, 2019.
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 43/687
Prepared by: J.B. Munford, West Des Moines Development Services, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265, 515-222-3620
When Recorded, Return to: City Clerk, City of West Des Moines, PO Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265-0320
ORDINANCE NO. 2350
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014, TITLE 9 (ZONING), CHAPTER 15 (OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING),
SECTION 4 (GENERAL OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS), SECTION 6 (DESIGN STANDARDS), SECTION 7 (NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED) TO AMEND
REGULATION PERTAINING TO OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
Section 1. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 15 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) Section 4 (General Off-Street Parking Regulations), Subsection A12, is hereby amended by deleting the
highlighted strikethrough text and adding the bold italic text.
A. General Provisions: All of the following standards shall apply to all off-street parking:
12. Parking Structures: Parking structures are subject to setbacks, building height, and other development standards of a principal structure in the respective zoning district. In addition:
a. Garages and carports are allowed in the side and rear yards for zero lot line homes and multi-family residential projects in each multi-family residential zone.
b. Parking ramps, above or below ground shall be reviewed by the city as part of the site plan review process.
Section 2. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 15 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) Section 6 (Design Standards), Subsections B5, I and J, is hereby amended by deleting the highlighted
strikethrough text and adding the bold italic text.
B. Access: With respect to access, all of the following shall apply:
5. Private Drive/Street
a. Access to four (4) or fewer single-family detached houses shall be considered a private drive. Access to more than four (4) single-family detached houses shall be considered a private street.
b. Single-family attached developments having paved access to garages without adequate room to park an additional car between the roadway and garage shall consider the access to be a private
drive. If the length of paving in front of the garage is long enough to accommodate the parking of a car, the roadway shall be considered a private street and the paving between the garage and
roadway will be considered a private drive.
I. Striping: All parking spaces, except individual dwelling unit driveways, parking spaces for single-family attached and detached residences, shall be striped in accordance with city requirementsthe
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) standards. The striping shall be maintained in a clear and visible manner.
J. Wheel Stops/Curbing: All Off-Street parking areas lots and associated driveways aisles, access roadways and frontage roads, except driveways for single-family attached and detached residences, shall
be constructed with permanent, integrally attached, continuous Portland cement concrete curbing of at least four inches (4") high and six inches (6") wide or of alternate height and width acceptable to
the city. Prefabricated portable curb or wheel stops shall not be considered an acceptable alternative to curbing, unless otherwise approved by the city council during review of a development request.
1. Wheel stops in addition to curbing shall be allowed in the following instances:
a) When the adjoining pedestrian walkway is less than six feet (6’) in width. In these instances, the depth of the parking stall shall be increased to accommodate vehicle overhang within
the stall so that a minimum four feet (4’) clear width is maintained on the walkway.
b) When curb is dropped to provide accessible parking spaces. In these instances, the length of the dropped curb shall extend only the width of the stall (or stalls if adjacent) and any
associated accessible walkway then transition back to full height curb at the first regular stall.
2. The curbing shall be at least three feet (3') from any wall, fence, property line, walkway, or structure where parking and/or driveways or aisles are located adjacent thereto.
Section 3. Amendment. Title 9 (Zoning), Chapter 15 (Off-Street Parking And Loading) Section 7 (Number Of Parking Spaces Required), is hereby amended by deleting all of Title 9; Chapter 15,
Section 7 and replacing with the text below.
9-15-7: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
A. Uses Not Specified: In the case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is mentioned, and to which said use is similar
shall apply, as determined by the Development Services Director.
B. Development with more than one use: If more than one use exists in a building or on a site, each separate use’s parking requirements shall be calculated individually (i.e. Restaurant in hotel – restaurant
total calculated for restaurant Gross Floor Area (GFA) and hotel total calculated for hotel guestrooms and staff).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 44/687
C. Parking Spaces Requirements for Land Uses:
Land Use Requirements
Residential
Single-Family Attached and
Detached Dwelling
· 2 Spaces Per Dwelling Unit
· Tandem Parking Allowed
· Attached Units & Manufactured Housing – 1 Visitor Space Per 10
Units
Multi-Family Dwelling · Efficiency Apartment – 1.5 Spaces Per Unit
· 1-2 Bedroom Units – 1.75 Spaces Per Unit
· 3+ Bedroom Units – 2 Spaces Per Unit
· 1 Visitor Space Per 10 Units
Service & Commercial
Office · 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Medical Office · 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Hospitals & Nursing and
Personal Care Facilities
· 1 space per 3 beds
· 1 space per employee on max shift
Planned Commercial Center · 4.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Animal Services · 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Manufacturing and Industrial · 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Warehousing, Storage Lots, &
Construction Yards
· 0.75 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· 1 space per employee
Self-Storage Facilities · 0.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· Interior Access Facilities – Demonstrate parking availability for reuse
of the building for a common use in the zoning district in which it is
located
Retail · 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Convenience Store · 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· With gas sales – 1 space per pump
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 45/687
Car, Boat, & Recreational
Vehicle Dealers
· 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· Paved surface area shall be provided for each automobile on display
for sale
Vehicle Service Station · 3 spaces per service bay
· 1 space per service vehicle
· 1 space per employee on max shift
Car Washes · Full service: 1 space per employee on max shift
· Self-service: 2 spaces per stall
· 2 space queuing lane for each stall
Restaurants – Fast Food (No
Seating Area)
· 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· 11 queuing spaces per drive-through (5 of which shall be designated
for the ordering station if it is separate from the pickup window)
· 1 space per employee
Restaurants – Fast Food With
Dining
· 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· 11 queuing spaces per drive-through (5 of which shall be designated
for the ordering station if it is separate from the pickup window)
Restaurants – Sit-Down (No
Drive-Through)
· 20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Coffee Shops · 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· 11 queuing spaces per drive-through (5 of which shall be designated
for the ordering station if it is separate from the pickup window)
Drinking Places · 20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Banks · 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· 3 queuing spaces per drive-through lane
Hotels/Motels · 1 space for each guestroom
· 1 space per employee – dwelling parking may be used for this
requirement in cases of Bed and Breakfasts
Laundry Services · 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· 3 queuing spaces per drive-through lane
Motion Picture Theaters · 1 space per 4 fixed seats
Assembly Spaces · 20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Bowling Centers · 3 spaces per lane
Physical Fitness · 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 46/687
Facilities/Health Club · 4 spaces per netted court (such as tennis)
· 1 space per 40 square feet of swimming pool area
Golf Courses · 6 spaces per hole
Driving Range or Miniature
Golf Course
· 3 spaces
· 1 space per tee/hole
Elementary & Middle
Schools
· 1 space per employee
· 1 space per 5 seats in gymnasium and auditorium
· 25 space pickup/drop off queuing lane
High Schools · 5 spaces per classroom
· 1 space per 10 students
· 10 space pickup/drop off queuing lane
Colleges, Universities,
Vocational, And Trade
Schools
· 1.5 spaces per employee
· 1 space per 3 student desks or classroom seating capacity
Auditoriums, Theaters,
Stadiums, And Arenas
· 1 space per 4 fixed seats or 20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA,
whichever is greater
Libraries or Cultural Exhibits · 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Child Day Care Services · 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
· 1 space per employee
· 1 space per van or bus
Religious Organizations &
Funeral Services/Crematories
· 20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of assembly area
· 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet for non-assembly GFA
Section 4. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 5. Savings Clause. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 6. Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 and Section 2 of the City
Code of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
Section 7. Other Remedies. In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or corporation for violation
of any section or subsection of this Ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 47/687
Section 8. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
Passed by the City Council on the 4th day of March, 2019, and approved this 4th day of March, 2019.
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
Ryan T Jacobson, City Clerk
The foregoing Ordinance No. 2350 was adopted by the Council for the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, on
March 4, 2019, and was published in the Des Moines Register on March 8, 2019.
Ryan T. Jacobson, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2351
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE, CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA 2014 BY AMENDING TITLE 7, “PUBLIC WAYS AND
PROPERTY”,
CHAPTER 8F, “INDUSTRIAL WASTE”
SECTION I.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 48/687
Ordinance No.1875 and attachments thereto regulating industrial waste, commercial wastewater and hauled waste adopted by reference by the
City Council of the City of West Des Moines on January 30, 2006 is hereby amended by the addition of the highlighted, underlined text and deletion of the
highlighted, strike-through text and renumbering subsequent subsections accordingly as set out herein and re-adopted in its entirety as set forth below:
ARTICLE F
REGULATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER, COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED WASTE
SECTION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Sec. 1.A. Definitions.
Sec. 1.B. Abbreviations.
Sec. 1.C. General adoption.
Sec. 1.D. Intent and construction.
Sec. 1.E. Purpose and policy.
Sec. 1.F. Jurisdiction.
Sec. 1.G. Severability.
Sec. 1.H. Interpretation.
Sec. 1.I. Reserved.
SECTION 2. INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND
PRETREATMENT
Sec. 2.A. User requirements.
Sec. 2.B. Discharge prohibitions.
Sec. 2.C. Local limits for specific pollutants.
Sec. 2.D. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Sec. 2.E. State requirements.
Sec. 2.F. City's right of revision.
Sec. 2.G. Pretreatment.
Sec. 2.H. Dilution prohibited.
Sec. 2.I. Spill containment.
Sec. 2.J. Treatment upsets.
Sec. 2.K. Treatment bypass.
Sec. 2.L. Fees.
Sec. 2.M. Reserved.
SECTION 3. INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS AND REPORTING
Sec. 3.A. Classes of permits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 49/687
Sec. 3.B. Permit requirements.
Sec. 3.C. Permit applications; baseline monitoring reports.
Sec. 3.D. Report on compliance by categorical industries.
Sec. 3.E. Permit contents.
Sec. 3.F. Permit duration and renewal.
Sec. 3.G. Continuation of expired permits.
Sec. 3.H. Permit modifications.
Sec. 3.I. Permit transfer.
Sec. 3.J. Denial of permit.
Sec. 3.K. Permit violations.
Sec. 3.L. Periodic compliance reports.
Sec. 3.M. Certification and signatory requirements.
Sec. 3.N. Monitoring facilities.
Sec. 3.O. Inspection, sampling and recordkeeping authority.
Sec. 3.P. Confidential information.
Sec. 3.Q. Appeal of denial of confidential status.
Sec. 3.R. Reserved.
SECTION 4. ENFORCEMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER REGULATIONS
Sec. 4.A. Public notification of significant noncompliance.
Sec. 4.B. Significant noncompliance.
Sec. 4.C. Administrative actions.
Sec. 4.D. Actions authorized.
Sec. 4.E. Civil penalties.
Sec. 4.F. Performance bonds.
Sec. 4.G. Revocation of permit.
Sec. 4.H. Termination of service.
Sec. 4.I. Reinstatement of service.
Sec. 4.J. Emergency disconnection of service.
Sec. 4.K. Elimination of discharge; reinstatement of permit.
Sec. 4.L. Additional remedies.
Sec. 4.M. Notices to the WRA, the WRA Board, the WRA Director or the WRA Steering Committee
Sec. 4.N. Reserved.
SECTION 5. REGULATION OF FAT, OIL AND GREASE DISCHARGE BY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 5.A. Purpose.
Sec. 5.B. Definitions.
Sec. 5.C. Effective date of FOG regulations.
Sec. 5.D. Grease interceptor installation required after effective date.
Sec. 5.E. Exemptions from grease interceptor installation requirement for existing facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 50/687
Sec. 5.F. Compliance procedures.
Sec. 5.G. Installation of grease interceptors and grease traps.
Sec. 5.H. Operation, maintenance and cleaning of grease interceptors.
Sec. 5.I. Records and record keeping.
Sec. 5.J. Inspection of grease interceptors and related sewer and equipment.
Sec. 5.K. Inspection fees.
Sec. 5.L. Enforcement.
Sec. 5.M. Notice of violation-administrative penalties-corrective action order.
Sec. 5.N. Penalties.
Sec. 5.O. Order to cease operation of FSE.
Sec. 5.P. Appeal of corrective action order or cease and desist order.
Sec. 5.Q. Additional remedies.
Sec. 5.R. Reserved.
SECTION 6. REGULATION OF HAULED WASTE
Sec. 6.A. Definitions.
Sec. 6.B. License.
Sec. 6.C. Issuance of License.
Sec. 6.D. Standards for Vehicles and Equipment.
Sec. 6.E. Disposal.
Sec. 6.F. Identification of Source.
Sec. 6.G. Mixing Waste.
Sec. 6.H. Standards of Disposal at WRF.
Sec. 6.I. Rejection of Waste Loads.
Sec. 6.J. Treatment Fees for Hauled Waste.
Sec. 6.K. Enforcement.
Sec. 6.L. Notice of Violation – Administrative Penalties – Corrective Action Order.
Sec. 6.M. Penalties.
Sec. 6.N. Denial, Suspension and Revocation of License.
Sec. 6.O. Alternative Relief.
SECTION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING INDUSTRIAL WASTE
A. DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
(1) Act or Clean Water Act means the 1972 Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the 1977 Clean Water Act, and the 1987 Water Quality Act, as
amended.
(2) Approval authority means the Iowa department of natural resources.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 51/687
(3) Authorized representative means:
(a) An executive officer of a corporation.
(b) A general partner of a partnership.
(c) The proprietor of a proprietorship.
(d) The conservator, trustee, attorney in fact, receiver or other person or agent authorized in law and in fact to act on behalf of users which are not
corporations, partnerships, or proprietorships or on behalf of other entities which must legally act through an agent.
(e) Any other authorized representative of a person or entity identified in subsections (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this definition, if the authorization
specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, such
as the position of plant manager or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company and the written authorization is submitted to the director.
(f) Any other person authorized by law to act on behalf of any entity.
(4) Baseline monitoring report means the report required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-7).
(5) Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the analysis of BOD as described in Environmental Protection Agency methods.
(6) Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other
drainage pipes inside the wall of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three feet outside the building wall.
(7) Building sewer or lateral sewer means the sewer extending from the building drain to the connection with the POTW.
(8) Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's pretreatment facility.
(9) Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD) means the analysis of BOD as described in Environmental Protection Agency
methods while inhibiting the nitrogenous oxygen demand.
(10) Categorical user means a user subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(11) Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the measurement of the susceptibility of a sample to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant
expressed in mg/l and using Environmental Protection Agency methods.
(12) City means the political subdivision known as the city of West Des Moines, Iowa) and also means the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the city of West Des Moines.
(13) City sanitary sewer system or sanitary sewer system means the local outfall sewers, trunk sewers, pumping stations, force mains, and
wastewater equalization basins, and all other structures, devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, which are used for collecting,
conveying or storing wastewater and which serve and are owned, operated and maintained by the city or by a sanitary district serving the
city.
(14) Combined waste stream formula means the formula as found in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 52/687
(15) Composite sample means a representative sample using a minimum of three grab sample aliquots obtained over a period of time and
mixed using either a flow proportional or time proportional method.
(16) Conventional pollutant means BOD, COD, O&G, suspended solids, pH, ammonia nitrogen, total Kjeldahl nitrogen and fecal coliform
bacteria.
(17) County means the political subdivisions known as Dallas, Madison, Polk and Warren Counties and also means the territory within the
corporate boundaries of Dallas, Madison, Polk and Warren Counties.
(18) County sanitary sewer system or sanitary sewer system means the local outfall sewers, trunk sewers, pumping stations, force mains, and
wastewater equalization basins, and all other structures, devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, which are used for collecting,
conveying or storing wastewater and which serve and are owned, operated and maintained by the county or by a sanitary district serving the
county.
(19) Discharge or indirect discharge means the introduction of treated or untreated wastewater into the POTW.
(20) Dissolved solids means the concentration of residue left in an evaporating dish after evaporation and drying at defined temperatures using
Environmental Protection Agency methods or standard methods.
(21) Domestic wastewater means all household-type waste discharged from places of human habitation, including toilet, bath, kitchen and
laundry wastewater.
(22) Domestic wastewater is further defined as waste which does not exceed daily maximum limits of 300 mg/l COD, 200 mg/l BOD, 250 mg/l
suspended solids, 100 mg/l oil & grease, 30 mg/l TKN, and 15 mg/l NH3-N at a discharge rate of 100 gallons per capita per day. This loading
is equal to 0.25 pound of COD, 0.17 pound of BOD, 0.20 pound of suspended solids, 0.083 pound of oil & grease, 0.025 pound of TKN and
0.013 pound of NH3-N per capita per day.
(23) Domestic user means a person discharging only domestic wastewater to the POTW, which wastewater is discharges from any building or
parts of a building designed for or occupied by one or more persons as a single housekeeping unit, including such units within multifamily
dwellings and apartment buildings, which building or premises is a source of wastewater discharge into a POTW.
(24) Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(25) Environmental Protection Agency methods means standard procedures for wastewater analysis approved by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency and prescribed in 40 CFR 136, and includes alternate methods approved by the approval authority.
(26) E. Coli or Escherichia coli means bacteria that are a member of the fecal coliform group and whose presence indicates fecal
contamination in water.
(27) Fecal coliform means bacteria common to the intestinal tracts of humans and animals whose presence in water is an indication of
pollution.
(28) Fat, oil, and grease or oil and grease or FOG means those substances which are detectable and measurable using analytical test
procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or
“greases”.
(29) Garbage means solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the commercial
handling, storage and sale of produce.
(30) Grab sample means a single aliquot sample collected either directly or by means of a mechanical device.
(31) Headworks means the main wet well at the WRF prior to any treatment process.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 53/687
(32) Industrial user means a person whose property, building or premises is a source of wastewater discharge into the POTW, other than a
domestic user.
(33) Industrial waste means the liquid waste from industrial users as distinct from domestic sewage.
(34) Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, which both:
(a) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and
(b) Causes a violation of any requirement of the WRA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any federal, state or local regulations or
permits.
(35) Limit means the maximum allowable discharge of a given pollutant as in the following definitions:
(a) Daily maximum limit or daily instantaneous maximum limit means the maximum allowable discharge of pollutant as measured at
any time during a calendar day, expressed as either a concentration limit or a daily mass limit. It is a violation if the concentration
limit on any single sample taken exceeds that discharge limits in the discharge permit for the user, or the discharge limits set forth in
Section 2.C.
(b) Monthly average limit means the maximum allowable value for the average of all measurements of a pollutant obtained during one
calendar month.
(36) National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NCPS) or categorical standards means any limitations on pollutant discharges to POTW
promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency that apply to specified process wastewater of particular industrial categories.
(37) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to the Act.
(38) New source means a source as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(k).
(39) Nonconventional pollutants means all pollutants which are not included in the definition of conventional pollutants.
(40) NH3-N means the ammonia nitrogen concentration in mg/l as determined using Environmental Protection Agency methods.
(41) O&M means operation and maintenance.
(41) Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into water of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the WRA's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or other permit issued to the WRA by the Iowa
department of natural resources or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(42) Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, association, joint stock company, society, corporation trust,
estate, municipality, governmental entity, group, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
(43) pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
(44) Pollution means the alteration of chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water as a result of human activity or enterprise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 54/687
(45) POTW treatment plant means that portion of the publicly owned treatment works which is designed to provide treatment, including
recycling and reclamation, of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
(46) Pretreatment means the reduction, elimination, or alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
(47) Pretreatment facility means the equipment used to accomplish pretreatment.
(48) Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment standards, imposed on an industrial
user.
(49) Pretreatment standards means, for any specified pollutant, the prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in Section 2.B of this Article,
the specific limitations on discharge as set forth in Section 2.C of this Article, the state pretreatment standards or the National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, whichever standard is most stringent.
(50) Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles are carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the POTW, with no particle greater than one-half
inch in any dimension.
(51) Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means and includes "POTW" treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, and which
is owned by the Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority or any of Participating Communities that make up the WRA.
This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW Treatment Plant.
(52) Sampling chamber or sampling maintenance hole means a device or structure suitable and appropriate to permit sampling and flow
measurement of a wastewater stream to determine compliance with this article.
(53) Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to a pretreatment facility causing it to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.
Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(54) Sewage means and includes wastewater as herein defined.
(55) Sewage system means sewers, intercepting sewers, pipes or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all other constructions, devices
and appliances appurtenant thereto used for collecting or conducting sewage to a point of treatment or ultimate disposal.
(56) Significant user means:
(a) All categorical users.
(b) All industrial users that:
(i) Discharge 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excludes sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown
wastewater);
(ii) Contribute a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the WRF; or
(iii)Contribute a discharge that has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the director, to adversely affect the POTW treatment
plant by causing interference or pass through.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 55/687
(57) Sludge means the solids separated from the liquids during the wastewater treatment process.
(58) Slug or slug load means any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any pollutant, measured using a grab or
composite sample, is more than five times the allowable concentration as set forth in Sections 2.B and 2.C of this Article or in a user's most
recent wastewater discharge permit or which exceeds a slug concentration level specified in a wastewater discharge permit. A discharge with
pH outside the allowable range by more than one standard unit (S.U.) or a flow rate in excess of two times the maximum flow limit
established in a wastewater discharge permit shall also be considered a slug.
(59) Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, most recent edition.
(60) Standard Methods means the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest USEPA approved edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association, and the Water Environment Federation.
(61) Storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial waste other than
unpolluted cooling water.
(62) T, when used as a portion of a chemical name, shall designate "total" such as in "cyanide-T" where "T" means "total" cyanide.
(63) TKN means the Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen concentration expressed in mg/l as determined using Environmental Protection Agency methods
or Standard Methods.
(64) Total metal means the sum total of the suspended and dissolved concentrations of a metal specified in a wastewater discharge permit or
as specified in Section 2.C hereof.
(65) Total suspended solids (TSS) means the portion of total solids retained by a filter using Environmental Protection Agency methods or
Standard Methods.
(66) Total Toxic Organics (TTO) means the summation of all quantified values greater than 0.01 milligram per liter for the toxic organics as
specified in the applicable regulation.
(67) Toxic Pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in 40 CFR 403, appendix B.
(68) Unpolluted Water means water containing none of the following: free or emulsified oil and grease; substances that may impart taste, odor
or color characteristics; volatile, explosive, toxic or poisonous substances in suspension or solution; explosive, odorous or otherwise
obnoxious gases. Such water shall not contain more than 25 mg/l of suspended solids, and not more than 25 mg/l of BOD.
(69) Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed pretreatment facilities, inadequate pretreatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
(70) User means a person discharging anything other than domestic wastewater into the POTW, and includes categorical users as herein
defined.
(71) Waste hauler means a private contractor licensed by the WRA to deliver wastewater to the WRF or other locations approved by the WRA
director, and includes all persons required to have a license under Section 6.B of this Article.
(72) Wastewater means and includes sewage as defined in federal law and regulation, or a combination of the liquid and water-carried waste
from residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and
stormwater as may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the OTW POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 56/687
(73) Wastewater discharge permit means the document issued to a user by the WRA in accordance with the terms of this article which permits
such user to discharge wastewater to the POTW.
(74) Water of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(75) WRA or wastewater reclamation authority means the Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority, an entity organized and
existing under Chapters 28E and 28F of the Iowa Code, and established pursuant to the WRA Agreement. The term "WRA" means and
includes the representatives of the Participating Communities on the WRA Board, and the officers and employees of the WRA.
(76) WRA agreement means the Amended and Restated Agreement for the Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority,
approved and executed by the WRA and its Participating Communities and effective as of July 1, 2004.
(77) WRA director or director means the person appointed by the WRA board, or by the WRA operating contractor upon consultation with the
board, as provided in Section 2.63 of the WRA operating contract, who is charged with the administration and management of the WRA
system and of the provision of all services outlined in operating contract. Unless otherwise indicated in the text, the director shall mean and
include the person acting as the director's authorized designee in the director's absence in carrying out the director's duties under this
Article.
(78) WRA operating contractor or operating contractor means the city of Des Moines, pursuant to the Initial Operating Contractor executed by
the city of Des Moines and the WRA Board on and as of July 1, 2004, or such successor operating contractor as the WRA shall contract with
to provide operation and management services to the WRA
(79) WRA participating community or WRA participating communities means, individually or collectively, depending on context, the cities of
Altoona, Ankeny, Bondurant, Clive, Cumming, Des Moines, Johnston, Norwalk, Pleasant Hill, Polk City, Waukee and West Des Moines, and
Polk County, Warren County, the Urbandale Sanitary Sewer District, the Urbandale-Windsor Heights Sanitary District and the Greenfield
Plaza/Hills of Coventry Sanitary District, together with any other cities, counties, or sanitary districts that become participating communities
under the provisions of the WRA agreement.
(80) WRA wastewater collection and conveyance system or WCCS means the WRA sanitary sewer interceptors and extensions to same,
detention basins, equalization basins, storage facilities, pumping stations, force mains and all related property and improvements.
(81) WRA wastewater reclamation facility or WRF means the wastewater treatment plant located generally at 3000 Vandalia Road, Des
Moines, Iowa, as the same may be expanded or improved in the future, and any other wastewater treatment plants hereafter acquired or
constructed and operated by the WRA.
(82) WRA system means and includes the WRF, the WCCS, satellite wastewater and CSO treatment facilities hereafter constructed, all real
and personal property of every nature hereinafter owned by the WRA and comprising part of or used as a part of the WRA system, and all
appurtenances, contracts, leases, franchises and other intangibles of the WRA.
B. ABBREVIATIONS.
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:
BETX Benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylenes(total)
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
BMR Baseline monitoring report
C Celsius
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 57/687
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
F Fahrenheit
FOG Fat oil, and grease
GPD Gallons per day
IDNR Iowa Department of Natural Resources
lb/day Pounds per day
Mgd Million gallons per day
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NCPS National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or categorical standards
NH3-N Ammonia nitrogen
NPDES National Pollution Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&G Oil and grease
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SCP Spill control plan
SIC Standard industrial classification
SNC Significant noncompliance
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
TCLP Toxicity characteristic leaching procedure
TFE Trichlorotrifluoroethane
TKN Total Kjeldahl nitrogen
TOH Total organic hydrocarbons
TPH Total purgeable hydrocarbons
TRC Technical review criteria
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
USC United States Code
U.S. EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 58/687
VPH Volatile petroleum hydrocarbons
C. GENERAL ADOPTION.
The provisions of this article are enacted to aid in the enforcement of the pretreatment regulations set forth in this article and may be placed in a
separate portion of the municipal code of any WRA participating community which adopts these provisions. Each WRA participating community by
enacting this article designates the WRA and its operating contractor as the enforcement agency under this article. Employees, agents and officers of
the WRA and of its operating contractor, while acting to enforce this article for the WRA, are empowered to make such inspections, issue such orders
or permits and take such actions within the corporate boundaries of the (city) (county)as are authorized by this article. The WRA or its operating
contractor is also authorized to impose and collect all fees or penalties authorized by this article, and are authorized to directly bill and collect from
contributors penalties, fees charges and surcharges from all users within the (city) (county). A user's failure to pay any fee, charge, penalty or
surcharge is a municipal infraction and shall also be grounds to discontinue sewer service to the user, all as hereafter more particularly provided. The
enforcement of this article in the (city) (county) is not dependent upon passage of this article or a similar ordinance by other WRA participating
communities.
D. INTENT AND CONSTRUCTION.
This article seeks to implement provisions of the Act, the general pretreatment regulations found at 40 CFR, Part 403 and the Iowa Administrative
Code, chapter 567, sections 62.4 and 62.8. This Article is to be construed and applied in accordance with the Clean Water Act amendments, the
general pretreatment regulations, the Iowa Administrative Code and the purpose and policy provision set forth in Section 1.E of this Article.
E. PURPOSE AND POLICY.
(1) This article regulates the use of sanitary sewers; private wastewater disposal; the installation and connection of building sewers; and the
discharge of wastewater or waste into the POTW. This article sets forth uniform requirements for discharges into the POTW, and the deposit
of wastewater and waste hauled to the WRF or to other locations approved by the WRA director for disposal and treatment.
(2) The objectives of this article are to:
(a) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may interfere with the operation of the system or interfere with sludge management
and disposal.
(b) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may pass through the system inadequately treated and ultimately into
receiving water, the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(c) Protect workers' safety and health and protect against damage to the POTW.
(d) Provide for equitable distribution of treatment and industrial pretreatment costs resulting from pollutants introduced into the POTW.
F. JURISDICTION.
The sections of this Article are applicable in their entirety to all users who contribute wastewater, directly or indirectly, into the POTW without regard to
whether the physical facilities of such users are situated within or outside the corporate limits of the city.
G. SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Article or the application thereof to any particular person or particular circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or application of this Article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end the provisions of this
Article are severable.
H. INTERPRETATION.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 59/687
This Article shall be construed and interpreted to conform with 40 CFR I, and it is the intent of this Article that it comply with the federal regulations.
I. RESERVED.
SECTION 2. INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND PRETREATMENT
A. USER REQUIREMENTS.
(1) The following requirements shall apply to all users of the POTW:
(a) All users shall promptly notify the WRA director in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in
their discharge.
(b) New or increased contributions of pollutants or changes in the nature of pollutant discharged to the POTW shall require prior
approval by the WRA director.
(c) Industrial users shall notify the WRA director, the Environmental Protection Agency Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR 261. The notification shall comply with the requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(p).
(d) Discharge of any pollutants without the notice and approval required by this subsection is prohibited. Upon the receipt of notice
required by this subsection, the WRA director shall within 180 days or less approve the discharge if he or she finds the proposed
discharge meets applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and would not cause the WRA to violate its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit. The WRA director shall deny permission for the discharge if he or she finds applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are not met or the discharge would cause a violation of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit for the WRF. In lieu of denial of permission for discharge, the WRA director may allow such discharge or
contribution upon conditions which would not violate applicable pretreatment standards or requirements and would not cause a
violation of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for the WRF.
(e) Food Service Establishments shall be regulated first under Section 5 of this ordinance but may be required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit and be subject to the requirements of Sections 1 through 4, inclusive, if the WRA Director determines that
additional pretreatment is required in order to comply with Fat, Oil, & Grease discharge limits.
(2) Any part of this subsection notwithstanding, upon receipt of the notice required by this subsection, the WRA director may require, in addition
to the requirements of this subsection, that an industrial user obtain a permit under this article.
(3) Users who are determined to be industrial users as herein defined and who refuse to apply for or obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
be subject to termination of sewer services as provided in Section 4.G hereof.
(C91, § 21-83; O.11, 716)
B. DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
The following general prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW unless the user is subject to a more restrictive National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, or wastewater discharge permit limit. The following substances are prohibited
from discharge to the POTW:
(a) Pollutants creating a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including but not limited to waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using test methods referenced in 40 CFR 261.21. Waste streams shall not
be ignitable at ambient temperatures. At no time shall two successive readings on a meter capable of reading L.E.L. (lower
explosive limit) at the nearest accessible point to the POTW, at the point of discharge into the POTW or at any point in the POTW,
be more than five percent nor any single reading greater than ten percent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 60/687
(b) Any substance which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0 or
greater than 12.0.
(c) Solid or viscous pollutants which will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. Such pollutants include
but are not limited to grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch any dimension, animal tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, wipes, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing waste, or tumbling and de-burring stones, and
wastewater containing fat, wax, O&G, or other substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and
150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius).
(d) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference or pass through at the WRF or which constitutes a slug load as defined in this article.
(e) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater or vapor
having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) at the point of introduction into the POTW, and in no
case wastewater or vapor which alone or in concert with other discharges produces a temperature at the WRF greater than 104
degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius).
(f) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
(g) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems or a public nuisance.
(h) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the WRA.
(i) Radioactive wastes unless they comply with Atomic Energy Commission Act of 1954 (68 Stat. 919 as amended and part 20,
subpart D, Waste Disposal, section 20.303 of the regulations issued by the Atomic Energy Commission, or amendments thereto).
(j) Any wastewater containing concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues, or of dissolved solids, such as but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate, which exceed 3,000 mg/l nonvolatile
or 3,000 mg/l total dissolved solids unless approved by the WRA director.
(k) Pollutants causing excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye waste and vegetable tanning solutions.
C. LOCAL LIMITS FOR SPECIFIC POLLUTANTS.
(1) Generally. Local limits for specific pollutants discharged pursuant to this article shall be as follows:
(a) Dilution. Dilution of the discharge from a pretreatment facility or from a regulated process is prohibited as a method for treatment of
wastes in order to meet the limits set forth in this article.
(b) Sample location. Measurement of pollutant concentrations to determine compliance shall be made at the point immediately
following the pretreatment facility and before mixture with other waters, unless another point is designated by the WRA director. If
necessary, the concentrations so measured shall be recomputed to exclude the effect of any dilution that is improper using the
combined waste stream formula.
(2) Headworks limits; average mass. The average composite loading of all industrial users contributing the following specific pollutants to the
POTW shall not exceed the allowable total pounds. The allocation of pollutants between industrial and nonindustrial sources may be
adjusted by the director provided that the allowable total loading for any pollutant at the headworks of the WRF is not exceeded.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 61/687
30-Day Average Allowable
Pounds/Day
Pollutant Total Industrial
BOD 195,600 135,153
TSS 300,400 208,463
NH3 13,000 6,959
TKN 27,760 16,950
Maximum Allowable
Headworks Loading
Pounds/Day
Maximum Allowable
Industrial Loading
Pounds/Day
Pollutant Total Industrial
Arsenic-T 4.24 7.58 3.87 3.81
Cadmium-T 2.71 3.65 2.54 2.16
Chromium-T 170.12 136.35 159.92 120.90
Copper-T 83.03 148.56 60.85 125.51
Cyanide-T 20.80 17.08 18.77 8.28
Lead-T 15.74 28.17 13.59 20.94
Mercury-T 0.63 0.999 0.59 0.747
Nickel-T 48.47 87.27 45.80 75.75
Silver-T 32.51 23.30 30.38 19.77
Zinc-T 201.54 360.59 158.34 283.53
(3) Discharge concentration limits and review criteria. Discharge concentration limits and review criteria shall be as follows:
(a) The discharge into the POTW of any materials, water or waste having a pollutant concentration greater than the limits in (3)(c), (d),
and (e) of this subsection or containing pollutants not listed in this subsection shall be subject to the review and approval of the WRA
director. After review of the proposed discharges, the WRA director may:
(i) Reject the waste for reasons consistent with Section 1.E of this article.
(ii) Require pretreatment to an acceptable pollutant concentration for discharge to the POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 62/687
(iii) Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge of the water or waste.
(iv)Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatment of water and waste or any combination thereof.
(v) Reduce the maximum or average mass loading of present and prospective individual users on any reasonable prorated basis
to meet headworks loading limits at the WRF.
(vi)Require the user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit and be subject to any of the rules and regulations contained therein.
(vii) Require the user to meet local limits when local limits are more restrictive than National Categorical Pretreatment Standards,
provided that headworks loading limits are met.
(viii) Initiate enforcement action in response to any noncompliance with this Article using the enforcement procedures outlined in
this Article.
(ix)Take any combination of the steps in subsections (3)(a)(i) through (3)(a)(vii), as appropriate.
(b) Users discharging wastewater to the POTW whose pollutant concentrations or flows are greater than the following shall be
considered industrial users for purposes of sewer charges and may be regulated or permitted by the WRA director as appropriate:
Pollutant Daily
Maximum
(mg/l)
I. BOD 200
II. TSS 250
III. COD 300
IV. O&G-T 100
V. TKN 30
VI. NH3-N 15
VII. An average daily flow greater than 5,000 gallons or having
an unusual concentration of flow constituting a slug load, as
defined in this article.
(c) Pollutant limits. Average and maximum concentration limits for users without National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for these pollutants
shall be as follows:
Pollutant Daily
Maximum
(mg/l)
Monthly
Average
(mg/l)
Arsenic-T 0.39 0.38 0.26 0.25
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 63/687
Cadmium-T 0.15 0.08 0.10 0.05
Chromium-T 13.33 6.43 8.89 4.29
Copper-T 3.44 10.21 2.29 6.80
Cyanide-T 1.25 0.53 0.83 0.36
Lead-T 0.61 1.43 0.41 0.95
Mercury-T 0.03 0.042 0.02 0.028
Nickel-T 4.20 7.22 2.80 4.81
O&G-T 400.0 --
O&G-Mineral 100.0 --
Silver-T 3.04 1.30 2.03 0.87
TPH VPH 10.0 --
Zinc-T 5.99 19.64 3.99 13.09
pH range shall be not lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0.
Temperature (liquids or vapors) shall be not greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit at the point of entry into the POTW.
(d) Daily maximum pollutant limits for waste haulers hauled waste. Wastes delivered to the WRF by truck or rail shall not exceed the
following maximum concentrations in any load or overall daily loading limits unless otherwise approved by the WRA Director:
Pollutant Concentration (mg/l) Loading (pounds/day)
COD 100,000 --
O&G-T 50,000 --
VPH 10.0 --
Arsenic-T 0.04 -- 0.014
Cadmium-T 2.70 -- 0.93
Chromium-T 72.0 -- 24.74
Copper-T 69.0 -- 23.71
Cyanide-T 0.75 -- 0.29
Lead-T 19.5 -- 6.70
Mercury-T 0.35 -- 0.12
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 64/687
Nickel-T 10.8 -- 3.71
Silver-T -- 0.26
Zinc-T 255.0 -- 87.62
TPH 10.0
pH range shall be not lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0.
(e) Daily maximum limit for gasoline cleanup projects. Discharge of wastewater from sites where gasoline is being removed from the
soil or groundwater shall meet the following limits prior to discharge to the POTW:
Pollutant mg/l
Benzene 0.050
BETX 0.750
(4) No subsection shall be construed to provide lesser discharge standards than are or that may be imposed and required by U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or the Iowa department of natural resources, nor to allow the average allowable total loading for any
pollutant at the headworks of the WRF to be exceeded.
D. NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
Users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NCPS) as contained in 40 CFR I, subchapter N, part 405-471 shall comply with the
standards and applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. New sources of categorical discharge shall meet National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards in the shortest feasible time, but in no case longer than 90 days from the commencement of discharge. Failure to comply shall
be a violation of this article and subject the user to enforcement action. The WRA is required to notify all known affected categorical users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. Failure of the WRA to notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty, if any, to comply with
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
E. STATE REQUIREMENTS.
State of Iowa requirements and limitations on discharges pursuant to this Article shall apply when they are more stringent than U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
or WRA requirements and limitations unless allowed by the Iowa department of natural resources.
F. CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.
The City, acting at the direction of the WRA, reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW than
those contained in this Article if deemed necessary to comply with the purpose and policy objectives presented in section 1.E of this Article.
G. PRETREATMENT.
(1) A user discharging or with potential to discharge any waste into the POTW as set forth in Section 2.B, 2.C or 2.D of this Article shall be
required by the WRA director to construct, install and operate, at the user's sole expense, such pretreatment facilities as may be required in
order to:
(a) Reduce the objectionable characteristics or constituents of wastewater to within the maximum limits provided for in Sections 2.B,
2.C, 2.D and 2.E of this Article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 65/687
(b) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such wastewater.
(c) Reduce the pollutants to such concentration and flows as may be contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit.
(d) Prevent the discharge of liquid waste containing FOG, sand in excessive amounts, any flammable waste, or other harmful
pollutants. All traps or similar devices shall be of a type and capacity needed to perform effectively and shall be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. All traps or devices shall be provided and maintained in efficient operating condition at all
times. Materials removed from traps shall be considered unacceptable for disposal at the WRF unless specifically approved by the
WRA director.
(2) All plans, specifications, technical operating data and other information pertinent to the proposed operation and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the WRA director prior to construction. Design and installation of such facilities
shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, chapters and laws, including local zoning regulations. The review and approval of
such plans and operating procedures shall, in no way, relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
produce an effluent acceptable to the WRA director under this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operations shall be reported to and be acceptable to the WRA director prior to the user's initiations of the changes.
(3) Users shall continuously maintain all pretreatment facilities required by this article in satisfactory and effective operating condition at the sole
expense of such user.
(4) No section contained in this article shall be construed to prevent or prohibit a separate or special agreement between the WRA and any user
whereby wastewater containing waste of unusual strength, character or composition may be accepted for treatment, subject to additional
payment by such user; provided, however, that such agreement shall have the prior approval of the WRA Board, shall not conflict with the
Iowa department of natural resources and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency requirements, and shall be consistent with subsection
2.C(2) Section 5.Mand Sections 2.D and 2.E of this Article, and subsection (6) of this subsection.
(5) The WRA director may reject any waste which, in the opinion of the director, may cause interference or pass through.
(6) Users shall obtain the specific approval of the WRA director prior to discharging any waste resulting from a pretreatment facility to the
POTW. The WRA director may develop a documentation system to track the transportation and final disposition of any pretreatment waste.
Pretreatment waste regulated by this subsection shall include waste generated as a result of pretreatment processes used to comply with
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits, air pollution permits, wastewater discharge permits, soil/groundwater reclamation
processes, and pollutants resulting from a spill of any liquid or solid material or the cleanup of any such spill. Pretreatment waste is prohibited
from disposal to the water of the state except as specifically permitted by the Iowa department of natural resources.
H. DILUTION PROHIBITED.
Users shall not increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or with any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the WRA or its Operating Contractor.
I. SPILL CONTAINMENT.
(1) Users having the ability to cause interference or pass through or to discharge a slug shall provide protection from accidental discharge to the
POTW of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials
shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained at the user's sole cost and expense.
(2) Users meeting the criteria in subsection I(1) of this section shall develop a spill containment plan. The plan shall require the approval of the WRA director
and shall contain the following:
(a) A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges.
(b) A description of stored chemicals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 66/687
(c) Procedures for immediately notifying the WRA of slug discharges, including any that would violate the discharge prohibitions in
Section 2.B of this Article. Notification procedures shall comply with subsections (3) and (4) of this subsection.
(d) A description of procedures and structures necessary to prevent adverse impacts upon the POTW from accidental spills including
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant
site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
(e) A schedule for the completion or implementation of necessary procedures and structures. Complete implementation and installation
of any procedures or structures shall be according to the shortest possible schedule, but in no case longer than one year. Review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify and operate its
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
(3) Users shall immediately telephone and notify the WRA of any accidental or deliberate discharge of pollutants which violates section 2.B of
this Article or which is a slug load. Any discharge into the POTW of a substance which is a listed or characteristic waste under section 3001
of RCRA must be immediately reported to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Regional Director, the Iowa department of natural
resources, and the WRA. Notifications required in this subsection shall include the name of caller, location and time of discharge, pollutant
concentration, volume and the corrective actions taken.
(4) Users shall submit a written report to the WRA director within five days following such an accidental or deliberate discharge describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Users shall submit follow-up reports
as may be required by the WRA director. Such report shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such report relieve the user of
any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or deliberate
discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to the city, result in the revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge
permit.
(5) Users shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its pretreatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of pretreatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power to the user's pretreatment facility is reduced, lost
or fails.
(6) Users required to have a spill containment plan must permanently post a notice in English and the language of common use on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call if a prohibited discharge occurs. Users shall ensure that all
employees who are in a position to cause, discover, or observe such an accidental discharge are advised of the emergency notification
procedures.
J. TREATMENT UPSETS.
Users shall inform the WRA director within one hour of becoming aware of an upset in operations that places it in a temporary state of noncompliance
with the pollutant limits in this article. Users shall provide a follow-up written report to the WRA director within five days. The report must demonstrate
that the pretreatment facility was being operated in a prudent and appropriate manner and shall contain:
(a) A description of the upset, its cause, and impact on the user's compliance status.
(b) The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and, if the noncompliance is continuing, the time
by which compliance is reasonably expected to be restored.
(c) All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of such an upset.
K. TREATMENT BYPASS.
(1) Under this article, bypass is prohibited unless it is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage or no feasible alternatives
exist such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
(2) The user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards, but only if it is for essential maintenance
to ensure efficient operation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 67/687
(3) Notification of bypass shall be submitted in accordance with the following:
(a) Anticipated bypass. If the user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice, at least ten days
before the date of the bypass, to the WRA director.
(b) Unanticipated bypass. The user shall immediately notify the WRA director and submit a written report to the WRA within five days.
This report shall specify the following:
(i) A description of the bypass, its cause, and the duration.
(ii) Whether the bypass has been corrected.
(iii)The steps being taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent a reoccurrence of the bypass.
(4) Proper notification shall not relieve the user of liability for treatment costs and fees or other remedies as provided for in Section 2.G of this
Article.
L. FEES.
To provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW and for the implementation of the pretreatment program established by this article, the
following fees are hereby established and shall be applicable to discharges by all users:
(a) All users shall be subject to the following fees and charges:
(i) The wastewater discharge permit application fee shall be $200.00 for a class A permit, $100 for a class B permit, and $100 for
a soil/groundwater remediation permit.
(ii) The annual fee for a class A wastewater discharge permit shall be $1000.00.
(iii)The annual fee for a class B wastewater discharge permit shall be $400.00.
(iv)The fee paid by each industrial user when an accidental discharge or slug load occurs shall be up to $1,000.00. The fee shall
reimburse the WRA for any costs incurred as a result of the discharge.
(v) The fee for sampling a user's discharge shall be $50.00 per day when using a 24-hour automatic sampler. The fee for
subsequent consecutive days and for collecting grab samples shall be $25.00 per day. When a sampling event must be
rescheduled due to failure of the user's sampling equipment or due to a sampler seal (used to detect sample tampering) being
broken, a trip charge of $25.00 and a rescheduling fee of $50.00 shall be assessed. The trip charge fee may be waived if the
user informs the WRA of sampling equipment failure prior to 8:00 a.m. of a scheduled sampling day.
(vi)Laboratory analysis fees for those analyses performed by the WRA shall be as follows:
LABORATORY ANALYSIS
FEES
Test Cost/Sample
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 68/687
BOD $ 20.00
COD 20.00
Total Organic Carbon (TOC) 20.00
TSS 10.00
pH 5.00
Oil and grease
Total 35.00
Mineral/nonmineral 35.00
Nitrogen, ammonia 15.00
Nitrogen, nitrate 15.00
TKN 30.00
Phosphorous, total 25.00
Potassium 12.00
Calcium carbonate equivalent 15.00
Soil analysis, each pollutant 20.00
Phenols 28.00
Cyanide 30.00
Metals:
Arsenic 20.00
Selenium 20.00
Mercury 25.00
Other metals (per parameter) 15.00
BETX (OA-1) 40.00
TPH VPH (OA-1) 40.00
BETX & TPH VPH (OA-1) 45.00
USEPA Tests:
608 Organochlorine
Pesticides & PCBs
70.00
624 Volatile Organic
Compounds
140.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 69/687
625 Base/Neutral Organic
Compounds
and/or
290.00
625 Acid/Organic
Compounds
290.00
(vii) Fees for analysis performed by laboratories other than the WRA laboratory shall be the full cost of each analysis.
(viii) Fees for annual or biannual inspections of permitted users shall be $100.00 for those holding a class A permit and $50.00 for
those holding a class B permit.
(ix)Fees for copying and mailing documents shall be $1.00 for the initial page and $0.25 for each additional page plus postage. No
charges shall be assessed for requests for copies received from individuals or agencies served by the WRA, provided the
number of pages requested does not exceed ten.
(x) Fees for past due reminders sent each 30 days that a balance remains unpaid shall be $5.00.
(xi)Prohibitive waste charges for each pollutant discharged in excess of permit or ordinance limits shall be $25.00 per day for class
B permit holders and $50.00 per day for class A permit holders. High strength charges shall double if discharges are slug loads.
Payment of fees does not preclude other enforcement action and may not be paid in lieu of compliance with discharge
limitations.
(xii) Fees for inspection of a Food Service Establishment grease trap or interceptor shall be $50.00 per visit Fees for inspection
of a food service establishment as defined in section 5 of this article, regulation of fats, oils, and grease discharge by
food service establishments, shall be $50 per visit.
(b) All users contributing wastewater in excess of the following concentrations shall be assessed a surcharge, which shall be in addition to the rates
and charges ordinarily billed to such users for sewer use:
Pollutant Surcharge
(per pound)
Suspended solids in excess of 250 mg/l $0.16
BOD or CBOD in excess of 200 mg/l 0.11
TKN in excess of 30 mg/l 0.61
Oil and grease in excess of 100 mg/l 0.06
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) in excess of 300 mg/l may be used at the discretion of the WRA director in lieu of CBOD. In such
case the excess COD concentration shall be multiplied by the known CBOD/COD ratio or by a ratio of two-thirds to establish an
equivalent CBOD concentration.
Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) in excess of 15 mg/l may be used at the discretion of the WRA director in lieu of TKN by multiplying the
excess NH3-N concentration times two to establish an equivalent TKN concentration.
(c) The establishment and imposition of new or different fees or charges, in addition or in substitution for those provided above in this
subsection, shall be by ordinance amending this chapter. The amounts of the fees and charges established in this subsection shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 70/687
be and remain in effect until such time as the WRA Board shall by resolution revise said fee amounts. Said revised fees and
charges shall take effect after the board causes said resolution to be sent to this (city council)(board of supervisors) and thereafter
causes same to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in each county in which participating communities are located.
M. RESERVED.
SECTION 3. INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
A. CLASSES OF PERMITS.
Discharge permit classifications shall be as follows:
(a) Class A permit issued to a user discharging 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excludes sanitary, non-contact
cooling, and boiler blowdown).
(b) Class B permit issued to a user discharging less than 25,000 gallons per day of process wastewater.
B. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
(1) All new industrial users shall notify the WRA director of the nature and characteristics of their proposed discharge 180 days prior to
commencing discharge. A notification form prescribed by the WRA shall be used for this purpose.
(2) Significant users shall discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the POTW only after obtaining a wastewater discharge permit
from the WRA director. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a user of the obligation to obtain other permits required by
federal, state, or local law.
(3) Other users, including waste haulers, shall obtain permits as required by the WRA director.
C. PERMIT APPLICATIONS; BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit or submitting a baseline monitoring report shall submit the following information as required by 40
CFR 403.12 or by the WRA director:
(a) Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit must submit an application form prescribed by the WRA and accompanied by the application
fee. All new significant users must submit such application 180 days prior to the date of any wastewater discharge. Existing users subject to new
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards must, within 180 days after the effective date of the standard, submit such an application. The
following information is required:
(i) Name, address, and location of the facility, if different from the mailing address.
(ii) The name of a person or agent authorized to accept legal service of process.
(iii) Standard industrial classification (SIC) code of both the industry as a whole and any processes for which National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards have been promulgated and a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
(iv) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any federal, state, or local
standards with sampling and analysis performed in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency approved methods, and meeting the
following requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 71/687
a. The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process if the user is a categorical user.
b. All samples shall be representative of daily operations.
c. A minimum of four grab samples, if required, must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile
organics. For all other pollutants required, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite
sampling techniques where feasible. The WRA director may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any user who
demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is not feasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional
techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that such sampling will provide a representative
sample of the effluent being discharged.
d. Where the flow of the stream being sampled is less than or equal to 250,000 gallons per day, the user must analyze three samples
within a two-week period. Where the flow of the stream being sampled is greater than 250,000 gallons per day, the user must analyze
six samples within a two-week period.
e. Samples must be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists and prior to mixing with other waste. If non-regulated wastewater is mixed with regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user must measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentrations
or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted to the WRA director. Users not subject to categorical standards shall submit analysis of wastewater representative of the
effluent discharged to the POTW.
f. The WRA director may allow the submission of an application which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for pretreatment.
g. A statement indicating the time, date and place of sampling, methods of analysis, and certifying that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW shall accompany each application/baseline
monitoring report unless such sampling and analysis was performed by the city.
(v) Time and duration of all discharges.
(vi)Daily maximum, daily average, and monthly average wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if
any.
(vii) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes at the site, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at
the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the POTW.
(viii) The site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation. The plans shall include a schematic process diagram which indicates all points
of discharge to the POTW. All plans must be certified for accuracy by a professional engineer registered in the state.
(ix)Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production.
(x) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).
(xi)Number and type of employees and hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment facility.
(xii) A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the user, as defined in Section 3.M of this Article, and certified to
by a professional engineer registered in the state, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and if not whether additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet
pretreatment standards and requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 72/687
(xiii) If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet pretreatment standards or requirements, the user shall supply a
compliance schedule indicating the shortest time schedule necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional
pretreatment or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule:
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards. Such schedule shall include, where applicable, but shall not be limited to dates for the hiring of
an engineer, completing preliminary plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction,
beginning operation, and conducting routine operations.
b. No increment referred to in subsection (a)(xiii)a. of this subsection shall exceed nine months, nor shall the total
compliance period exceed 18 months.
c. No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the WRA director, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress,
the reason for any delay, and if appropriate the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no
event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the WRA director.
(xiv) If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the limits on discharge into the POTW
set forth in Section 2.B, 2.C, 2.D of this Article, or any other limits set by the WRA director, a plan shall be provided by the user
giving the shortest schedule by which the user will provide the needed equipment, operation, or maintenance changes and
additions to meet such limits. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. For a compliance schedule for meeting National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards the following condition shall apply:
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required to meet the applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Such schedule shall include, where applicable, but not be limited to dates for the
hiring of an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing construction and completing construction.
b. No time increment in the schedule may exceed nine months.
c. No later than 14 days after each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the WRA director stating whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such
date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the
steps being taken by the user to return to the schedule established. In no case shall more than nine months elapse
between such progress reports to the WRA.
(xv) Any additional information required by the WRA director to evaluate a permit application.
(b) All applications and reports must contain the certification statement and be signed in accordance with Section 3.M of this Article.
D. REPORT ON COMPLIANCE BY CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIES.
Users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit a report to the WRA director containing the information described in
subsections 3.C(a)(iii), (a)(iv), (a)(v) and (a)(xi) of this Section within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or, if a new source, following commencement of discharge. Users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits shall
provide a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. For all other users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All reports must contain the certification statement and be signed in accordance with section 3.M of
this Article.
E. PERMIT CONTENTS.
Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the WRA director to prevent pass through or
interference; protect the quality of the water body receiving effluent from the POTW; protect worker health and safety; facilitate the WRA's sludge
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 73/687
management and disposal program; protect ambient air quality; and protect against damage to the POTW. The WRA director may include the following
items in the permit, and such additional items as the director determines necessary or prudent:
(a) Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
(b) Limits on the average or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties.
(c) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
(d) Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including additional management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or prohibited discharges.
(e) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
(f) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection, sampling, and flow monitoring facilities and equipment for each
separate discharge into the POTW.
(g) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards
for tests, and reporting schedules.
(h) Compliance schedules.
(i) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports and which may include production data.
(j) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the WRA director and
affording the director or the director's representatives access thereto.
(k) Requirements for the notification of any substantial change in the manufacturing processes, pretreatment processes, quantity or
quality of waste discharged to the POTW 90 days prior to such change. The WRA director shall approve, deny or condition a
changed discharge prior to a change occurring in accordance with subsection 2.A(1)(a)(d) of this Article.
(l) Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges.
(m)Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the WRA director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws,
rules, and regulations.
(n) A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal
pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the permit.
F. PERMIT DURATION AND RENEWAL.
Permits required under this Section shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. Permit fees shall be due annually to the WRA
regardless of the term of the permit. Permitted users shall apply for a new permit by submitting a completed permit application a minimum of 90 days
prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
G. CONTINUATION OF EXPIRED PERMITS.
Expired permits issued pursuant to this Section shall remain effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued unless the user is notified of permit
termination by the WRA director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 74/687
H. PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
(1) The WRA director may modify the permit issued pursuant to this Section for good cause, including but not limited to the following:
(a) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standard or requirement. After becoming aware of more
stringent standards or requirements, the WRA will , as necessary, update permits within 90 days;
(b) To make material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or discharge volume or character
which were not considered in drafting the effective permit;
(c) To make a change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(d) Upon receipt of information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, to (city)(county), WRA or operating
contractor personnel, or to the receiving water;
(e) Upon occurrence of a violation of any terms or conditions of the permit;
(f) Misrepresentation of, or grant of variance from, such categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(g) To correct typographical or other errors in the permit;
(h) To reflect transfer of ownership or operation of the permitted facility to a new owner or operator; or
(i) Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws,
or rules and regulations.
(2) The filing of a request by the permittee for permit modification, revocation and reissuance, termination, or a notification of planned changes
or anticipated noncompliance shall not have the effect of staying or delaying the implementation or effective date of any permit condition.
I. PERMIT TRANSFER.
An industrial wastewater discharge permit is not transferable to any other person or entity. A new owner or operator must apply for a new wastewater
discharge permit 60 days prior to taking ownership or undertaking operation of a permitted facility.
J. DENIAL OF PERMIT.
The WRA director may deny a wastewater discharge permit to any user whose discharge of material to the POTW, whether shown upon application,
including test results submitted by the applicant, or determined after inspection or testing conducted by the WRA or its operating contractor, is not in
conformity with this article or whose application is incomplete or does not comply with the requirements of Section 3.C of this Article.
K. PERMIT VIOLATIONS.
Any violation of the terms, conditions, or limits of a user's wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and shall subject the
user to all enforcement procedures outlined in this article.
L. PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 75/687
Under this Section, periodic compliance reports are required as follows:
(a) Significant users shall submit to the WRA director, during the months of January and July, a report indicating the nature,
concentration, and flow of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by permit or pretreatment standards for the preceding six-month
period. This report shall include a record of the monthly average flows and the daily flow for each analysis date during the reporting
period. At the discretion of the WRA director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget
cycles, etc., the WRA director may agree to alter the months during which the reports are to be submitted. More frequent reports
may be required by the WRA director.
(b) The WRA director may impose mass limitations on users. In such cases, the report required by subsection IL(a) of this subsection
section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. All analyses shall be
performed using Environmental Protection Agency approved methods using sampling techniques approved by the Iowa department
of natural resources.
(c) Users shall meet the certification and signatory requirements in Section 3.M of this Article for each report submitted under this
subsection. Where the WRA itself collects all the information required for the report, including flow data, the industrial user will not be
required to submit a periodic compliance report.
(d) A user must notify the WRA director of all violations identified as a result of self-monitoring to the POTW by telephone, during
normal business hours, within 24 hours of the time the user becomes aware of such violation. The user must also submit the results
of repeat analyses to the WRA within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, together with a complete report on all steps
taken to resolve the violation. The user need not repeat the analyses if:
(i) The WRA performs sampling of the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month; or
(ii) The WRA performs sampling of the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the
user receives the results of this sampling.
(e) A user who monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the WRA or who self-monitors in addition to WRA monitoring,
using Environmental Protection Agency methods or standard methods, shall report the monitoring results to the WRA director in
accordance with subsections I L(a), (b)(c) and (d) of this subsection section.
M. CERTIFICATION AND SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.
(1) All applications or reports submitted by a user pursuant to this section shall contain the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
(2) All applications and reports shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user as defined in section 1.A of this Article. A user shall
maintain a current and accurate authorization on file with the WRA director.
N. MONITORING FACILITIES.
(1) When required by the WRA director pursuant to this Section, each permitted user shall at its expense provide and operate monitoring
facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems. The WRA director may
require the placement of such monitoring facilities at the end of each process where pollutants are used, produced, or treated. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 76/687
(2) When required by the wastewater discharge permit and within 90 days of written notification, a user shall install a sampling chamber for
each separate discharge of the building sewer in accordance with plans and specification approved by the WRA director. A user shall provide
ample room in or near such sampling chamber to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. Each user shall at its
expense maintain all sampling and measuring equipment in a safe and proper operating condition at all times, which equipment shall be
safely, easily and independently accessible to authorized representatives of the WRA. Users shall certify all flow measuring devices to be in
proper working condition at a frequency specified in the permit or in writing by the WRA director, using a qualified technician acceptable to
the WRA director. Sampling shall be in accordance with the following:
(a) Each sampling chamber shall contain a flume unless another device is approved by the WRA director, with a recording and
totalizing device for measurement of the liquid quantity.
(b) At the discretion of the WRA director, metered water supply to a user may be used as the volume quantity where it is substantiated
that the metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment agreed to by
the director is made in the metered water supply to determine the liquid waste quantity. Separate meters may be used to subtract
water which is not discharged to the POTW or is discharged to a sewer other than the sampled location.
(c) Samples shall be taken at a frequency and volume determined by the WRA director and shall be properly refrigerated and
preserved in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency approved methods. The sample shall be composited in proportion to
the flow for a representative 24-hour sample. A time proportioned 24-hour sample may be used if flow proportioned sampling is
determined by the WRA director to be impractical. Grab samples shall be used where appropriate.
(3) A user must inform the WRA director prior to breaking a sampler seal, used by the WRA to detect sample tampering, unless necessary to
prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. A user shall not place additional seals or locks upon a sampler which may be
used by the WRA without first obtaining approval from the WRA director.
O. INSPECTION, SAMPLING AND RECORDKEEPING AUTHORITY.
Under this Section, users shall be deemed to have given the following authorities to the WRA and its operating contractor:
(a) Users shall permit authorized representatives or agents of the WRA to enter upon all properties and all parts of the premises, or
upon properties of users with wastewater discharge permits, for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, records
copying, or the performance of any of their duties. This shall include the right to set up, on the user's property, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, or metering operations as may be required in pursuance of the
implementation and enforcement of this article.
(b) Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements in the security measures so that, upon presentation of suitable identification,
WRA or operating contractor personnel will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
(c) All users subject to any of the reporting requirements of this article shall maintain copies of reports and records of all information as
required in 40 CFR 403.12(o) resulting from any monitoring activities required by this article for a minimum of three years and shall
make such records available for inspection and copying by the WRA and it operating contractor. This period of retention shall be
extended until the completion of any unresolved negotiation, hearing, or litigation involving a purported violation.
P. CONFIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS, DATA AND INFORMATION.
(1) Except as provided in this subsection, documents, data and information obtained from user reports, questionnaires, permit applications and
inspections pursuant to this Section shall be made available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction. If the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate that the release of such information would divulge information concerning processes or
methods of production entitled to protection under law as trade secrets of the user or would give advantage to competitors and serve no
public purpose, the WRA director may determine that such information should be kept confidential and not made available for public
examination, but such information shall be available to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the Iowa department of natural
resources.
(2) Decisions by the WRA director to deny confidential status for information may be appealed using the procedures in Section 3.Q of this
Article. In determining whether information is confidential, the provisions of Iowa Code chapter 22 shall prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 77/687
(3) Effluent data and enforcement actions by the WRA or its operating contractor will not be considered confidential records or information.
Q. APPEAL OF DENIAL OF CONFIDENTIAL STATUS.
(1) Any person aggrieved by the WRA director's decision to release information or data obtained as provided in subsection 3.P(1) of this
Section and who can demonstrate a direct and substantial interest in the information or data sought to be kept confidential may appeal the
WRA director's decision. A request for appeal shall be filed in writing with the WRA director not less than five days after the WRA director's
decision to deny confidential status to such information or data. The appeal request shall include a statement of the basis upon which the
request for confidential status is made, as well as the appealing party's interest in the information or data sought to be kept confidential. The
WRA director may request additional information from the appealing party.
(2) Based upon the information provided by the appealing party, the WRA director shall make a determination with respect to the confidentiality
of the information or data at issue. The WRA director shall notify the parties, in writing, of the WRA director's decision within 7 days after
receipt of the appeal.
(3) If still aggrieved by the WRA director's determination on appeal, a party may file an action in Polk County district court, seeking a declaratory
ruling with respect to the confidentiality of such documents, data and information, or seeking an injunction to prevent the disclosure of same.
(4) During the pendency of an appeal to the WRA director, the documents, data or information at issue shall be kept confidential. However, if
during the pendency of such appeal, a request for examination or copying of such documents, data or information is made of the WRA or its
operating contractor pursuant to I.C. ch. 22, the WRA or its operating contractor will notify the appealing party of such request for disclosure
and will keep confidential the requested documents, data or information, pending action by the appealing party to defend its confidentiality
request. In that notification, the appealing party requesting confidentiality will be given not more than 5 calendar days within which to file suit
in Polk County district court seeking the entry of a declaratory order and/or injunction to protect and keep confidential such documents, data
or information. If the appealing party fails to initiate suit within the time requested, the WRA director shall release the documents, data or
information at issue for public examination.
(5) If during the pendency of such appeal, a lawsuit is initiated pursuant to I.C. ch. 22 seeking the release of such documents, data or
information, the appealing party shall take action to defend its confidentiality request in said lawsuit. If the appealing party fails to defend its
confidentiality request in said suit, the WRA director shall release the documents, data or information at issue for public examination.
R. RESERVED.
SECTION 4. ENFORCEMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER REGULATIONS
A. PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
The WRA will annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper published in the WRA community, a list of users who at any time during the previous 12
months were in significant noncompliance as defined in section 4.B of this Article.
B. SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
(1) Any violation of pretreatment requirements under this article (i.e. including but not limited to those relating to limits, sampling, analysis,
reporting, meeting compliance schedules, and regulatory deadlines) is an instance of noncompliance for which the user is liable for
enforcement, including penalties and injunctive relief. Instances of significant noncompliance are user violations which meet one or more
of the following criteria:
(a) Violations of wastewater discharge limits as follows:
(i) Chronic violations. Sixty-six percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same
average limit in a six-month period (any magnitude of exceedance).
(ii) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations. Thirty-three percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily
maximum limit or the same average limit by more than the TRC in a six-month period. (e.g., limit x TRC = the point at
which a violation becomes a TRC violation). There are two groups of TRCs as follow:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 78/687
Group I for conventional pollutants
(BOD, TSS, FOG)
TRC = 1.4
Group II for all other pollutants TRC = 1.2
(iii)Any other violation of a wastewater discharge permit limit (average or daily maximum) that the WRA director believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, including slug loads, or pass through or which
endangers the health of (city)(county), WRA or operating contractor personnel or the public.
(iv)Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment and
has resulted in the WRA's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(b) Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date.
(c) Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, or any other report required by the WRA within 45
days from the due date.
(d) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(e) Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, that the WRA director
considers to be significant.
(2) When a user is in significant noncompliance, the WRA director is directed to:
(a) Report the information to the Iowa Department of Natural Resources as part of the annual pretreatment performance summary
of permitted user noncompliance.
Include the user in the annual public notification according to section 4.A of this Article.
(b) Address significant noncompliance through appropriate enforcement actions or document in a timely manner the reasons for
withholding enforcement.
C. ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS.
(1) The WRA director may issue a written notice to the user giving the specific nature of violations which shall include the frequency,
magnitude and impact of the violation upon the POTW. The notice may also include the following:
(a) An order requiring a plan of action for preventing reoccurrence of the violation.
(b) An order requiring specific action for accomplishing remediation.
(c) An order requiring the user to respond in writing within 30 days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 79/687
(2) The WRA director is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the user responsible for any noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the
user to correct noncompliance within a time period specified by the order.
(3) The WRA director may issue enforceable orders or schedules to require compliance with pretreatment standards including appropriate
interim limits. Such orders and schedules may be incorporated as a revision to an existing wastewater discharge permit and shall not
require the consent of the user.
D. ACTIONS AUTHORIZED.
(1) Where there has been noncompliance with any section of this article, the WRA director may request the WRA operating contractor's
attorney, or the attorney retained by the WRA for that purpose, to bring an action in equity or at law to seek the issuance of a preliminary
or permanent injunction, or both, or such other relief as may be appropriate, to compel the user's compliance with this article.
(2) In addition to other remedies provided under this section or other sections of this article, in any action brought at the request of the WRA
director to enforce this article, the WRA operating contractor's attorney or the attorney retained by the WRA is authorized to seek to
recover all actual damages suffered by the (city)(county) or the WRA, including all actual damages and losses related to costs of repair
and remediation of the POTW, costs of investigation and administration reasonably related to any particular violation and attorneys' fees.
E. CIVIL PENALTIES.
(1) Each violation of any section of this article or of a permit issued under this article is declared to be a municipal infraction. Each day that a
violation of a section of this article continues, and each day that a violation of a permit issued under this article continues, shall be
considered a separate municipal infraction.
(2) Any person who knowingly makes a false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or a wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, commits a municipal infraction punishable by a
civil penalty as hereafter provided in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1.
(3) Any person who fails to perform an act required by the provisions of this article, or who commits an act prohibited by the provisions of
this article, commits an environmental violation and shall be guilty of a municipal infraction, punishable by a civil penalty as provided by
Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1.
(4) Violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 CFR 403.8 is an environmental violation punishable by a civil
penalty as hereafter provided in subsection Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1.
F. PERFORMANCE BONDS.
The WRA director may decline to reissue a permit to any user who has failed to comply with this article or any order or previous permit issued under
this article unless such user first files a satisfactory bond payable to the WRA in a sum not to exceed the value determined by the WRA director to be
necessary to achieve compliance giving due consideration to the number and magnitude of previous violations, potential need for remediation and
stating the reasons which support the amount of bond in a written order directed to the user, but in no case shall the bond be required to be greater
than $25,000.00 $100,000.00. The user shall use a bond form prescribed by the WRA.
G. REVOCATION OF DISCHARGE PERMIT; TERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE.
(1) Grounds for revocation of discharge permit and/or for termination of sewer service. Any user who violates this article, any condition of its
wastewater discharge permit, or any of the following is subject to having its discharge permit revoked and/or its sewer service terminated
in accordance with the procedures of this subsection:
(a) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge.
(b) Failure of the user to report substantial changes in process activity or in volume or character of pollutants being discharged into
the POTW at least 90 days prior to such change.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 80/687
(c) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(d) Refusal to allow reasonable access by WRA or operating contractor personnel to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling.
(e) Violation of permit conditions.
(f) Failure to report an upset, failure, or bypass of the user's pretreatment facilities.
(g) Failure to pay fines, fees, or sewer user charges.
(h) Failure to follow enforcement orders or compliance schedules.
(i) Failure to correct a condition that impedes or alters the WRA's ability to monitor the user's discharge or has the potential to
cause interference or pass through.
(j) Failure to obtain a wastewater discharge permit as required by this article after notification by the WRA director that such permit
is required.
(2) Procedure for revocation of discharge permit and for termination of sewer service. The procedure for revocation of a discharge permit
and termination of sewer service shall be as follows:
(a) Any permit issued to a user pursuant to this article may be revoked, and sewer service terminated, by written order of the WRA
director, specifying the grounds for such revocation and termination as outlined in subsection G(1) of this section, which order
shall not take effect until hearing thereon as hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for an order to revoke a
user's discharge permit and terminate sewer service, the WRA director shall cause a notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying
the violations of subsection G(1) of this section which are deemed to have occurred, and the time, date and place that such
hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the user by regular mail addressed to the user's address listed on the
wastewater discharge permit a minimum of ten days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered when placed
in the mail.
(b) Sewer service may be terminated by written order of the WRA director, specifying the grounds for such revocation and
termination as outlined in subsection G(1)(j) of this subsectionsection, which order shall not take effect until hearing thereon as
hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for an order to terminate sewer service, the WRA director shall cause a
notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violation of subsection G(1)(j) of this subsection section which is deemed to
have occurred, and the time, date and place that such hearing will be held. The notice shall be sent to the user by regular mail
addressed to the user's address a minimum of ten days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered when
placed in the mail.
(c) If after such a hearing the WRA director makes a finding based on substantial evidence that violations under subsection G(1) of
this section have occurred as alleged, the director may issue an order immediately revoking the permit, if a permit had
previously been issued, and terminating sewer service to the user's premises. The determination to revoke such permit and
terminate service, shall be in the discretion of WRA director and shall be dependent upon the circumstances surrounding the
user's violations of subsection G(1) of this section and the severity of those violations. If the user does not appear for the
hearing, the WRA director shall issue the order revoking the discharge permit and/or terminating sewer service, which shall take
effect immediately.
(d) The decision and order of the WRA director to revoke the permit of a user may be appealed to the WRA appeal committee.
Such appeal request shall be in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are disputed,
and shall be delivered to WRA not less than 10 days after the director's entry of the order of revocation of permit and/or
termination of sewer service. Such appeal request shall be considered delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
%Des Moines Metropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 81/687
Des Moines, Iowa 50326 50317
(e) The chair of the appeal committee shall schedule the appeal and shall
cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to be mailed to the appealing user. Such appeal shall be decided by
majority vote of the appeal committee. If the appeal committee affirms the order of the WRA director revoking the permit and/or
terminating sewer service, the appeal committee shall so state and order in its written decision.
(f) A user whose permit has been revoked shall not be eligible for another permit until 30 days after the violating conditions have
been corrected to the satisfaction of the WRA director.
(g) Upon determination by the WRA director that the user's sewer service connection to the POTW be terminated, the director's
written order shall be sent to the (city public works department)(county engineer) who shall cause the user's connection to the
sewer to be severed or plugged. The manner of severance and procedure for disconnection shall be determined by the (city
public works department)(county engineer). Upon completion of the disconnection, the (city public works department)(county
engineer) shall certify to the WRA director the (city's)(county's) cost to disconnect the user's sewer service. Upon receipt of such
certification of costs, the WRA director shall forward to the user whose service was disconnected by registered mail return receipt
requested, certified mail, or personal service a bill for the cost of making the disconnection, including all costs for labor and
materials, and a service charge of $100.00 for WRA supervision.
(h) Any building at which sewer service is disconnected as herein provided shall be inspected by the (city building official)(county
sanitarian) and if appropriate shall be red-tagged as unfit for human occupancy.
H. RESERVED.
I. REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE.
If service is severed pursuant to this Section, the service may be reinstated in the following manner:
(a) Upon payment to the WRA of any delinquency in full, supervision fee of $100.00, and an inspection by the WRA director to
determine whether the original cause for termination has been corrected, the WRA will issue a permit for reconnection of the
building service line to the POTW. Such reconnection costs, plus inspection fees for the (city)(county) in accordance with this
Code, shall be at the sole expense of the user.
(b) Upon reconnection and payment of all costs described in (a) of this subsection, the City, through its agents, shall remove the red
tag from the building, and the building shall, so far as the City is concerned, be fit for human occupancy.
J. EMERGENCY DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE.
(1) Conditions for immediate disconnection of service. The WRA director may, after informal notice, suspend the wastewater discharge
permit of, and sewer service to, a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge
presenting or causing an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment.
(2) Procedure for immediate disconnection. The procedure for immediate disconnection shall be as follows:
(a) When the WRA director determines that a discharge as described in J(1) of this subsection exists, an oral order shall be issued,
followed immediately by a written order, to the user stating the problem and requiring immediate cessation of the discharge. A
user orally notified of a suspension of its wastewater permit or sewer service shall immediately stop or eliminate all discharges. If
a user fails to immediately and voluntarily comply with the suspension order, the WRA director shall take immediate action to
eliminate the discharge, including disconnection from the POTW. Methods of informal notice to a user shall include but not be
limited to any of the following: personal conversations between user and personnel or the WRA or its operating contractor,
telephone calls, letters, hand-delivered messages or notices posted at the user's premises or point of discharge.
(b) A user responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit to the WRA director, prior to the hearing
described in Section 4.G(2), a detailed written report describing the causes of the endangerment and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 82/687
K. ELIMINATION OF DISCHARGE; REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT.
A user notified by the WRA director of revocation of its discharge permit and/or disconnection of its sewer service under Section 4.G or 4.J shall
immediately cease discharging wastewater to the POTW. If the user fails to comply voluntarily with the revocation and/or disconnection order, the (city)
(county) shall take such steps as are deemed necessary by the WRA, including immediate severance of the sewer connection. The WRA director shall
reinstate the wastewater discharge permit or the sewer service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge.
L. ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
(1) In addition to remedies available to the WRA set forth elsewhere in this article, if the WRA is fined by the Iowa department of natural
resources or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for violations of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for
the WRF, or for violations of water quality standards as the result of a discharge of pollutants by an identifiable user, the fine, and all legal,
sampling, analytical testing costs and any other related costs, shall be charged to the responsible user. Such charge shall be in addition
to any other remedies the WRA may have under this article at law or in equity.
(2) If the discharge from any user results in a deposit, obstruction, damage or other impairment to the POTW, the user shall become liable to
the City district) and/or the WRA for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violations or discharge. The WRA may add to the user's
charges and fees the costs incurred by the WRA and by the City for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violations or
discharge.
(3) The remedies provided in this article shall not be exclusive, and the WRA may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statute,
at law or in equity against any persons violating this article.
(4) In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, the City and/or the WRA may initiate an action, either in law or in equity, to
obtain an injunction against further violations of this article and for judgment for all costs incurred by the City and/or the WRA occasioned
by the user's violation of any requirements of this article.
M. NOTICES TO THE WRA, THE WRA BOARD, THE WRA DIRECTOR OR THE WRA STEERING COMMITTEE.
Notices which are required to be given or which may be given to the WRA, the WRA board, the WRA director or the WRA appeal committee, as
provided in Sections 2 through 4 of this article, shall be mailed to such entity, body or person at the following address:
%Des MoinesMetropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
Des Moines Wastewater Reclamation Facility
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, Iowa 50317
N. RESERVED.
SECTION 5. REGULATION OF FAT, OIL AND GREASE DISCHARGE BY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
A. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this section shall be to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contribution and accumulation of Fat,
Oil, and Grease (FOG) into the POTW. Such discharges from commercial kitchens, restaurants, food processing facilities and all other establishments,
where Fat, Oil and Grease (FOG) of vegetable or animal origin are discharged directly or indirectly into the POTW, can contribute to line blockages
and/or spills in violation of Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR), Part 403.
B. DEFINITIONS.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 83/687
The definitions found in section 1.A shall apply to the provisions of this Section, provided however that the following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) Best management practices or BMPs means and includes schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and
other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the State. For purposes of this Section, best management
practices include procedures and practices that reduce the discharge of fat, oil and grease (FOG) to the building sewer, to the City
sanitary sewer system and to the POTW.
(2) Design liquid depth means the maximum depth of liquid when the tank is filled with water.
(3) Effective date means the date set forth in section 5.C upon which the regulatory provisions of this Section take effect.
(4) Food Service Establishment or FSE means an operation or enterprise that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise
provides food for human consumption. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, those that process meat or other food
ingredients as an intermediate step or for final human consumption, food service operations in a summer camp, residential substance
abuse treatment facility, halfway house, correctional facility, school, restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer, church, hotel, bars, hospital,
prison, care institution or similar facility.
(5) Grease interceptor means a tank that serves one or more fixtures and is remotely located. Grease interceptors include, but are not
limited to, tanks that capture wastewater from dishwashers, garbage disposals, floor drains, pot and pan sinks and trenches as allowed
by local plumbing codes. For purposes of this ordinance, a grease interceptor is a multi-compartment tank located underground outside
of a building that reduces the amount of FOG in wastewater prior to its discharge into the POTW.
(6) Grease trap means a device designed to retain grease from one to a maximum of four fixtures. Not all grease traps are approved by the
manufacturer for use on heated water (e.g., dishwasher) or in-line to a waste disposal unit (e.g., garbage disposal and grinders). For
purposes of this ordinance, a grease trap is a small device located within a building.
(7) Minimum design capability means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept
and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the POTW.
(8) Non-routine inspection means an impromptu, unscheduled inspection of an FSE made without prior notification or arrangement.
(9) Routine inspection means an inspection of an FSE which is scheduled in advance or according to a pre-arranged schedule.
(10) User as used in this Section has the same meaning as the definition in section 1.A, but also includes persons who discharge
wastewater to the POTW from mobile sources, such as mobile food vendors.
C. EFFECTIVE DATE OF FOG REGULATIONS.
The provisions of this Section shall be effective on and after January 1, 2006.
D. GREASE INTERCEPTOR INSTALLATION REQUIRED AFTER EFFECTIVE DATE.
The owner of a building or facility in which an FSE is located, and the owner or operator of an FSE shall be required to install an approved grease
interceptor, and to thereafter operate and maintain same as provided in this Section.
E. EXEMPTION FROM GREASE INTERCEPTOR INSTALLATION REQUIREMENT FOR EXISTIN FACILITIES.
The requirements of section 5.D shall not apply to that portion of a building or facility within which an FSE is in existence on the effective date if:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 84/687
(a) The FSE has an existing grease interceptor or grease trap in place as of the effective date and provided that (1) the owner or
occupant of the FSE continues to use the interceptor or trap, (2) the interceptor or trap is of sufficient capacity and design, and
(3) the interceptor or trap is operated and maintained so as to comply with FOG discharge limits; and
(b) Any repair, remodeling or renovation of the wastewater plumbing system in the existing FSE involves only (1) the repair of leaks
or the clearing of stoppages in drains, soil, waste or vent piping, or (2) the removal and reinstallation of a sink, toilet or hot water
heater; provided that such work does not involve replacement, rearrangement or moving of wastewater pipes, floor sinks,
drainage fixtures or grease traps; and
(c) None of the following conditions are present:
(i) A building or facility exists on the effective date and is thereafter expanded or renovated, or a portion thereof, to include an
FSE where such FSE did not previously exist; or
(ii) An FSE exists on the effective date within a building or facility, or portion of a building or facility, and application is thereafter
made for a building permit(s) for such building or facility with valuation of $50,000 or more within a twelve (12) month period;
or
(iii)A building or facility, or portion thereof, that contained an FSE on the effective date but in which an FSE ceases to operate
for one year or more, as determined by Iowa Department of Inspections & Appeals, Food and Consumer Safety Bureau
records.
F. COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.
(1) After the effective date, any permitted construction under Section 5.D shall be deemed compliant upon issuance of a certificate of
compliance or certificate of occupancy for such construction by the City building official or designee.
(2) Any FSE shall be deemed compliant, unless the WRA director or local building official or designee determines that an existing grease
trap or grease interceptor is incapable of adequately retaining FOG. In such cases, the Director may order the FSE to install an adequate
grease interceptor within a specified time period if:
(a) the FSE is found to contribute FOG in quantities above FOG discharge limits; or
(b) the FSE discharges necessitate increased maintenance on the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) in order to keep
stoppages from occurring therein; or
(c) the FSE's discharge to the POTW is at anytime determined to exceed four hundred (400) mg/l total FOG.
(3) An order directing an existing FSE or the owner or operator of the FSE or the owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is located
to install a grease interceptor shall be in writing from the WRA Director in the form of a notice of violation including a corrective action
order, as provided in section 5.F M of this Article.
(4) FSEs or owners of buildings or facilities within which an FSE is located which are unable to install or replace a grease interceptor due to
exceptional physical constraints or economic hardship may appeal to the WRA director for approval of an alternative grease control
technology by requesting a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Such requests shall be submitted in writing and
shall include detailed descriptions of the FSE's physical or financial constraints and the alternative grease control technology which it
proposes to install and utilize.
(a) In order to demonstrate exceptional economic hardship, the owner or operator of the FSE shall submit to the WRA director
balance sheets and profit and loss statements for FSE for the preceding three (3) years. A new FSE shall submit profit/loss
projections or a detailed business plan with projections for twenty-four (24) months. Each request shall be evaluated on a caseby-
case basis.
(b) Notwithstanding approval of alternative grease control technology, when the WRA director determines that such alternative is
not performing adequately, the FSE or owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is located shall be required to take
additional grease control measures, which may include the installation of a grease interceptor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 85/687
(c) In order to demonstrate exceptional physical site constraints preventing the installation of a grease interceptor, the owner or
operator of the FSE or owner of the building or facility in which the FSE is located shall submit to the WRA director
documentation and plats showing the location of sanitary sewer and any private easements in relation to the building sewer for
the building housing the FSE, and showing available space inside or outside the building and drawings of existing plumbing at or
in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that site.
(d) An FSE that is given an exemption from installing a properly sized grease interceptor is prohibited from installing or using a
dishwasher or garbage disposal without approval of the director and must comply with the conditions of such approval, if any.
G. INSTALLATION OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GREASE TRAPS.
Grease interceptors and grease traps, when required, shall be installed as follows:
(a) Grease interceptors and grease traps shall be installed at the expense of the owner or operator of the FSE or owner of the
building or facility in which the FSE is located which is contributing wastewater to the POTW.
(b) All wastewater streams containing FOG or reasonably likely to contain FOG within FSEs or other FOG generating operations
shall be directed into one or more appropriately sized grease interceptor before discharge to the POTW. Grease interceptors
shall be either sized by adding the peak design flow rates for all fixtures leading to the grease interceptor and allowing a
minimum retention time of thirty (30) minutes or as follows:
Grease Interceptor Sizing
1. Peak meals per hour
a. Seating capacity of FSE
b. Occupancy of FSE
c. Seating or occupancy x meal factor of 1.3 (45 minute meal) or 1.0
(intermittent-use FSEs) = Peak meals per hour
* Church: include all area(s) used for meal service
* Assisted Living / nursing facility; equal to maximum number of residents (per
State license)
2. Waste flow rate, gallons of flow
a. Commercial, equipped kitchen with dishwasher & one garbage disposal* 7
b. Commercial, equipped kitchen with dishwasher, no garbage disposal* 6
c. Commercial, equipped kitchen with no dishwasher, one garbage disposal* 6
d. Commercial, equipped kitchen with no dishwasher, no garbage disposal* 5
e. Single service kitchen** 2
* Each additional garbage disposal, add one (1) gallon
** Single service kitchen = no garbage disposal, no dishwasher and all service is single
use
3. Retention time, hours
a. Commercial kitchen 2.5
b. Single service kitchen 1.5
4. Storage factor
a. Commercial kitchen up to 8 hours of operation 1
b. Commercial kitchen up to 12 hours of operation 1.5
b.c. Commercial kitchen up to 16 hours of operation 2
d. Commercial kitchen up to 20 hours of operation 2.5
c.e. Commercial kitchen up to 24 hours of operation 3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 86/687
d.f. Single service kitchen 1.5
Peak Meals Waste Flow Retention Storage Calculated
per Hour X Rate X Time X Factor = Interceptor Size
(c) Concrete grease interceptors whether precast or poured in place, shall be designed and manufactured in accordance with
ASTM C 1613-08 Standard Specification for Precast Concrete Grease Interceptor Tanks or IAPMO / ANSI Z1001 Grease
Interceptors and shall be installed in accordance with the codes adopted by the jurisdiction in which the FSE is located. Where
no code is adopted, the construction and installation shall be in accordance with the Iowa State Plumbing Code and this Section.
Grease interceptors using materials other than concrete require approval by the director, and shall comply with the conditions of
such approval, if any.
(d) The building official or other designated official of the governmental subdivision within which the FSE is located shall inspect
each grease interceptor installation made pursuant to this Section, shall review all relevant information regarding the rated
performance of the grease interceptor, and the building plan and facility site plan for the building and site where the grease
interceptor has been installed, and shall approve such grease interceptor installation upon determination that the grease
interceptor meets all applicable standards and requirements.
(e) Grease interceptors shall have a minimum capacity of one thousand (1000) gallons and shall not exceed five thousand (5000)
gallons for a single unit. Where a capacity greater than five thousand (5000) gallons is required, several smaller units shall be
installed in series, however the capacity shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) gallons for any single series of interceptors
without approval of the director.
(f) Grease interceptors shall be installed outside the building housing the FSE and below surface grade, and shall have access
manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty-four (24) inches, over each chamber and sanitary tee. Access manholes shall
extend from the grease interceptor to at least the finished surface grade and be designed and maintained to prevent storm or
surface water inflow and groundwater infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection
and grease removal.
(g) Sewer lines which are not grease laden, which are not likely to contain FOG, or which contain sanitary wastes shall not be
connected to a grease interceptor.
(h) Grease interceptors shall be equipped with an accessible discharge sampling port with a minimum six (6) inch diameter, which
shall extend from the grease interceptor to at least the finished surface grade.
(i) Where grease interceptors are shared by more than one FSE, the building owner shall be the responsible party for record
keeping and cleaning of the interceptor.
H. OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND CLEANING OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GREASE TRAPS AND GREASE HAULER
CERTIFICATION.
(1) The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor or trap shall operate and maintain
the grease interceptor or trap so as to consistently achieve attainment of the grease limit. In this context, consistent achievement means
that any wastewater sample taken from that wastewater exiting the grease interceptor or trap shall not exceed four hundred (400)
milligrams per liter of FOG.
(2) The owner or operator of the FSE shall cause the grease interceptor or trap to be cleaned as hereinafter required when FOG and solids
reach 25% of the design liquid level of the grease interceptor or trap, or sooner if necessary to prevent carry over of grease FOG from
the grease interceptor or trap into the city sanitary sewer system, but not less than once every three (3) months when an interceptor is
first installed and not less than annually thereafter. . Interceptors and traps shall be cleaned at three (3) month intervals or less. A
longer cleaning interval must be approved by the WRA director. If the owner or operator of the FSE, or an employee of the owner or
operator, has obtained a currentwaste hauler's license grease hauler certification from the WRA indicating satisfactory completion
of the and has completed to the satisfaction of the WRA director the course of training offered by the WRA inon the cleaning of grease
interceptors and traps, such person or persons may clean the grease interceptor trap in the facility included in such grease hauler’s
certification. Failure to adequately clean the grease trap, properly dispose of all grease trap waste, or maintain clean out
records and measurements may result in revocation of a grease hauler certification pursuant to Section 6.N. Alternatively, the
owner or operator of an FSE may employ a waste hauler licensed by the WRA pursuant to Section 6 of this article to clean the grease
interceptor or trap, provided that the waste hauler’s personnel actually performing the cleaning of the grease interceptor grease
interceptor cleaning has completed the course of training offered by the WRA in the cleaning of grease interceptors has a current
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 87/687
grease hauler certification from the WRA indicating satisfactory completion of the course of training offered by the WRA on the
cleaning of grease interceptors and traps.
(3) Any person who cleans a grease interceptor or trap shall do so in accordance with the following procedures and requirements. The person cleaning the
grease interceptor or trap shall:
(a) Completely empty and remove the contents (liquids and sludge) of all vaults of the grease interceptor or trap, and remove the grease mat and
scrapings from the interior walls. As part of each cleaning of a grease interceptor or trap, the owner or operator of the FSE, or the licensed
waste hauler employed by the FSE owner or operator, shall perform the following maintenance activities:
(i) Check that the sanitary “tees” on the inlet and outlet sides of the grease interceptor are not obstructed, loose, or missing.
(ii) Verify that the baffle is secure and in place.
(iii) Inspect the grease interceptor or trap for any cracks or other defects.
(iv) Check that lids are securely and properly seated after completion of cleaning.
(b) Not deposit waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor or trap back into the grease interceptor or trap from
which the waste or wastewater was removed or into any other grease interceptor or trap, for the purpose of reducing the volume
of waste and wastewater to be disposed of.
(c) Not introduce enzymes, emulsifying chemicals, hot water or other agents into a grease interceptor or trap to dissolve or
emulsify grease or as a grease abatement method. Introduction of bacteria as a grease degradation agent is permitted with prior
written approval by the WRA director.
(d) Dispose of waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor or trap at the WRF or at a facility approved for disposal of
such waste by the WRA director. Waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor or trap shall not be discharged to
any private sanitary or storm sewer or to the city sanitary or storm sewer system. The waste hauler shall provide a copy of
the disposal receipt for all waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor or trap to the owner or operator of
the FSE.
(e) Not use an automatic grease removal system to clean a grease interceptor without prior written approval of the WRA director,
and if, the use of an automatic grease removal system is approved, shall operate same in a manner that the grease wastewater
discharge limit, as measured from the system’s outlet, is consistently achieved.
(4) If grease interceptor cleaning is performed by a licensed waste hauler, the owner or operator of the FSE shall witness all
cleaning/maintenance activities to verify that the grease interceptor is being fully cleaned and properly maintained according to the
requirements of this Section or Section 5.H. The waste hauler shall provide a copy of the disposal receipt for all waste and wastewater
removed from a grease interceptor to the owner or operator of the FSE.
(5) As part of each cleaning of a grease interceptor, the owner or operator of the FSE, or the licensed waste hauler employed by the owner
or operator, shall perform the following maintenance activities:
(a) Check that the sanitary “tees” on the inlet and outlet sides of the grease interceptor are not obstructed, loose, or missing.
(b) Verify that the baffle is secure and in place.
(c) Inspect the grease interceptor for any cracks or other defects.
(d) Check that lids are securely and properly seated after completion of cleaning.
(6) The WRA director may make exceptions to the above requirements, or may approve alternative operational requirements or cleaning
and maintenance methods, provided that such exceptions or approvals shall be made in writing by the WRA director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 88/687
(7) The WRA Director may issue a grease hauler certification upon satisfactory completion of the course of training offered by the
WRA on the proper maintenance and cleaning of grease interceptors and traps, disposal procedures and record keeping. Such
certification shall be for a period of 5 years and shall be in effect for the person receiving such training and for the FSE site for
which such person is the owner, operator or employee thereof.
I. RECORDS AND RECORD KEEPING.
(1) Required Records
The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor or trap shall maintain a written record of grease
interceptor or trap maintenance, including a log showing the dates upon which the grease interceptor or trap was inspected and the estimated amount
of FOG present in the grease interceptor or trap at each inspection, the date upon which waste and wastewater was removed from the grease
interceptor or trap and disposed of, and the location and means of such disposal of waste and wastewater, and the name and employer or the person
or persons performing each of said tasks. The log shall further include a record of the placement of any approved or unapproved additive into the
grease interceptor, grease trap or building sewer on a constant, regular or scheduled basis, including the type and amount of additive placed on each
such occasion. Only additives approved by the WRA director pursuant to section 5.H(3)(c) may be used in a grease interceptor.
(2) Record Keeping
The log shall at all times be kept and maintained on a day-to-day basis, so as to show a record of waste and wastewater removal, waste and
wastewater disposal and approved additive placement for a continuous period of three (3) years. All such records shall be kept secure at the premises
of the FSE for a continuous period of three years and shall be made available for non-routine inspection by the (city)(county), the WRA and its
operating contractor, or the employees and agents of any of them at any time during normal business hours.
J. INSPECTION OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND RELATED SEWERS AND EQUIPMENT.
The owner or operator of an FSE shall:
(a) Provide, operate and maintain, at its expense, safe and accessible monitoring facilities (such as a suitable manhole), and shall
make such monitoring facilities available for inspection, and for sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal
drainage systems. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis.
(b) Shall allow personnel authorized by the WRA director or by the (city building official or designee)(county sanitarian), bearing
proper credentials and identification, to enter upon or into any building, facility or property housing an FSE at any reasonable
time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, in
accordance with this Section.
(c) Shall, upon request by the WRA director’s authorized representative, open any grease interceptor or grease trap for the
purpose of confirming that maintenance frequency is appropriate, that all necessary parts of the installation are in place,
including, but not limited to, baffles influent and effluent tees, and that all grease interceptors, traps, and related equipment and
piping is maintained in efficient operating condition.
(d) Shall accommodate compliance inspections and sampling events by the authorized representatives of the WRA director or of
the (city building official)(county sanitarian). Staff may conduct routine inspections and sampling events of any food service
establishment. Non-routine inspection and sampling events shall occur more frequently when there is a history of noncompliance
with this Section and when blockages occur in the City’s sanitary sewer system downstream of the FSE.
K. INSPECTION FEES.
The fees for inspection of an FSE shall be as provided in section 2.L and shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the invoice for such fees.
L. ENFORCEMENT.
The WRA director is authorized to enforce this Section as hereinafter provided. The City building official or designee, or such other governmental
official hereafter designated by the WRA, is also authorized to enforce this Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 89/687
M. NOTICE OF VIOLATION - ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES – CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER.
(1) The director, or such other designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in Section 5.M L, are authorized to
issue a notice of violation imposing an administrative penalty upon any person who fails to perform an act required by this Section or who
commits an act prohibited by this Section. Such notice may include a corrective action order requiring the user to take one or more of the
following corrective actions within thirty (30) days:
(a) Conform to best management practices;
(b) Submit copies of the grease interceptor or trap maintenance log;
(c) Develop, submit and implement a FOG compliance plan to be approved by the director or designated enforcement official; or
(d) Install a compliant grease interceptor.
(2) The administrative penalty for such violations shall be as provided in the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the (city
council)(board of supervisors) by resolution.
(3) Notice of violation, with the applicable penalty for such violation noted thereon, shall be issued to and served upon the violator. Service
of the notice may be by regular mail or by delivery in person.
(4) Penalties assessed pursuant to notice of violation shall be paid by the violator in full as directed in the notice within thirty (30) days of its
issuance.
(5) The administrative penalties set out in the schedule of administrative penalties shall be charged in lieu of the fines and penalties provided for in Section
5.O N, unless the violator refuses to correct the violation and pay the scheduled administrative penalty, or the WRA director determines that immediate
enforcement action by misdemeanor or municipal infraction prosecution is, in view of the particular circumstances of the case, necessary to achieve
compliance with the requirements of this article. A record of all violations, administrative penalties charged or other enforcement actions taken shall be
maintained by the WRA for a period of three years.
N. PENALTIES.
(1) Any person who fails to perform an act required by this Section or who commits an act prohibited by this Section shall be guilty of a
simple misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment as provided by Iowa Code chapter 903 or shall be guilty of a municipal infraction
punishable by a civil penalty as provided Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of this Code.
(2) Any person who fails to comply with a pretreatment standard applicable to an FSE shall be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by
a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars for each day the violation exists or continues, as provided by section 364.22 or
331.307 of the Iowa Code.
(3) When enforcement is sought through a municipal infraction proceeding, the director, or such other designated officers or officials with
enforcement authority as provided in Section 5.M L, may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the order.
O. ORDER TO CEASE OPERATION OF FSE.
(1) Where a violation of this Section has not been timely corrected, and results in or threatens interference or pass through as herein
defined, the WRA director, or such other designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in Section 5.M L, shall
have the authority to issue an order in writing to the owner or operator of the FSE, ordering such person or persons to cease and desist
from further operation of the FSE and from further discharge of wastewater to the sanitary sewer system. The order shall be delivered by
personal service unless the owner or operator cannot be found within the (city)(county), in which event notice shall be by ordinary mail
addressed to the owner’s or operator’s last known address and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises
of the FSE.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 90/687
(2) Operation of the FSE shall cease on the date stated in the order and shall not recommence without the prior written approval of the WRA
director.
(3) The applicant may make a written request to the director for a reconsideration and hearing on the cease and desist order within ten (10)
days from the issuance of the order, provided, however, that operation of the FSE shall cease pending the outcome of the hearing.
(4) The owner’s or operator’s request for hearing shall identify the appealing party, include the address of the person requesting the hearing
and to which all further notices shall be mailed or served, and shall state the basis for the appeal.
(5) The hearing shall be scheduled to be held as soon as practicable and no later than fourteen (14) days after the request for hearing was
filed with the WRA director. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified in writing or by telephone of the date and place of such
hearing at least three (3) days in advance thereof. At such hearing the director and the person requesting the hearing may be
represented by counsel, examine witnesses, and present evidence as necessary.
(6) The determination by the director or by that the violation occurred shall be considered a final administrative decision, unless appealed to
the WRA.
P. APPEAL OF CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER OR CEASE AND DESIST ORDER.
(1) Any person aggrieved by a corrective action order or a cease and desist order issued by the WRA director or by such other designated
officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in Section 5.M L, may, file an appeal and request a ruling that such order be
modified or rescinded.
(2) Such appeal request shall be in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including any factual findings which are disputed, and shall
be delivered to the WRA within ten (10) days after the WRA director's issuance of the order. Such appeal request shall be considered
delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
%Des MoinesMetropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, Iowa 50326 50317
(3) The chair of the appeal committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to be
mailed to the appealing party. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the appeal committee. The appeal committee may affirm,
modify or rescind the order of the director and shall so state and order in its written decision.
Q. ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
The WRA or the City is not precluded from seeking alternative relief from the court, including an order for abatement or injunctive relief or for recovery
of investigational or remedial costs resulting from a non-complying discharge, in the event that the WRA or the City files a misdemeanor citation, notice
of administrative penalty, and/or files a municipal infraction for the same violation of this Section.
R. RESERVED.
SECTION 6. REGULATION OF HAULED WASTE*
A. DEFINITIONS.
The definitions found in Sections 1.A and 5.B shall apply to the provisions of this subdivision, provided however that the following words, terms and
phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 91/687
(1) Vehicle means a commercial device equipped with a tank and used to remove or transport waste.
(2) Waste means human excreta, water, scum, sludge, septage, FOG, and food waste or grease solids, and non-hazardous industrial
wastewaters and solids removed from public and private wastewater disposal systems, holding tanks, impervious vaults, portable or
chemical toilets, or from devices used to trap grease resulting from food preparation. Waste also means liquid wastes resulting from spill
clean-up.
B. LICENSE.
No waste hauler shall remove waste from within the corporate limits of the City of West Des Moines or shall dispose of waste, whether from a source
inside or outside the corporate limits, into the POTW without first obtaining a waste hauler license from the WRA, with the following exceptions:
(a) WRA participating communities that operate vehicles to remove waste from municipal sewer systems.
(b) Waste haulers hired by WRA participating communities to remove waste from municipal sewer systems and which bring no
other wastes to the WRF.
(c) Waste haulers utilized by industrial users issued a wastewater discharge permit by the WRA.
(d) Waste haulers granted temporary authorization by the WRA director in order to deal with an emergency.
C. ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
The waste hauler's license shall be issued by the WRA director upon written application that shall consist of the following minimum requirements:
(a) Inspection. The WRA director, upon application, shall inspect the trucks, hoses, valves, and associated equipment of the
applicant for a waste hauler's license and determine if they meet the minimum qualifications for complying with the conditions of
this Section.
(b) License fee and bond. An application shall require the payment of a fee of $60.00 for each vehicle used by the applicant and the
posting of a bond with reasonable surety in the penal sum of $10,000.00 for the faithful compliance with this Section, including
prompt payment of fees, fines and damages. WRA participating communities that contract with waste haulers in order to clean
and rehabilitate storm and sanitary sewers owned by the community or that own and operate waste hauling vehicles may provide
proof of self-insurance or provide a letter guaranteeing payment of up to $10,000.00 in lieu of providing a surety bond.
(c) Renewal. A waste hauler license shall expire on June 30 next after its issuance. The renewal application must be made in the
same manner as the initial application and must be received by the director 30 days prior to expiration. Failure to apply 30 days
prior to expiration may result in an interruption in the license and the privileges of such license.
(d) Transferability. Waste hauler licenses are not transferable.
D. STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
As to all vehicles and equipment used by a waste hauler, the licensee shall:
(a) Prevent waste and wastewater from leaking, spilling, or discharging onto roads or rights-of-way.
(b) Ensure proper construction and repair of the equipment to allow cleaning.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 92/687
(c) Maintain vehicles and equipment in an essentially rustfree and sanitary condition and appearance.
(d) Display the business name as it appears on the waste hauler license in three-inch or larger letters on the left and right sides of
the vehicle.
E. DISPOSAL.
Waste haulers shall dispose of hauled wastes permitted in this Section according to rules for land application as found in chapter 65, chapter 69, and
chapter 121 of the Iowa Administrative Code or at a location designated by the WRA director. Hours of operation at the WRF disposal station shall be
set by the WRA director. Special arrangements between the waste hauler and the WRA director shall be allowed to permit response to emergency
conditions. Waste haulers shall maintain the designated disposal location in a clean and orderly condition to avoid noxious odors and unsanitary
conditions.
F. IDENTIFICATION OF SOURCE.
Waste haulers must document the nature and origin of wastes collected and the site and method of disposal for wastes that are removed from (city)
(county) locations or are delivered to the WRF. Such information shall be provided on a manifest form provided by the WRA director. The manifest shall
also include: (i) the name, address and phone number of the waste generator, (ii) the type of waste collected, (iii) the approximate volume of the load,
(iv) any other information consistent with identification and tracking of wastes. The WRA director or his or her designee shall have the right to verify all
information required by this subsection, including the right to measure, sample and analyze any waste regulated by this Section. The waste hauler shall
obtain approval from the WRA director or his or her designee prior to loading wastes originating from an industrial/commercial source unless prior
approval is on record with the WRA.
G. MIXING WASTES.
(1) For the purposes of this Section, wastes from residential and nonresidential sources shall not be mixed. Wastes from an
industrial/commercial source shall not be mixed with wastes of any type from another location. Portable toilet and FSE grease trap wastes
may be mixed with similar wastes from different locations. Residential wastes from several sources may be mixed as long as each source
is identified.
(2) Any tanks or equipment used for hauling waste to the WRF shall not be used for hauling hazardous wastes or hazardous substances, as
defined in I.C. § 567.1 et seq., chapter 131 of the Iowa Administrative Code and in 40 CFR 261, or other wastes detrimental to the WRF.
H. STANDARDS OF DISPOSAL AT WRF.
Under this Section, disposal of wastes at the WRF shall be carried out in accordance with pretreatment standards and requirements established by
federal, state, county and city governments including categorical standards developed for the waste generator's industrial category. The WRA director
may reject wastes from waste haulers who do not comply with this subsection or with any other subsection of this Section. Waste haulers shall not
deliver wastes to the WRF, or to any other disposal location approved by the WRA director which are:
(a) Prohibited by Section 2.B or exceed the limits found in subsection 2.C(3)(d), Sections 2.D and 2.E of this chapter.
(b) Hazardous wastes or hazardous substances as defined in 40 CFR Part 261 or 567 I.A.C., Chapter 131.
(c) Originate from mineral oil and grease traps unless first treated to remove the oil and grease.
(d) Not completely identified or are from industrial/ commercial sources that are not approved by the director as required in Section
6.F.
(e) Mixed in a manner prohibited in Section 6.G.
(f) Wastes other than residential from outside the WRA, except through requests to the director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 93/687
I. REJECTION OF WASTE LOADS.
(1) The WRA director may reject any hauled waste load that violates or is suspected of violating the requirements of this Section or that fails
to meet any other guidelines established by the WRA director to protect personnel, equipment, and the WRF. Waste haulers must:
(a) Remove rejected waste from the WRF.
(b) Immediately remove any additional wastes contaminated by the rejected waste while contained at the WRF prior to introduction
into the sewer.
(c) Properly dispose of all rejected wastes in accordance with state and federal law.
(d) Provide the WRA director with a written statement, signed by the waste hauler license holder, stating the location, date, and time
the rejected load was disposed of. The statement is due within five calendar days after the waste is rejected.
(2) A vehicle used to haul rejected wastes shall not thereafter be allowed to dispose of additional wastes at the WRF until the statement
required by this subsection is delivered to the WRA director.
J. TREATMENT FEES FOR HAULED WASTES.
(1) A treatment fee shall be charged per pound of hauled waste received at the WRF for all wastes originating within WRA participating
communities which are treated through the headworks at the WRF using all treatment processes at the WRF, which fee shall be equal to
the cost of disposal and treatment of an equivalent volume and mass of pollutants otherwise delivered into the POTW. The treatment fee
shall include: (1) the volume charge component, (2) a treatment surcharge component for each pollutant as found in Section 2.L of this
Article, and (3) a program cost component. The program cost component shall be calculated by dividing the annual administrative costs
of the waste hauler program by the total gallons of hauled waste treated in the previous calendar year. The surcharge component shall
be calculated using the average concentration of pollutants found in hauled wastes delivered to the wastewater reclamation facility. The
treatment surcharge and program cost components shall be reviewed and updated annually based on the most recent data collected by
the operating agency. The treatment fee for loads originating outside the corporate limits of the WRA participating communities shall be
1.5 times the fee for loads originating within the WRA participating communities.
(2) A treatment fee shall be charged for hauled wastes originating within the corporate limits of the WRA participating communities which are
treated using only a portion of the treatment processes at the WRF, which fee shall be calculated to recover the cost of treatment. The
cost of treatment shall include electrical, chemical, personnel, and any capital costs associated with the treatment processes utilized, and
a program cost component which shall be calculated by dividing the annual administrative costs of the waste hauler program associated
with partial process treatment by the total gallons of hauled waste treated using only a portion of the treatment processes in the previous
calendar year. Treatment costs shall be reviewed and updated annually based on the most recent data collected by the operating
agency. The treatment fee for loads originating outside the corporate limits of the WRA participating communities shall be 1.5 times the
fee for loads originating within the WRA participating communities.
(3) Fees shall be computed and recorded at the disposal station and shall be paid by the waste hauler on the basis of monthly billings by the
finance department. Limits of credit shall not exceed 60 days. Abuse of such credit shall be grounds for liability on the waste hauler's
bond and for refusal of disposal services to any waste hauler under this Section.
(4) Waste haulers may elect to have their loads tested for actual concentration at their expense as set out in Section 2.L. When a waste
hauler has elected to have loads tested for actual concentration, the treatment fee will be based on the actual concentration whether it be
higher or lower than the average concentration treatment fee. Said testing will be done at least once a month or more often as required
by the WRA director.
K. ENFORCEMENT.
The WRA director, the City building official or such other governmental official hereafter designated by the WRA, shall be authorized to enforce this
Section as hereinafter provided.
L. NOTICE OF VIOLATION - ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES – CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 94/687
(1) The director, or such other designated officers or officials with enforcement authority as provided in section 6.K, are authorized to issue a
notice of violation imposing an administrative penalty upon any person who fails to perform an act required by this Section or who
commits an act prohibited by this Section.
(2) The administrative penalty for such violations shall be as provided in the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the (city
council)(board of supervisors) by resolution.
(3) Notice of violation, with the applicable penalty for such violation noted thereon, shall be issued to and served upon the violator. Service
of the notice may be by regular mail or by delivery in person.
(4) Penalties assessed pursuant to notice of violation shall be paid by the violator in full as directed in the notice within thirty (30) days of its
issuance.
(5) The administrative penalties set out in the schedule of administrative penalties shall be charged in lieu of the fines and penalties provided for in Section
6.M, unless the violator refuses to correct the violation and pay the scheduled administrative penalty, or the WRA director determines that immediate
enforcement action by misdemeanor or municipal infraction prosecution pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 is, in view of the particular
circumstances of the case, necessary to achieve compliance with the requirements of this article. The WRA shall maintain a record of all violations,
administrative penalties charged or other enforcement actions taken.
M. PENALTIES.
(1) Any person who fails to perform an act required by this Section or who commits an act prohibited by this Section shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment as provided by Iowa Code chapter 903 or shall be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by a
civil penalty as provided by Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of this Code.
(2) Any person who violates a discharge prohibition set forth in Section 2.B, or discharges in excess of local limits as set forth in Section 2.C,
shall be guilty of an environmental violation punishable as provided by section 364.22 of the Iowa Code.
N. DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(1) Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of waste haulers license. The WRA director may deny, suspend or revoke the waste hauler
license and/or grease hauler certification of any wastehauler who violates any provision of this Section or any condition of its license,
or who commits any of the following violations, or who does not meet the following requirements:
(a) Violation of any term, condition or requirement of this Section, the license, or applicable state of Iowa or federal laws or
regulations.
(b) Obtaining a license by misrepresentation.
(c) Falsification of, failure to complete or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in a license application.
(d) Failure to pay fees, administrative penalties or fines.
(e) Failure to report a spill to the WRA.
(f) Using wash down water or otherwise diluting the permitted waste for the purpose of meeting discharge limitations or
requirements.
(g) Falsification of, failure to complete or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in any report, manifest information or record
required by the license or this Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 95/687
(h) Tampering with samples or sampling equipment intended to accurately reflect the contents of each hauled waste load.
(i) Refusing to allow WRA personnel timely access to the wastehauler’s facility premises, vehicles, or records.
(j) Failure to perform as required under a corrective action order or compliance schedule issued by the WRA director.
(k) Failure to correct any violation of this Section within 30 days after notice by the WRA Director.
(l) Failure to immediately correct any violation of this Section if the condition constituting the violation is declared a threat to public
health, safety or welfare by the WRA director and the director orders immediate correction.
(2) Procedure for denial, suspension or revocation of wastehauler's license. The procedure for denial, suspension or revocation of a
wastehauler’s license shall be as follows:
(a) Any license issued to a wastehauler pursuant to this Section may be denied, suspended or revoked by written order of the WRA
director specifying the grounds for such action as outlined in subsection N(1) of this section. which order shall not take effect
until hearing thereon as hereafter provided. Upon determining that grounds exist for an order to deny, suspend or revoke a
wastehauler’s license, the WRA director shall cause a notice of hearing to be prepared, specifying the violations of subsection
N(1) of this section which are deemed to have occurred, and the time, date and place that such hearing will be held. The notice
shall be sent to the wastehauler by regular mail addressed to the wastehauler’s address listed on the wastehauler’s license a
minimum of ten days prior to the date set for hearing, and shall be deemed delivered when placed in the mail.
(b) If after such a hearing the WRA director makes a finding based on substantial evidence that one or more violations under
subsection N(1) of this section have occurred as alleged, the director may deny issuance or the license, suspend the license for
a fixed period, or may issue an order immediately revoking the license and ordering the wastehauler to discontinue hauling waste
to the WRF or any other disposal locations approved by the director. The determination whether to deny issuance of a license to
suspend a license, or to revoke a license, shall be in the discretion of the director and shall be dependent upon the
circumstances surrounding the violations of subsection N(1) of this section and the severity of those violations. If the
wastehauler does not appear for the hearing, the director shall issue the order revoking the wastehauler’s license and ordering
the cessation of delivery of hauled waste at the WRF or any other disposal locations approved by the director, which order shall
take effect immediately.
(c) The decision and order of the WRA director to deny issuance, to suspend or to revoke the license of a wastehauler may be
appealed to the WRA appeal committee. Such appeal request shall be in writing, shall include the grounds for appeal including
any factual findings which are disputed, and shall be delivered to WRA not less than 10 days after the director's entry of the order
of denial, suspension or revocation. Such appeal request shall be considered delivered when placed in the mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to:
WRA Appeal Committee
%Des MoinesMetropolitan Wastewater Reclamation Authority
3000 Vandalia Road
Des Moines, Iowa 50326 50317
(d) The chair of the appeal committee shall schedule the appeal and shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to
be mailed to the appealing wastehauler. Such appeal shall be decided by majority vote of the appeal committee. If the appeal
committee affirms the order of the WRA director denying issuance, suspending or revoking the license and ordering the
cessation of waste deliveries at the WRF or other approved locations, the appeal committee shall so state and order in its written
decision.
(e) A wastehauler whose license has been denied or revoked shall not be eligible for issuance or reinstatement of its license until
30 days after the violating conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of the director.
O. ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 96/687
Neither the WRA nor the City is precluded from seeking alternative relief from the court, including an order for abatement or injunctive relief, in the
event that the WRA or the City files a misdemeanor citation, notice of administrative penalty, and/or files a municipal infraction for the same violation of
this Section, or in the event the WRA seeks to deny, suspend or revoke the wastehauler's license.
SECTION II. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION III. SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase,
or part hereof not adjudged invalid, or unconstitutional.
SECTION IV. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in
Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
SECTION V. OTHER REMEDIES. In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section herein, the City may proceed in law or
equity against any person, firm or corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance.
SECTION VI. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 18th day of March, 2019.
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
Published in the Des Moines Register on this 22nd day of March, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Prepared by: R. Jacobson, City Clerk, City of West Des Moines, P.O. Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265
Return To: City Clerk, City of West Des Moines, P.O. Box 65320, West Des Moines, IA 50265
ORDINANCE NO. 2352
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2019
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 97/687
BE IT ENACTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
SECTION 1. The West Des Moines City Council, as required by Iowa Code Section 380.8, published notice of a proposed City Code prepared by Sterling
Codifiers, Inc. and placed on file in the office of the City Clerk for review by the public, and for which the City Council, following public hearing on the 4th
day of March, 2019 approved the proposed Code for the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
SECTION 2. From and after the date of publication of this Ordinance, the City Code of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
Inc. containing compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing
body of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code and law of the City of West Des Moines.
SECTION 3. The official City Code, pursuant to Iowa Code Section 380.8, contains all the City Ordinances in effect except for grade ordinances, bond
ordinances, zoning map ordinances, ordinances vacating streets and alleys, and ordinances containing legal descriptions of urban renewal areas and
urban revitalization areas.
SECTION 4. If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional such adjudication shall not affect the validity of
the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part there of not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final passage, adoption and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 18th day of March, 2019.
_________________________________
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
______________________
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of West Des Moines, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2330, passed November 12, 2018.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 98/687
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2027
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2014
BE IT ENACTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
SECTION 1. The West Des Moines city council, as required by Iowa Code, section 380.8, published notice a proposed city code, prepared by Sterling
Codifiers, Inc., was on file in the office of the city clerk for review by the public for the city council then conducting a public hearing on the 7th day of April,
2014, on the proposed city code for the city of West Des Moines, Iowa.
SECTION 2. From and after the date of publication of this ordinance, the city code of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
Inc., containing compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing
body of the city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the city of West Des Moines.
SECTION 3. The official city code, pursuant to Iowa Code section 380.8, contains all the city ordinances in effect except for grade ordinances, bond
ordinances, zoning map ordinances, ordinances vacating streets and alleys, and ordinances containing legal descriptions of urban renewal areas and
urban revitalization areas.
SECTION 4. If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional such adjudication shall not affect the validity of
the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final passage, adoption and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 21st day of April, 2014.
/s/
Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/
Jody E. Smith, CMFA, MMC
City Clerk
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of West Des Moines.
This City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the WEST DES MOINES CITY CODE OR CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of
the Council and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1993 Code)
1-1-2:ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Title. (1993
Code)
1-1-3:AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the Title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its
proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
City Code. (1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 99/687
1-1-4:CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so
authorized by the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of
the Clerk. Any person having in his custody a copy of the City Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and efficient manner.
He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the
City Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be
returned to the office of the City Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. (1993 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; ordinances
relating to ward and precinct boundaries; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances or resolutions; ordinances establishing,
naming or relocating and vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; grade ordinances; ordinances relating to community development and
environment; ordinances pertaining to PUD District regulations as it relates to specific parcels of land; ordinances relating to covenants and easements;
any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the City Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the City Code; any ordinance affecting
building lines or dedicating property for public use; and all special ordinances. (1993 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1993 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of
this City Code. (1993 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not effect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1993 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this City Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of
the City Council may be fully carried out.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 100/687
In the construction of this City Code, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provisions:
A. May: Confers a power.
B. Must: States a requirement.
C. Shall: Imposes a mandatory duty. (1985 Code §1-1.0103)
D. Plural/Singular and Gender: Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any
matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several
matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any section of this City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
E. Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter",
"Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not
meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1993 Code).
1-3-2:DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Where words and phrases used in this City Code are defined by State law, such definitions shall apply to their use in this City Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, shall have the following
meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this City Code:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred either expressly or impliedly, to do so. (1993 Code)
ALLEY: A public right of way, other than a street, affording secondary means of access to abutting property, and unless otherwise indicated in the text,
shall include the entire width between property lines.
CITY: The City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CITY CODE: The Code of Ordinances of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CLERK: The City Clerk of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CODE: The specific chapter in which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code
adopted by reference.)
COUNCIL: The City Council of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Polk or Dallas County, Iowa. (1985 Code §1-1.0102; 1993 Code)
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
City of West Des Moines".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
LICENSE or PERMIT: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MAYOR: The chief executive officer of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (1993 Code)
MEASURE: An ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
MONTH: A calendar month. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons
within the community. (1993 Code)
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words
"affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn".
OCCUPANT, TENANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
West Des Moines". Officers shall include the designee of the officer.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession. (1993 Code)
ORDINANCES: The ordinances of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, as embodied in the Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 101/687
adopting the Code of Ordinances and those enacted hereafter.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust or other legal entity, and
includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidences of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right of interest therein. (1993 Code)
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Real property and tangible and intangible personal property unless clearly indicated otherwise.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person owning private property in the City as shown by the County Auditor's plats of the City. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building
or land. (1993 Code)
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any City-owned open place, such as parks and squares.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any and all property owned by the City or held in the name of the City by any of the departments, commissions or agencies within
the City government.
PUBLIC WAY: Includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare.
REPEATED OFFENSE: A recurring violation of the same section of the City Code. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property. (1993 Code)
SIDEWALK: That improved concrete walk-way portion of the street between the edge of the travelled way, surfacing or curb line and the adjacent property
line.
STATE: The State of Iowa.
STATUTES, LAWS: The latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
STREET: Means and includes any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words shall
include every other of them and, unless otherwise indicated in the text, shall include the entire width between property lines. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1993 Code)
YEAR: A calendar year. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
re-enacted. (1993 Code)
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
1-4-1: MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS:
A. A municipal infraction is a civil offense punishable by a civil penalty of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation or, if the
infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each repeat offense. However, notwithstanding Iowa
Code section 364.3, a municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 CFR section
403.8, by an industrial user may be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or
continues. The city may classify a municipal infraction, other than a violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement,
as an environmental violation if the infraction is a violation of Iowa Code chapter 455B or 459, subchapters II and III, or a violation of a standard
established by the city in consultation with the department of natural resources, or both. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying or storing of grain by a person, shall not be subject to an ordinance, the violation of which is classified as an environmental violation,
unless the person is engaged in industrial production or manufacturing of grain products. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying or storing of grain by a person engaged in industrial production or manufacturing of grain products, shall not be subject to an
ordinance, the violation of which is classified as an environmental violation, if the discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15. A municipal
infraction which is classified as an environmental violation is punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
occurrence. A person committing an environmental violation is not subject to a civil penalty, if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 102/687
1. The violation results solely from the person conducting an initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing or
conducting a shutdown, of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
2. The person notifies the city of the violation within twenty four (24) hours from the time that the violation begins.
3. The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8) hours.
The city shall not enforce this section against a person committing an environmental violation, until the city offers to participate in informal
negotiations with the person. If the person accepts the offer, the city and the person shall participate in good faith negotiations to resolve issues
alleged to be the basis for the violation.
B. The violation of any section of this code or of any law, rule, or regulation adopted by reference in this code shall constitute a municipal infraction and is
subject to civil penalties and/or subject to abatement for halting the violation.
C. Any violation of this code which would be a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor or a serious misdemeanor under state law or a violation of a simple
misdemeanor under chapters 687-747 of the code of Iowa shall not constitute a municipal infraction.
D. An officer authorized to enforce this code or regulations may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. The citation may be
served by personal service as provided in Iowa rule of civil procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at the defendant's last known
mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Iowa rule of civil procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions
of Iowa rule of civil procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and one copy shall be sent to the clerk of the district
court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternate relief sought, or both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
E. In municipal infraction proceedings:
1. The matter shall be tried before a magistrate, a district associate judge or a district judge in the same manner as a small claim. The matter shall only
be tried before a judge in district court if the total amount of civil penalties assessed exceeds the jurisdictional amount for small claims set forth in
Iowa Code section 631.1.
2. The city has the burden of proof that the municipal infraction occurred and that the defendant committed the infraction. The proof shall be by clear,
satisfactory and convincing evidence.
3. The court shall ensure that the defendant has received a copy of the charges and that the defendant understands the charges. The defendant may
question all witnesses who appear for the city and produce evidence or witnesses on the defendant's behalf.
4. The defendant may be represented by counsel of the defendant's own selection and at the defendant's own expense.
5. The defendant may answer by admitting or denying the infraction.
6. If a municipal infraction is proven, the court shall enter a judgment against the defendant. If the infraction is not proven, the court shall dismiss it.
F. All penalties or forfeitures collected by the court for municipal infractions shall be remitted to the city in the same manner as fines and forfeitures are
remitted for criminal violations under Iowa Code section 602.8106. If the person named in the citation is served as provided in this section and fails,
without good cause, to appear in response to the civil citation, judgment shall be entered against the person cited.
G. A person against whom judgment is entered shall pay court costs and fees as in small claims under Iowa Code chapter 631. If the action is dismissed,
the city is liable for the court costs and court fees. Where the action is disposed of without payment, or provisions for assessment, of court costs, the
clerk shall at once enter judgment for costs against the city.
H. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action.
I. When judgment has been entered against a defendant, the court may do any of the following:
1. Impose a civil penalty by entry of a personal judgment against the defendant.
2. Direct that payment of the civil penalty be suspended or deferred under conditions imposed by the court.
3. Grant appropriate alternative relief ordering the defendant to abate or cease the violation.
4. Authorize the city to abate or correct the violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 103/687
5. Order that the city's costs for abatement or correction of the violation be entered as a personal judgment against the defendant or assessed against
the property where the violation occurred, or both.
If a defendant wilfully violates the terms of an order imposed by the court, the failure is contempt.
A magistrate or district associate judge shall have jurisdiction to assess or enter judgment for costs of abatement or correction in an amount not to
exceed the jurisdictional amount for a money judgment in a civil action pursuant to Iowa Code section 631.1, subsection 1, for magistrates and
section 602.6306, subsection 2, for district associate judges. If the city seeks abatement or correction costs in excess of those amounts, and the
matter is not before a judge in district court, the case shall be referred to the district court for hearing and entry of an appropriate order. The
procedure for hearing in the district court shall be the same procedure as that for a small claims appeal pursuant to Iowa Code section 631.13.
J. The defendant or the city may file a motion for a new trial or may appeal the decision of a magistrate, district associate judge, or a district judge to the
district court. The procedure on appeal shall be the same as for a small claim pursuant to Iowa Code section 631.13. A factual determination made by
the trial court, supported by substantial evidence as shown in the record, is binding for purposes of appeal relating to the violation at issue, but shall not
be admissible or binding as to any future violation for the same or similar ordinance provision by the same defendant.
K. This section does not preclude a peace officer of the city from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this code or regulations if criminal penalties are
also provided for the violation. Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the defendant constitutes a separate offense.
L. The issuance of a civil citation for a municipal infraction or the ensuing court proceedings does not provide an action for false arrest, false imprisonment,
or malicious prosecution.
M. An action brought pursuant to this section for a municipal infraction which is an environmental violation does not preclude, and is in addition to, any
other enforcement action which may be brought pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 455B, 455D, 455E, or 459, subchapters II, III, and VI. (Ord. 1732, 3-12-
2007)
1-4-2: GENERAL PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this code for any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty, or obtain a
license required by, or violating any provision of this code, or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation or, if the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each repeat offense. (Ord. 1733, 3-12-2007)
Chapter 5
CHARTER
1-5-1: TITLE:
These provisions may be cited as the CHARTER OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA. (1985 Code §1-2.0101)
1-5-2: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The form of government of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, is the Mayor-Council with appointed Manager form of government. (1985 Code §1-2.0102)
1-5-3: OFFICERS' POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City. (1985 Code §1-2.0103)
1-5-4: NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL:
The Council consists of two (2) Councilmembers elected at large and one Councilmember from each of three (3) wards as established by the City Code,1
elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years. (1985 Code §1-2.0104)
1-5-5: TERM OF MAYOR:
The Mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years. (1985 Code §1-2.0105)
1-5-6: COPIES ON FILE:
The City Clerk shall keep an official copy of the Charter on file with the official records of the Clerk, the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the
Charter available at the Clerk's office for public inspection. (1985 Code §1-2.0106)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 104/687
Chapter 6
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
ARTICLE A. MAYOR
1-6A-1: TERM OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION:
The mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years. The salary of the mayor shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) yearly effective January 1, 1998, and
effective January 1, 2006, the salary shall be fourteen thousand dollars ($14,000.00) yearly. (Ord. 1093, 6-6-1994; amd. Ord. 1552, 10-27-2003)
1-6A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the mayor shall be as follows:
A. Chief Executive Officer: The mayor is the chief executive officer of the city, and except for the supervisory duties which have been delegated by law to
the city manager or other authority. He shall have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their records and to call for special
reports from the city manager or department heads at any time.
B. Council Duties:
1. Presiding Officer: He shall act as presiding officer at all regular and special council meetings. The mayor pro tem1 shall serve in this capacity in the
mayor's absence.
2. Reports To Council: He shall make such oral or written reports to the council as requested. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally,
the municipal departments and recommendations suitable for council action.
3. Calling Special Meetings: He shall call special meetings of the council when he deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the city.
4. Veto Power2: He may sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution passed by the city council; however, the mayor may not
veto a measure if he was entitled to vote on the measure at the time of passage. If he exercises his veto power, he must explain the reason for such
veto to the council at the time of the veto. The council may override the mayor's veto by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the council members.
C. Contracts: He shall, whenever authorized by the council, sign contracts on behalf of the city.
D. Professional Services: He shall, upon order of the council, secure for the city such specialized and professional services not already available to the
city. In executing the order of the council, he shall conduct himself in accordance with this code and the laws of the state.
E. Emergencies: The mayor may take command of the police and govern the city by proclamation when he determines a time of emergency or public
danger exists. Within the city limits, he has all the powers conferred upon the sheriff to suppress disorders.
F. Signature On Licenses And Permits: He shall sign all licenses and permits which have been granted by the council, except those designated by law or
ordinance to be issued by the city clerk or city manager.
G. Removal Orders For Nuisances: He shall order in writing, to be removed at public expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible
and liable or where an ordinance authorizes otherwise. (1985 Code §1-3.0102; amd. 1993 Code)
1-6A-3: APPOINTMENTS:
The mayor shall appoint the following officials:
A. Mayor pro tem3.
B. Civil service commission4, subject to council approval.
C. Library board of trustees5, subject to council approval.
D. Board of water works trustees6, subject to council approval.
E. Planning and zoning commission7, subject to council approval.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 105/687
F. Zoning board of adjustment8, subject to council approval.
G. Municipal code appeals board9.
H. Other board or commission members as authorized, subject to the approval of the council. (1985 Code §1-3.0103; amd. Ord. 912, 7-9-1990; Ord. 1012,
7-6-1992; 1993 Code)
1-6A-4: VOTING ON MEASURES:
The mayor is not a member of the council and may not vote as a member of the council. (1985 Code §1-3.0105)
1-6A-5: MAYOR PRO TEMPORE10:
A. Vice President Of Council: The mayor pro tempore shall be vice president of the council. (1985 Code §1-3.0201)
B. Compensation: If the mayor pro tem performs the duties of the mayor during his absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or
more, the mayor pro tem may be paid for that period such compensation as determined by the council, based upon his performance of the mayor's
duties and upon the compensation of the mayor. (1985 Code §1-3.0204)
C. Powers And Duties: Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of the mayor in cases of
absence or inability of the mayor to perform his duties. In the exercise of the duties of his office, the mayor pro tempore shall not have power to employ
or discharge from employment officers or employees that the mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge without the approval of the council.
(1985 Code §1-3.0202)
D. Voting Rights: The mayor pro tempore shall have the right to vote as a member of the council. (1985 Code §1-3.0203)
ARTICLE B. COUNCIL
1-6B-1: NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL; COMPENSATION:
The council consists of two (2) council members elected at large and one council member from each of three (3) wards as established by this code,
elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years. The salary of each council member shall be nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00) yearly effective January 1,
2004. (Ord. 1553, 10-27-2003)
1-6B-2: MEETINGS:
Meetings of the council shall be as follows:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the council shall be set by adoption of a schedule of regular meetings for the next calendar year at the first
regular meeting held in December of each year. The regular meetings shall begin at five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. in the community room of the public
library or at some other designated location. The schedule, time and place of the meeting is subject to change by council resolution. (Ord. 1177, 4-8-
1996, eff. 5-10-1996)
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings shall be held upon call of the mayor or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the council
submitted to the clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be given
personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the council. A record of the service of notice shall be maintained by the clerk.
C. Quorum: A majority of all council members is a quorum.
D. Compelling Attendance: Any three (3) members of the council can compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly
called meeting by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
E. Rules Of Procedure: The council shall determine the rules of its own proceedings by resolution, and the clerk shall keep such rules on file for public
inspection.
F. Open And Closed Meetings:
1. Meetings Open: All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by state law.
2. Closed Session: A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of either two-thirds (2/3) of the council or all of the members present at the
meeting and in accordance with chapter 28A of the Iowa Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 106/687
G. Use Of Electronic Devices:
1. Cameras And Recorders: The public may use cameras or recording devices at any open session.
2. Electronic Meetings: A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or
impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of chapter 28A of the Iowa Code.
H. Minutes: Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and place, the members present and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken, and the vote of each member present shall be made public. (1985 Code §1-3.0304)
1-6B-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the council shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. General: All powers of the city are vested in the council except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
B. Wards: By ordinance, the council may divide the city into wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or create new
wards.
C. Fiscal Authority: The council shall appropriate and apportion all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment
thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which may be
specially assessed.
D. Public Improvements: The council shall make all orders for the doing of work, or the making or construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.
E. Contracts: The council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts, and no contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the city unless either made
by ordinance or resolution adopted by the council, or reduced to writing and approved by the council, or expressly authorized by ordinance or resolution
adopted by the council.
F. Employees: The council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties and compensation of employees not otherwise provided for by state law or
this code.
G. Records: The council shall maintain records of its proceedings.
H. Setting Compensation For Elected Officers: By ordinance, the council shall prescribe the compensation of the mayor, council members, and other
elected city officers, but a change in the compensation of the mayor shall not become effective during the term in which the increase is adopted, and
the council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of November and December
immediately following a regular city election. A change in the compensation of councilmembers shall become effective for all councilmembers at the
beginning of the term of the Councilmembers elected at the election next following the adoption of the increase in compensation. (1985 Code §1-
3.0302)
1-6B-4: APPOINTMENTS:
The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers, duties, compensation and term of office:
City Clerk1.
City Attorney2.
City Manager3.
(1985 Code §1-3.0305; amd. Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
1-6B-5: PROCEDURES FOR PASSAGE OF MEASURES:
The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner: (1985 Code
§1-3.0303)
A. Approved Action By Council: Passage of an ordinance, amendment or resolution requires an affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the
Councilmembers. Each Councilmember's vote on an ordinance, amendment or resolution must be recorded. (1985 Code §1-3.0303; 1993 Code)
B. When Measures Become Effective: Measures passed by the Council, other than motions, become effective in one of the following ways:
1. If the Mayor signs the measure, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon signing and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
2. If the Mayor vetoes a measure4 and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor's veto, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon
repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 107/687
3. If the Mayor takes no action on the measure, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, and an ordinance or
amendment becomes law when published, but not sooner than fourteen (14) days after the day of passage unless a subsequent effective date is
provided within the measure.
C. Overriding Mayor's Veto: Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor's veto, the Council may repass the ordinance or resolution by a vote of not less than
two-thirds (2/3) of the Councilmembers, and the ordinance or resolution becomes effective upon repassage and publication. (1985 Code §1-3.0303)
Footnote 1: See also Section 1-7A-1 of this Title.
Footnote 2: See also Section 1-7D-1 of this Title.
Footnote 3: See also Section 1-7B-2 of this Title.
Footnote 4: See also subsection 1-6A-2B4 of this Chapter.
Chapter 7
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES1
1-7-1: OATHS:
The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the following: (1985 Code §1-1.0201)
A. Qualify for Office: All elected officers and the following appointed officers shall qualify for office by taking the oath set out in subsection B herein:
1. City Clerk.
2. Deputy City Clerk.
3. Police Chief and peace officers.
4. Fire Chief and career fire fighters.
5. Treasurer. (Ord. 911, 7-9-90)
B. Prescribed Oath: The prescribed oath is: I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the
State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in West Des Moines
as now or hereinafter required by law.
C. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths: The following officers are empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to
the business of their respective office:
1. The Mayor.
2. The Clerk. (1985 Code §1-1.0201; 1993 Code)
1-7-2: TERMS OF APPOINTED OFFICERS:
The terms of all appointed officers that are not otherwise fixed by law or ordinance shall be two (2) years, such terms expiring at the time of the
organizational meeting of the Council in January following the regular Municipal election and the appointment of a successor. (1985 Code §1-1.0208)
1-7-3: OPEN MEETINGS:2
All meetings of the Council, any board or commission or any multi-membered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be
held in open session unless closed sessions are expressly permitted by law.3 (1985 Code §1-1.0206)
1-7-4: DUTIES; GENERAL:
Each Municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties prescribed by law and City Code, or as otherwise directed by the Council unless
contrary to State law or City Charter.4 (1985 Code §1-1.0203)
1-7-5: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to be
furnished or performed for this City, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this Section is void. The provisions of this
Section do not apply to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 108/687
A. Compensation of Officers: The payment of lawful compensation of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of
which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
B. Investment of Funds: The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository, paying agent or for investment of funds.
C. Stock Interests: Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described
in subsection F3 of this Section, or both, if the contracts are made by competitive bid, publicly invited and opened, and if the remuneration of
employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract, and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement or preparation
of any part of the contract. The competitive bid requirement of this subsection shall not be required for any contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
D. Newspaper: The designation of an official newspaper.
E. Contracts:
1. Existing Contracts: A contract in which a City officer or employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time he was elected or
appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
2. Volunteers: Contracts with volunteer firemen, emergency medical volunteers or civil defense volunteers.
3. Corporations: A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or employee has an interest by reason of stockholdings when less than five
percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or
immediate family of such officer or employee.
4. Competitive Bids: A contract made by competitive bid, publicly invited and opened, in which a member of a City board of trustees, commission or
administrative agency has an interest if he is not authorized by law to participate in the awarding of the contract. The competitive bid requirement of
this subsection does not apply to any contract for professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid. (1985 Code §1-1.0207; 1993
Code)
1-7-6: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
A. Open for Inspection: All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to inspection by the public upon request. (1985 Code
§1-1.0204)
B. Transfer to Successor: Each officer shall transfer to his successor in office all books, paper, records, documents and property in his custody and
appertaining to his office. (1985 Code §1-1.0205)
1-7-7: RESIGNATIONS; REMOVALS; VACANCIES:
A. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting his resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office during the time for which he was elected if,
during that time, the compensation of the office has been increased. (1985 Code §1-1.0209)
B. Removal of Appointed Officers: Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office may be removed by the officer or
body making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and
a copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed who, upon request filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing the copy,
shall be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the
date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date. (1985 Code §1-1.0210)
C. Vacancies: A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled by the Council, within thirty (30) days after the vacancy occurs for
the balance of the unexpired term unless a special election is sooner held to fill the office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term. Such an
election shall be called if the Council is presented with a petition so requesting in accordance with State law or the Council may call an election. When
a vacancy occurs in an appointed office, it must be filled by the appointing authority. (1985 Code §1-1.0211; 1993 Code)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT1:
At its first meeting in January following the regular city election, the council shall appoint by majority vote a city clerk to serve for a term of two (2) years.
(Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-2: CITY SEAL:
The city seal shall be in the custody of the clerk and shall be attached by him to all transcripts, orders, and certificates which it may be necessary or proper
to authenticate. The city seal shall be circular in form, in the center of which shall be the words "Corporate Seal" and around the margin the words "City of
West Des Moines, Iowa". (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 109/687
1-7A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY:
The clerk, or in his absence or inability to act, the deputy clerk, shall have the powers and duties as provided in this article, this code and the law. (Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-4: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A. Recording And Publication Of Meeting Minutes: The clerk shall attend all regular and special council meetings and within thirty (30) days following a
regular or special meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed,
a summary of all receipts and the gross amount of the claims approved.
B. Council Agenda: The clerk shall prepare and maintain a city council agenda, subject to modification by the mayor, city council, or the city manager, and
forward copies to such officials or persons as directed. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-5: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
At the direction of the council, the clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The clerk shall record and preserve a correct
record of the proceedings of such meetings. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-6: COUNCIL MEASURES:
A. Recording Council Measures Being Considered: The clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the council with a statement, where
applicable, indicating whether the mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the mayor's
veto.
B. Publication Of Measures: The clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings, and official notices requiring publication as
follows:
1. Time: If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by this code or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less than
four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
2. Manner Of Publication: A publication required by this code or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the city.
C. Authentication And Certification:
1. Authentication: The clerk shall authenticate all such measures except motions with his signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when
required.
2. Certify Measures: The clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines,
or limits to the recorder of the county containing the affected parts of the city. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-7: RECORDS:
The clerk shall maintain the specified city records in the following manner:
A. Ordinances And Codes: The clerk shall maintain copies of all effective city ordinances and codes for public use.
B. Custody: The clerk shall have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings or documents in which the city is a party in interest unless
otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.
C. Maintenance: The clerk shall maintain all city records for at least ten (10) years, except that ordinances, resolutions, council proceedings and records
and documents relating to real property transactions or bond issues must be maintained permanently. Bonds and coupons may be destroyed after two
(2) years from the retirement of debt and a record of destruction shall be placed with the original bond record.
D. Provide Copy: The clerk shall furnish, upon request, to any municipal officer a copy of any record, paper, or public document under his control when it
may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of his duty. The clerk shall furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set
by council resolution. The clerk shall, under the direction of the mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the corporation to those public
documents or instruments which, by ordinance and this code, are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
E. Filing Of Communications: The clerk shall keep and file all communications and petitions directed to the council or to the city generally. The clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the council taken upon matters considered in such communications and petitions. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-8: CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION SECRETARY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 110/687
The clerk shall serve as secretary to the civil service commission and perform such functions as required by law. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-9: LICENSES AND PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
The clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this code, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show
date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which
issued. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-10: NOTIFY APPOINTEES:
The clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the mayor or council to offices in the city government of their position and the time at which they shall
assume the duties of their office. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-11: ELECTIONS DUTIES:
The clerk shall accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a city office for filing if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of signatures and
it is timely filed. The clerk shall deliver all nomination petitions to the county commissioner of elections not later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the day
following the last day on which nomination petitions can be filed. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
ARTICLE B. CITY MANAGER
1-7B-1: PURPOSE:
By virtue of the authority conferred by section 372.4, code of Iowa, the office of city manager for the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, is hereby created.
(Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7B-2: APPOINTMENT, TERM, AND COMPENSATION:
The city manager shall be appointed by a majority of the city council at a regular meeting of such body, and such manager shall hold office at the pleasure
of the said body and shall be subject to removal by a majority vote thereof, subject to the terms and conditions of any existing agreement executed
between the city council and the manager. The manager shall receive such annual salary as the council shall, from time to time, determine by agreement
and/or approve by resolution, and time of payment shall be fixed in accordance with other city employees. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7B-3: DUTIES:
The duties of the manager shall be as follows:
A. Resolutions, Policies, And Laws: The manager shall see that all resolutions, ordinances, laws, council's and mayor's directives and approved
operational policies are either faithfully enforced and executed or referred to the proper official for compliance thereof.
B. Attend Council Meetings: The manager shall attend all meetings of the city council unless otherwise excused by the mayor or council.
C. Recommendations: The manager shall recommend to the mayor and council such measures as the manager may deem necessary for good efficient
government and the general welfare of the city.
D. Departmental Administration: The manager shall have general supervision and direction of the administration of the following departments, offices,
classifications, and services and be directly responsible to the mayor and council for the proper function of same:
1. City clerk.
2. Department of public works.
3. Department of community and economic development.
4. Department of finance.
5. Department of development services.
6. Fire department.
7. Emergency medical services department.
8. Police department.
9. Purchasing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 111/687
10. Human resources.
11. Human services.
12. Parks and recreation.
13. Public buildings, land, and custodians thereof under the direct jurisdiction of the council.
14. Budget preparation and operation.
15. Contracts and agreements as approved by council.
16. Administrative policies and procedures.
17. All others as directed by council.
E. Supervise Contracts: The manager shall supervise the performance of all contracts for work and services to be done for the city except as specified
otherwise in said construction or service program involved.
F. Franchises: The manager shall maintain an accounting of all obligations, agreements, commitments, and contractual franchises involving the city and
report to the mayor and council any deviations from the exact terms as specified.
G. Purchasing: The manager shall be authorized to direct the purchasing of all commodities, materials, supplies, capital outlay, and services for all
departments of the city that have been budgeted and appropriated by a resolution of the council and enforce a program to determine that such
purchases are received and are of the quality and character called for in the order.
H. Require Taking Of Bids: The manager shall require the taking of bids on all matters deemed advisable as required by law, or as directed by the council.
I. Hire, Suspend, And Discharge Employees: The manager shall have the power to hire, suspend, or discharge any employee over which the manager
has, by this article, authority to appoint or employ, subject to civil service provisions and chapter 70, code of Iowa.
J. Emergency Employees: The manager shall have the authority to employ any person for emergency purposes as deemed necessary for the welfare of
the city, but in no case shall said employment be extended after the first council meeting following the date of employment, unless otherwise approved
by vote of the council.
K. Supervision Of Facilities And Equipment: The manager shall supervise and manage all buildings, structures, and land under the jurisdiction of the
council and shall also be charged with the care and preservation of all city owned equipment, tools, machinery, appliances, supplies, and commodities
under the control of employees or departments over which the manager has, by this article, specific authority.
L. Personnel Functions: Unless such power is specifically assigned by law to another appointing authority, the city manager shall have the power to
appoint, employ, transfer, promote, reclassify, determine rate of pay, discipline, or discharge all persons to city service, subject to civil service provisions
and chapter 70, code of Iowa. The city manager shall review and comment on personnel actions made by the police and fire chiefs to the city council.
The city manager shall develop, administer, and enforce personnel rules and regulations for employees under the authority delegated to the office of
city manager.
M. Fiscal Advice: The manager shall keep the mayor and council fully advised of the financial and other conditions of the city.
N. Annual Budget: The manager shall prepare and submit to the mayor and council an annual budget in the manner as prescribed by law.
O. Business Affairs: The manager shall see that all business affairs of the city are conducted by modern, approved methods and in an efficient manner.
P. Records And Reports: The manager shall, at all times, be responsible for the maintenance of accurate and current records of all affairs of the
departments under the manager's jurisdiction, and in a form acceptable by the council. Copies of such reports shall be available for public inspection.
Q. Assist Council Committees: The manager shall assist the council committees in the execution of their reviews, investigations, reports and assignments,
and perform in compliance with their directives; provided, same is not in conflict with established procedure governed by this article or not in conflict
with existing city ordinances.
R. Other: The manager shall perform duties and have direct authority on all matters delegated by council action.
S. Administrative Assistant To Mayor: The manager shall act as administrative assistant to the mayor and perform duties in the coordination of all phases
of municipal activity as directed by the mayor and council. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
ARTICLE C. FINANCE DIRECTOR
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 112/687
The finance director shall be appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7C-2: DUTIES OF FINANCE DIRECTOR:
The duties of the finance director shall be as follows:
A. Custody Of Funds: The finance director shall be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the city in the manner provided by law and council
direction.
B. Record Of Fund: The finance director shall keep the record of each fund separate.
C. Record Receipts: The finance director shall keep an accurate record of all money or securities received by the finance director on behalf of the city and
specify the date, from whom, and for what purpose received.
D. Record Disbursements: The finance director shall keep an accurate account of all disbursements, money, or property, specifying date, and to whom and
from what fund paid.
E. Special Assessments: The finance director shall keep a separate account of all money received by the finance director from special assessments.
F. Deposit Funds In Bank: The finance director shall, upon receipt of monies to be held in his custody and belonging to the city, deposit the same in banks
selected by the council in amounts not exceeding monetary limits authorized by the council.
G. Bank Reconciliation: The finance director shall reconcile bank statements with his books and certify monthly to the council the balance of cash and
investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
H. Debt Service: The finance director shall keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all payments of interest and principal.
I. Billings And Collections: The finance director shall bill and collect all charges, rents, or fees due the city for services not specifically assigned to other
departments.
J. Other Duties: The finance director shall perform such other duties as specified by the council by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-
17-2010)
1-7C-3: FINANCE OFFICER OF LIBRARY BOARD:
The finance director shall be the finance officer of the library board and pay out all money under control of the board on orders signed by the chair and
secretary of the board but shall receive no additional compensation for such services. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
ARTICLE D. CITY ATTORNEY
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION:1
The City Attorney shall be appointed by majority vote of the Council and receive such compensation as shall be established by resolution. (1985 Code §1-
4.0301)
1-7D-2: ATTORNEY FOR CITY:
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting the City's interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court, tribunal,
commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the mayor or Council. (1985 Code
§1-4.0302)
1-7D-3: POWER OF ATTORNEY:
The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed, the City shall be bound upon the same. (1985 Code §1-4.0303)
1-7D-4: ORDINANCE PREPARATION:
The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 113/687
ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication. (1985 Code §1-4.0304)
1-7D-5: REVIEW AND COMMENT; LEGAL OPINION:
The City Attorney shall, upon request from the Mayor, Council or City Manager, give his legal opinion in writing, upon all questions of law relating to City
matters. (1985 Code §§1-4.0305, 1-4.0307)
1-7D-6: OPINION ON CONTRACTS:
The City Attorney shall, at the request of the Council, offer a written opinion on and recommend alterations pertaining to contracts involving the City before
they become binding upon the City. (1985 Code §1-4.0306)
1-7D-7: ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS:
The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the Mayor, Council or City Manager. (1985 Code §1-4.0308; 1993 Code)
1-7D-8: PREPARE DOCUMENTS:
The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for the use of the City. (1985 Code
§1-4.0309)
1-7D-9: SPECIAL COUNSEL:
Special counsel may be retained, following authorization by the Council, when deemed necessary or appropriate. (1985 Code §1-4.0310)
Chapter 8
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-8-1: CORPORATE LIMITS:
The corporate limits of the City as of January 1, 1992 are described as follows:
Beginning at the northeast corner of the west one-half of Section 11, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of said Section 11, to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 78
North, Range 25 East of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the northwest quarter of said Section 14, to the north bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence southwesterly, along the high water mark of the north bank of the Raccoon River, through Sections 14, 15, 22, 21, 28, 29 and 30, Township 78
North, Range 25 East of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa to the east line of Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County,
Iowa;
Thence north, along said east line of Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, to a point 165.00 feet north of the southeast corner of the northeast
quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, a distance of 200.00 feet;
Thence south, a distance of 165.00 feet to the south line of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said Section 12;
Thence west, along the south line of the north one-half of the south one-half of said Section 12, to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter, of the
southwest quarter of said Section 12;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 12, to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said Section 12;
Thence west, along the south line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 12, to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
said Section 12;
Thence north, along the west line of the northwest quarter of said Section 12, to the southwest corner of Section 1, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of
the Fifth Principal Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the south line of said Section 1, to the west line of the east 15.0 acres of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section
1;
Thence north, along the west line of the east 15.0 acres of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 1, to the north line of the
southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 1;
Thence west, along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 1, to a point on the east line of Section 2, Township 78
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 114/687
North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said Section 2, to the north right-of-way line of Chicago and Northwestern Transportation Company Rail Line;
Thence northwesterly, along the north right-of-way line of the Chicago and Northwestern Transportation Company Rail Line, to the southerly right-of-way
line of Interstate Route Number 80;
Thence northeasterly, along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Route Number 80, to a point 609.63 feet west and 45.08 feet south of the northeast
corner of the southeast quarter of said Section 2;
Thence south 00o00'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 654.92 feet;
Thence north 82o51'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 609.63 feet, to a point on the east line of the southeast quarter of said Section 2;
Thence north, along the east line of said Section 2, to a point 308.00 feet south of the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of said Section 2;
Thence south 90o00'00" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 257.50 feet;
Thence north 00o00'00" east, a distance of 250.95 feet, to a point on the south right-of-way line of Interstate Route Number 80;
Thence easterly, along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Route Number 80, to a point of intersection with the east line of Section 2, Township 78
North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence north, along the east line of said Section 2, to a point of intersection with the north right-of-way line of Interstate Route Number 80;
Thence southwesterly, along the north right-of-way line of Interstate Number 80, to a point 2.3 feet east of the west line of said Section 2;
Thence north, parallel to the west line of said Section 2, to a point 1007.60 feet north of and 2.30 feet east of the southeast corner of Section 3, Township
78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence southwesterly, along a 716.20 foot radius curve, concave northwesterly, a distance of 900.00 feet to a point of tangency;
Thence south, 72o14'00" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 789.80 feet to a point of curvature;
Thence southwesterly, along a 716.20 foot radius curve, concave southeasterly, to a point on the east line, of the southwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of said Section 3;
Thence north, along the east line of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said Section 3, to the north line of the southwest quarter of the
southeast quarter of said Section 3;
Thence west, along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said Section 3, to the east line of the southwest quarter of said
Section 3;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said Section 3, to the southeast corner of the southwest corner of said Section 3;
Thence west, along the south line of the southwest quarter of said Section 3, a distance of 541.10 feet;
Thence north, a distance of 460.00 feet;
Thence west, a distance of 158.00 feet;
Thence south, a distance of 460.00 feet to a point on the south line of the southwest quarter of said Section 3;
Thence west, along the south line of the southwest quarter of said Section 3, to the southwest corner of the east one-half of the southwest quarter of said
Section 3;
Thence north, along the west line of the east one-half of the west one-half of said Section 3, to the southeast corner of Government Lot 4, of said Section
3;
Thence west, along the south line of said Government Lot 4, of said Section 3, to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way line of the County Road
(Waco Place);
Thence north, along the east right-of-way line of said County Road (Waco Place) and its extensions, to a point of intersection with the north line of said
Section 3;
Thence east, along the north line of said Section 3, to the northwest corner of the east 2.5 acres of Government Lot 2, of said Section 3;
Thence south, along the west line of the east 2.5 acres of said Government Lot 2, of said Section 3, to the south line of said Government Lot 2, of said
Section 3;
Thence east, along the south line of Government Lots 2 and 1, of said Section 3, to a point 170.00 feet west of the east line of said Section 3;
Thence south, a distance of 107.00 feet;
Thence east, a distance of 170.00 feet, to a point on the west line of Section 2, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of said Section 2, to the northwest corner of said Section 2;
Thence east, along the north line of Township 78 North, to a point of intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 115/687
Company right of way, said point lying on the north line of Section 3, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence southeasterly, along the east right-of-way line of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad Company right-of-way line, to a point of intersection with the
west right-of-way line of 73rd Street (Windsor Heights);
Thence southeasterly, along the west right-of-way line of 73rd Street (Windsor Heights), to the northwest corner of Rancho Grande Subdivision, an official
subdivision in Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the west line of said Rancho Grande Subdivision, to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway Route Number
235;
Thence easterly, along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway Route Number 235 and its extensions, to a point on the west line of Section 2,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence north, along the west line of said Section 2, to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of said Section 2;
Thence east, along the north line of the southwest quarter of said Section 2, to a point of intersection with the east line of Lot 44, Janet Woods Subdivision,
an official subdivision in Polk County, Iowa, and its extensions;
Thence southeasterly, along the northeasterly sides of Lots 44, 45 and 22, of said Janet Woods Subdivision, to the southeast corner of said Lot 22, Janet
Woods Subdivision;
Thence east, along the south line of Janet Woods Subdivision, to a point on the east line of the southwest quarter of said Section 2;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said Section 2, to the point of beginning.
And also:
Beginning at the northeast corner of the west one-half of Section 23, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of said Section 23, to the northeast corner of the west one-half of Section 26, Township 78 North,
Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of said Section 26, to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 78
North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line of the northeast quarter of said Section 35, to the northeast corner of the west one-half of the east one-half of said
Section 35;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of the east one-half of said Section 35, to the southeast corner of the west one-half of the east onehalf
of said Section 35;
Thence west, along the south line of said Section 35, to the southwest corner of said Section 35;
Thence north, along the west line of said Section 35, to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of the County Road (formerly known as
Southwest 72nd Avenue);
Thence west, along the south right-of-way line of the County Road (formerly known as Southwest 72nd Street), to a point of intersection with the northerly
right-of-way line of the Iowa Natural Heritage Foundation's Martensdale Bike Trail;
Thence southwesterly, along the northerly right-of-way line of the Natural Heritage Foundation's Martensdale Bike Trail, to a point on the west line of the
east one-half of the east one-half of Section 34, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the east one-half of the east one-half of said Section 34, of the southwest corner of the east one-half of the east onehalf
of Section 27, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the east one-half of the east one-half of said Section 27, to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of said Section 27;
Thence west, along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of said Section 27, to the point of intersection with the east property line of
Walnut Woods State Park;
Thence northwesterly, along the easterly property line of Walnut Woods State Park, to a point on the west line of said Section 27;
Thence north, along the west line of said Section 27, to the southwest corner of Section 22, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the south line of the southwest quarter of said Section 22, to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
said Section 22;
Thence north, along the west line of Government Lot 10, of said Section 22, to the high water mark on the southerly bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence northeasterly, along the high water mark of the south bank of the Raccoon River, through Sections 22, 23 and 14, Township 78 North, Range 25
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa, to a point of intersection with the east line of the west one-half of said Section 14;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of said Section 14, to the point of beginning.
EXCEPT, Lot 8, Sylvan Rill, an official plat in Section 26, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
EXCEPT, a 1.0 acre church site in the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 3, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 116/687
EXCEPT, a tract of land commencing at the southwest corner of Government Lot 11, of Section 3, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the south line of said Government Lot 11, of said Section 3, a distance of 2 rods;
Thence north, a distance of 2 rods;
Thence west, a distance of 2 rods to a point on the west line of said Government Lot 11, of said Section 3;
Thence south, along the west line of said Government Lot 11, to the point of beginning.
EXCEPT, a tract of land commencing at the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of Lot A Belleson Auditor's Plat, an official plat, Dallas County, Iowa, to the point of beginning located at the southeast
corner of said Lot A;
Thence south, along the east line of the northwest quarter of said Section 12, to the south line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said
Section 12;
Thence west, along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 12, to the southeast corner of Lot 4, Belleson Auditor's
Plat, an official plat in said Section 12, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northwesterly, along the northeasterly line of said Lot 4, to the northwest corner of said Lot 4;
Thence south, along the west line of said Lot 4, to a point on the south line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 12;
Thence west, along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 12, to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said Section 12;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 12, to the south line of Lot A Belleson Auditor's Plat, an
official plat, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the southern line of Lot A of said Belleson Auditor's Plat, to the west line of Lot 5 of said Belleson Auditor's Plat;
Thence south, along the west line of Lot 5 of said Belleson Auditor's Plat, to the southwest corner of Lot 5 Belleson Auditor's Plat;
Thence southeasterly, along the southerly line of Lot 5 of said Belleson Auditor's Plat, to the southeast corner of Lot 5 of said Belleson Auditor's Plat;
Thence north, along the east line of Lot 5 of said Belleson Auditor's Plat, to the south line of Lot A of said Belleson Auditor's Plat;
Thence east, along the south line of Lot A of said Belleson Auditor's Plat, to the point of beginning.
EXCEPT, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8, Barnes Heights, Plat 1, an official plat in the northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
EXCEPT, Lots 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 and 9, Barnes Heights, Plat 2, an official plat in the northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa. (Ord. 993, 2-18-92)
Chapter 9
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
1-9-1: RUNOFF ELECTIONS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to adopt the alternative of using a runoff election in lieu of a primary election for the choosing of persons for
elective municipal offices and prescribing the procedures to be followed therein. (1985 Code §1-1.0301)
B. When Held: A runoff election shall be held only for positions unfilled because of failure of a sufficient number of candidates to receive a majority vote in
the regular city election. (1985 Code §1-1.0302)
C. Qualification: Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for an office, but who receive the highest number of votes cast for that office in
the regular city election to the extent of twice the number of unfilled positions, are candidates in the runoff elections. (1985 Code §1-1.0303)
D. Time Held: Runoff elections shall be held four (4) weeks after the date of the regular city election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular
city elections. (1985 Code §1-1.0304; amd. 1993 Code)
E. Candidates Elected: Candidates in the runoff election who receive the highest number of votes cast for each office on the ballot are elected to the
extent necessary to fill the positions open. (1985 Code §1-1.0305)
1-9-2: WARDS AND PRECINCTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 117/687
1-9-2-1: DIVISION INTO WARDS:
The city is divided into three (3) wards described as follows:
A. First Ward: The first ward shall include all of that part of the city contained within the precincts identified with the beginning number one (1) as described
in section 1-9-2-3 of this chapter.
B. Second Ward: The second ward shall include all that part of the city contained within the precincts identified with the beginning number two (2) as
described in section 1-9-2-3 of this chapter.
C. Third Ward: The third ward shall include all that part of the city contained within the precincts identified with the beginning number three (3) as
described in section 1-9-2-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 1449, 8-6-2001, eff. 1-15-2002)
1-9-2-2: NUMERICAL DESIGNATIONS:
The following defines the meaning of the three (3) numbers that identify the precincts in West Des Moines:
A. The first number identifies which ward the precinct is in with one (1) being the first ward, two (2) being the second ward and three (3) being the third
ward.
B. The second number identifies which county the precinct is in with one (1) being Polk County, two (2) being Dallas County, and three (3) being Warren
County.
C. The third number identifies the precinct number within the ward and county. (Ord. 1643, 8-15-2005)
1-9-2-3: VOTING PRECINCTS:
The city is divided into voting precincts described as follows:
Precinct 111
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Grand Avenue and the east corporate limits;
Thence south, along the east corporate limits, to the centerline intersection of Railroad Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Railroad Avenue, to the centerline intersection of 8th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 8th Street, to the north corporate limits;
Thence easterly, along the north corporate limits, to the east corporate limits;
Thence south, along the east corporate limits, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 112
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Railroad Avenue and the east corporate limits;
Thence southerly along the east corporate limits, to the Polk/Warren County line;
Thence west, along the Polk/Warren County line to the Polk/Dallas County line;
Thence north, along the Polk/Dallas County line, to the high water mark of the north bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence northerly and easterly, along the high water mark of the north bank of the Raccoon River to the centerline intersection of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence north along the centerline of Interstate Highway 35 to the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence east along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the centerline intersection of South 50th Street;
Thence southerly along the centerline of South 50th Street to the centerline intersection of Commerce Drive;
Thence easterly and northerly along the centerline of Commerce Drive to the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence northerly, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the centerline intersection of Railroad Avenue;
Thence east, along the centerline of Railroad Avenue, to the point of beginning.
Except that census block numbers 1053 and 1054, both within tract number 011024, are to be excluded from this precinct.
Precinct 113
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 118/687
Beginning at the centerline intersection of 8th Street and Railroad Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Railroad Avenue, to the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence northerly and easterly, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the centerline intersection of 8th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 8th Street, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 114
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of 28th Street and the north corporate limits;
Thence south, along the centerline of 28th Street, to the centerline of Ashworth Road;
Thence east, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline intersection of 19th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 19th Street, to the centerline intersection of Vine Street;
Thence westerly and northerly, along the centerline of Vine Street, to the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline intersection of Valley West Drive/35th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of Valley West Drive/35th Street, to the north corporate limits;
Thence east, along the north corporate limits, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 115
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue and Vine Street;
Thence west, along the centerline of Vine Street, to the centerline intersection of 19th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 19th Street, to the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline intersection of 28th Street;
Thence north, along centerline of 28th Street, to the north corporate limits;
Thence easterly and southerly, along the north and easterly corporate limits, to the centerline of Interstate 235;
Thence west, along the centerline of Interstate 235, to the centerline intersection of 17th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 17th Street, to the centerline intersection of Pleasant Street;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of Pleasant Street, to the centerline of 16th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 16th Street, to the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence southwesterly, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 116
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue and 16th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 16th Street, to the centerline of Pleasant Street;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of Pleasant Street, to the centerline intersection of 17th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 17th Street, to the centerline intersection of Interstate 235;
Thence east, along the centerline of Interstate 235, to the easterly corporate limits;
Thence southeasterly, along the easterly corporate limits, to the centerline intersection of 8th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 8th Street, to the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence southwesterly, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 131
Beginning at the intersection of the Polk/Warren County line and South 20th Street (R45 Highway);
Thence south along the centerline of South 20th Street (R45 Highway) to the south line of Section 4, Linn Township, Warren County;
Thence west along the south line of Sections 4, 5 and 6, Linn Township, Warren County to the Madison/Warren County line;
Thence north along the Madison/Warren County line to the Dallas/Madison/Polk/Warren County line;
Thence east along the Polk/Warren County line to the point of beginning.
Precinct 211
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 119/687
Beginning at the intersection of Valley West Drive/35th Street and the north corporate limits;
Thence south, along the centerline of Valley West Drive/35th Street, to the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline intersection of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence north, along the centerline of Interstate Highways 35/80, to the north corporate limits;
Thence east, along the north corporate limits, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 212
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road and 39th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 39th Street, to the centerline intersection of Western Hills Drive;
Thence westerly and northerly, along the centerline of Western Hills Drive, to the centerline intersection of Cody Drive;
Thence west, along the centerline of Cody Drive, to the centerline intersection of 50th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 50th Street, to the centerline intersection of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway, to the centerline intersection of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence north, along the centerline of Interstate Highway 35, to the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence east, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 213
Beginning at the centerline intersection of 39th Street and Western Hills Drive;
Thence south, along the centerline of 39th Street, to the centerline intersection E.P. True Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway, to the centerline intersection of 50th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 50th Street, to the centerline intersection of Cody Drive;
Thence east, along the centerline of Cody Drive, to the centerline intersection of Western Hills Drive;
Thence southerly and easterly, along the centerline of Western Hills Drive, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 214
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road and Interstate Highway 35;
Thence south, along the centerline of Interstate 35, to the centerline intersection of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway, to the centerline intersection of 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence north, along the centerline of 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line), to the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence east, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 215
Beginning at the intersection of the north corporate limits and Interstate Highways 35/80;
Thence south, along the centerline of Interstate Highway 35/80 and the centerline of Interstate Highway 35, to the centerline intersection of Ashworth
Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline intersection of 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence north, along the Polk/Dallas County line, to the north corporate limits;
Thence east, along the north corporate limits, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 221
Beginning at the intersection of the north corporate limits and 59th Place (Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence south, along the Polk/Dallas County line, to the centerline of Ashworth Road;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the west corporate limits;
Thence northerly, along the westerly corporate limits, to the north corporate limits;
Thence east, along the north corporate limits, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 222
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 120/687
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road and 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence south, along the Polk/Dallas County line, to the centerline intersection of Mills Civic Parkway/335th Street;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway/335th Street, to the centerline intersection of Ute Avenue;
Thence northerly, along the centerline of Ute Avenue, to the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence east, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 311
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road and 39th Street;
Thence east along the centerline of Ashworth Road to the centerline intersection of Vine Street;
Thence southeasterly along the centerline of Vine Street to the centerline intersection of 32nd Street;
Thence southerly along the centerline of 32nd Street to the centerline intersection of Meadow Lane;
Thence easterly along the centerline of Meadow Lane to the centerline intersection of 28th Street;
Thence south along the centerline of 28th Street to the centerline of Giles Street;
Thence west along the centerline of Giles Street to the centerline intersection of 33rd Street (south);
Thence south along the centerline of 33rd Street to the centerline intersection of Maple Street;
Thence west along the centerline of Maple Street to the centerline intersection of 35th Court;
Thence southwesterly along the centerline of 35th Court and its extension to the centerline intersection of the Union Pacific Railroad Company Right-of-
Way;
Thence westerly along the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad Company Right-of-Way to the centerline intersection of 39th Street;
Thence north along the centerline of 39th Street to the point of beginning.
Precinct 312
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue and Vine Street;
Thence southwesterly along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the centerline intersection of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence west along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway to the centerline intersection of 39th Street;
Thence north along the centerline of 39th Street to the centerline intersection of the Union Pacific Railroad Company Right-of-Way;
Thence southeasterly, along the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad Company Right-of-Way, to the centerline extended of 35th Court;
Thence northeasterly, along the centerline of 35th Court and its extension to the centerline intersection of Maple Street;
Thence east along the centerline of Maple Street to the centerline intersection of 33rd Street;
Thence north along the centerline of 33rd Street to the centerline intersection of Giles Street;
Thence east along the centerline of Giles Street to the centerline of 28th Street;
Thence north along the centerline of 28th Street to the centerline intersection of Meadow Lane;
Thence westerly along the centerline of Meadow Lane to the centerline intersection of 32nd Street;
Thence northerly along the centerline of 32nd Street to the centerline intersection of Vine Street;
Thence southeasterly along the centerline of Vine Street to the point of beginning.
Precinct 313
Beginning at the centerline intersection of E.P. True Parkway and Grand Avenue;
Thence southwesterly along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the centerline intersection of South 35th Street;
Thence north along the centerline of South 35th Street to the centerline intersection of Fuller Road;
Thence west along the centerline of Fuller Road to the centerline intersection of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence northeasterly along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway to the centerline intersection of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence easterly along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway to the point of beginning.
Precinct 314
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 121/687
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Fuller Road and South 35th Street;
Thence westerly along the centerline of Fuller Road to the centerline intersection of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence west along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway to the centerline intersection of South 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence south along the Polk/Dallas County line to the high water mark on the north bank of the Racoon River;
Thence east along the high water mark on the north bank of the Raccoon River to the centerline of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence north along the centerline of Interstate Highway 35 to the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence east along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the centerline intersection of South 50th Street;
Thence southerly along the centerline of South 50th Street to the centerline intersection of Commerce Drive;
Thence easterly and northerly along the centerline of Commerce Drive to the centerline intersection of South 35th Street;
Thence north along the centerline of South 35th Street to the point of the beginning.
And also census block numbers 1053 and 1054, both within tract number 011024, are to be included in this precinct.
Precinct 315
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Interstate Highway 35 and E.P. True Parkway;
Thence south along the centerline of Interstate Highway 35 to the centerline intersection of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence west along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway to the centerline intersection of South 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence north along the Polk/Dallas County line to the centerline of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence easterly along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway to the point of beginning.
Precinct 316
Beginning at the centerline intersection of E.P. True Parkway and Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence southwesterly along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway to the centerline intersection of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence north along the centerline of Interstate Highway 35 to the centerline intersection of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence easterly along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway to the point of beginning.
Precinct 321
Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Mills Civic Parkway/335th Street and 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence south along the Polk/Dallas County line to the centerline of the Raccoon River;
Thence west along the centerline of the Raccoon River to the centerline of Grand Avenue/360th Street;
Thence east along the centerline of Grand Avenue/360th Street to the centerline intersection of Ute Avenue;
Thence northerly along the centerline of Ute Avenue to the centerline intersection of Mills Civic Parkway/335th Street;
Thence easterly along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway/335th Street to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 1449, 8-6-2001, eff. 1-15-2002; amd. Ord. 1465, 12-26-2001, eff. 1-15-2002; Ord. 1643, 8-15-2005)
Chapter 10
FINANCES
1-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
(1985 Code §1-1.0401)
1-10-2: CASH CONTROL:
To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of monies, the following shall apply: (1985 Code §1-1.0403; amd. 1993 Code)
A. Deposit Of Funds: All monies or fees collected for any purpose by any City officer shall be deposited through the Office of the Finance Director. If any
said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to him by check drawn by the Finance Director and approved by the Council only upon such officer's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 122/687
making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance or Council directive. (1985 Code §1-1.0403; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-
2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
B. Bank Deposits: All monies belonging to the City shall be promptly deposited in banks selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding the authorized
depository limitation established by the Council. (1985 Code §1-1.0403; amd. 1993 Code)
C. Change Fund: The Finance Director is authorized, at his discretion, to draw a check on the General Fund for establishing departmental petty cash
accounts to accommodate disbursements of small amounts for operating purposes and making change, without commingling other funds to meet the
requirements of said office. The funds shall be operated on an imprest basis not to exceed a total amount as authorized by resolution of the City
Council. Disbursements from departmental petty cash accounts shall be evidenced by supporting data, properly approved as to propriety and
authenticity. (1985 Code §1-1.0403; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-10-3: FUNDS CONTROL:
The Finance Director shall establish and maintain separate and distinct funds in accordance with the following: (1985 Code §1-1.0404; amd. 1993 Code;
Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
A. Revenues: All monies received by the City shall be credited to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.
B. Expenditures: No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
C. Emergency Fund: No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency Fund.
D. Debt Service Fund: Except where specifically prohibited by State law, monies may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
E. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund: Except where specifically prohibited by State law, monies may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment. (1985 Code §1-1.0404; amd. 1993
Code)
F. Balancing Of Funds: The Finance Director shall reconcile fund accounts at the close of each month and submit a report thereof to the Council. (1985
Code §1-1.0404; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-10-4: INVESTMENT OF FUNDS:
The Finance Director shall advise the Council on investments and shall invest City monies not immediately needed at interest in accordance with Council
directives and the requirements of chapter 452, Code of Iowa. (1985 Code §1-1.0408; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-10-5: BUDGETS:
1-10-5-1: OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION:
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with the following:
A. Proposal Prepared: The City Manager shall be responsible for preparation of the annual budget detail, for review and adoption by the Mayor and
Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council. (1985 Code §1-1.0405; amd. 1993 Code)
B. Boards And Commissions: All boards, commissions and other administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets
must submit their budget proposals to the Finance Director for inclusion in the proposed City budget no later than a date determined by the City
Manager.
C. Submission To Council: The Finance Director shall submit the completed budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of each year. (1985
Code §1-1.0405; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
D. Council Review: The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before
accepting such proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption.
E. Notice Of Hearing: Upon adopting a proposed budget, the Council shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause
notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date
established for the hearing. Proof of such publication must be filed with the county auditor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 123/687
F. Copies Of Budget On File: No later than ten (10) days before the public hearing, the clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies of the
detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and organizations and have them available for distribution at the offices of the mayor and clerk and
at the city library.
G. Adoption And Certification: After the hearing, the council shall adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year, and the clerk shall certify
the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the county auditor and the county board of supervisors of Polk and Dallas Counties. The tax levy
certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget. Two (2) copies each of the detailed budget as adopted
and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the county auditor. (1985 Code §1-1.0405; amd. 1993 Code)
1-10-5-2: RESERVED:
1-10-5-3: BUDGET AMENDMENTS:
A city budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the city appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
A. Program Increase: Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
B. Program Transfer: Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
C. Subprogram Transfer: Any transfer of appropriation from one subprogram to another must be approved by resolution of the council. (1985 Code §1-
1.0407; amd. 1993 Code)
D. Activity Transfers: The finance director, with the advice and consent of the city manager, shall have the authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the
appropriation allocated to activities within a program or subprogram; provided, however, that when such adjustments in any one activity aggregate one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or ten percent (10%) of the amount appropriated, whichever is greater, no further adjustments shall be made without
approval by resolution of the council. All such transfers shall be reported in writing at the next regular meeting of the council following the transfer and
recorded in the minutes for the information of the council and general public. (1985 Code §1-1.0407; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-
2010)
1-10-6: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. Accounting Records: The accounting records of the city shall consist of not less than the following:
1. Books Of Original Entry: There shall be established and maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
2. General Ledger: There shall be established and maintained a general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses. (1985 Code §1-1.0409; amd. 1993 Code)
3. Checks: Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the finance director following council approval, except as provided by subsection A5 of this
section. (1985 Code §1-1.0409; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
4. Budget Accounts: There shall be established such individual accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program, subprogram and
activity as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the council. Each individual account
shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and
expenditures can be related to the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose
for which the expense was incurred. (1985 Code §1-1.0409; amd. 1993 Code)
5. Immediate Payment Authorized: The council may, by resolution, authorize the finance director to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts
due which, if not paid promptly, would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall
be reported to the council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such payment. The
resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include, but is not limited to, payment of utility
bills, contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
6. Utilities: The finance director shall perform and be responsible for accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities except those under the
control and management of the utility board of trustees. (1985 Code §1-1.0409; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
B. Financial Reports: The finance director shall prepare and file the following financial reports: (1985 Code §1-1.0410; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-
2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1. Monthly Reports: There shall be submitted to the council, each month, a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, subprogram
and activity for the preceding month.
2. Annual Report: Not later than October 1 of each year or a subsequent date determined by the state auditor, there shall be published an annual report
containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the city, and all expenditures, the current public
debt of the city, and the legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be furnished to the auditor of State.
(1985 Code §1-1.0410; amd. 1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 124/687
1-10-7: UNAUTHORIZED EXPENDITURE:
No City official or employee, or any person acting under color of such office or employment, shall knowingly make any contract or authorize any
expenditure known by him or her to be in excess of that authorized by law. (1985 Code §1.0412)
1-10-8: PURCHASE ORDERS:
All purchases of supplies, material, services or equipment shall be made in accordance with procedures established by the City Manager and approved by
the Council. (1985 Code §1-1.0414)
1-10-9: NON-DISCRIMINATION:
The City of West Des Moines does not discriminate on the basis of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, or veteran status. Contractors and vendors doing business with the City of West Des Moines shall not discriminate against any employees or
applicants for employment on the basis of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or veteran
status and shall include a similar non-discrimination provision in all agreements associated with their business agreements with the City of West Des
Moines. (Ord. 2279, 2-20-2018)
ARTICLE A. INDUSTRIAL TAX ABATEMENT
1-10A-1: PURPOSE:
This Article shall provide for a partial exemption from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by new construction of industrial
real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution centers and acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real
estate pursuant to section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, Code of Iowa, as amended. (Ord. 894, 10-30-89)
1-10A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms are defined:
DISTRIBUTION CENTER:
A. Means a building or structure used primarily for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
B. Does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store good to be used in
the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum products or used for the retail sale of goods.
NEW CONSTRUCTION:
A. Means a new building and structures and includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and
structures.
B. Does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or
structure, unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence, and the reconstruction is
necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific products, and the reconstruction is required
for the owner of the building or structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those products; which determination shall receive prior
approval form the City Council upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development. The exemption shall also apply to new
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, Code of Iowa, as amended, unless the
machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the existing operational status.
RESEARCH-SERVICE FACILITIES: A building or group of buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities, including, but not limited to,
the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use, and corporate-research services which do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
WAREHOUSE: A building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to chapter 554, article 7, Iowa Code, except that it
does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail. (Ord. 894, 10-30-89)
1-10A-3: TAX EXEMPTION:
The amount of actual value added which is eligible and to which this exemption from taxation applies shall be as follows:
A. For the first year, seventy five percent (75%).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 125/687
B. For the second year, sixty percent (60%).
C. For the third year, forty five percent (45%).
D. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%).
E. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%). (1985 Code §1-6.03)
1-10A-4: EXEMPTION PROHIBITED:
A. Dual Exemptions: A property tax exemption under this Article shall not be granted if the property for which an exemption is being claimed has received,
or is receiving any other property tax exemption authorized by law.
B. Assessed Value Not Reduced Below Starting Value. The granting of an exemption under this Chapter for new construction constituting complete
replacement of an existing building or structure shall not result in an assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed
value of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added. (1985 Code §1-6.04)
1-10A-5: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
Applications for exemption under this Chapter shall be made pursuant to the provisions of section 427B.4 of the Code of Iowa, as amended. (1985 Code
§1-6.05)
1-10A-6: EXEMPTION MAY BE REPEALED:
When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted by this Article, and pursuant to chapter 427B of the Code of Iowa, ceases to
be a benefit to the City, the Council may repeal this Article, but existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration. (1985 Code §1-6.06)
ARTICLE B. TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
1-10B-1: VALLEY JUNCTION URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
(Rep. by Ord. 2207, 3-20-2017)
1-10B-2: WESTOWN PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in each district of the urban renewal project area known as the Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Project
Area, as legally described in the preamble of the ordinances codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines,
Counties of Polk and Dallas, West Des Moines Community School District, the Waukee Community School District, and all other taxing districts from
and after the effective date hereof, shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided. (Ord. 982, 12-16-1992; amd. Ord. 990, 12-23-1991)
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts taxing property in
the respective tax increment financing districts within said Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Project Area upon the total sum of the assessed value on
the assessment roll of January 1, 1993, being the first day of the calendar year preceding the effective date hereof, shall be allocated to and, when
collected, be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this Section shall be allocated to and,
when collected, be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City hereby established in each county, to pay the principal of and the interest on loans,
monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of
sections 403.9 and 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City, to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects undertaken
pursuant to the amended Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Project Program, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing
district levying taxes on said project area shall be collected against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation as hereinabove
provided. (Ord. 1105, 10-24-1994)
D. All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds of the taxing
districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes, unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in said Urban Renewal Project Area shall exceed the total assessed value of the taxable property in each tax increment financing district in
said Urban Renewal Project Area on the effective date hereof.
E. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection C referred to have
been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into
the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 126/687
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this Section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the Urban Renewal Project Area as described above. In the event that any provision of this Section shall be determined to be contrary
to law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this Section, which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to said Urban Renewal Project and the territory therein. (Ord. 982, 12-16-1991; amd. Ord. 990, 12-23-1991)
1-10B-3: GLENOAKS URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Project Area known as the Glenoaks Urban Renewal Project Area, as legally described
in the preamble of Ordinance 987 on file in the office of the City Clerk, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, counties of
Polk and Dallas, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date hereof, shall be divided as
hereinafter in this Section provided.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts taxing property in
said Glenoaks Urban Renewal Project Area upon the total sum of the assessed value on the assessment roll of January 1, 1990, being the first day of
the calendar year preceding the effective date hereof, shall be allocated to and, when collected, be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district
as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this Section, shall be allocated to and,
when collected, be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City hereby established to pay the principal of and the interest on loans, monies
advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of sections
403.9 and 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City, to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects undertaken pursuant to the
Glenoaks Urban Renewal Project Program, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district levying taxes on said project
area shall be collected against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said Glenoaks Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds of the taxing districts
as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes, unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property
in said Urban Renewal Project Area shall exceed the total assessed value of the taxable property in said Urban Renewal Project Area on the date of
the effective date hereof.
E. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection C referred to have
been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the Glenoaks Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this Section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the Urban Renewal Project Area as described above. In the event that any provision of this Section shall be determined to be contrary
to law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this Section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to said Urban Renewal Project and the territory therein. (Ord. 987, 12-23-1991)
1-10B-4: VALLEY JUNCTION/RAILROAD AVENUE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Polk County Tax Increment Financing District of the Urban Renewal Project Area known as the Valley
Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan Area, as legally described in the preamble of Ordinance 1161, by and for the benefit of the State of
Iowa, City of West Des Moines, Polk County, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective
date hereof, shall be divided as hereinafter in this Section provided.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts taxing property in
the Polk County Tax Increment Financing District within said Valley Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan Area upon the total sum of the
assessed value on the assessment roll of January 1, 1994, being the first day of the calendar year preceding the effective date hereof, shall be
allocated to and, when collected, be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxed by or for said taxing district into which all other property
taxes are paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this Section shall be allocated to and,
when collected, be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City hereby established, to pay the principal of and the interest on loans, monies
advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of sections
403.9 and 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City, to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects undertaken pursuant to the
Valley Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan, except that taxes for the payments of bonds and interest of each taxing district levying taxes on
said project area shall be collected against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said Valley Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan Area shall be paid into the funds
of the taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation of
the taxable property in said Urban Renewal Plan Area shall exceed the total assessed value of the taxable property in the Polk County Tax Increment
Financing District in said Urban Renewal Plan Area on the date of adoption hereof.
E. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection C of this Section
referred to have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the Valley Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal
Plan Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 127/687
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this Section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the Urban Renewal Project Area as described above. In the event that any provision of this Section shall be determined to be contrary
to law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this Section, which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to said Urban Renewal Plan and the territory therein. (Ord. 1161, 12-18-1995)
1-10B-5: WESTOWN III URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A. That the taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Project Area legally described in the preamble of Ordinance 1327, by and for the
benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, counties of Polk and Dallas, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing
districts from and after the effective date hereof shall be divided as hereinafter in this Section provided.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Project Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable
from the division of property tax revenue described herein (which certification is directed to be made during the 1998 calendar year), shall be allocated
to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this Section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced
to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of section 403.9 or
403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the
Urban Renewal Project Area pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall
be collected against all taxable property within the Urban Renewal Project Area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Project Area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in the Urban Renewal Project Area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal project area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for
said taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes.
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City referred to in subsection C of this section have been paid, all
monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal project area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the urban renewal project area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to
law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19
of the Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal project area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 1327, 9-21-1998)
1-10B-6: WESTOWN IV URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal project area legally described in the preamble of the ordinance codified herein, by and for
the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts
from and after the effective date hereof shall be divided as provided in this section.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable
from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein (which certification is directed to be made during the 1998 calendar year), shall be allocated
to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are
paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced
to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of section 403.9 or
403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the
urban renewal project area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be
collected against all taxable property within the urban renewal project area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal project area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in the urban renewal project area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal project area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for
said taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes.
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City referred to in subsection C of this section have been paid, all
monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal project area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 128/687
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the urban renewal project area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to
law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19
of the Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal project area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 1328, 9-21-1998)
1-10B-7: MILLS PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMENDED AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, included within the original tax increment district and the Tax Increment
Subdistrict Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8 less the area removed by amendment 4 ("amendment no. 4 area"), which amended area includes the lots and
parcels located within the area legally described above in this subsection A.
AMENDMENT NO. 3 AREA: Added no real property to the area.
AMENDMENT NO. 4 AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, described in the amendment to the amended and restated urban
renewal plan for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by resolution 13-11-11-07 on November 11, 2013, which removed the lots and
parcels located within the area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
AMENDMENT NO. 5 AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, described in the amendment to the amended and restated urban
renewal plan for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by resolution 14-11-17-09 on November 17, 2014, which added the lots and parcels
located within the area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
ORIGINAL TAX INCREMENT DISTRICT: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, described in the urban renewal plan for the Mills Parkway
Urban Renewal Area approved by resolution 99-06-14-05 on June 14, 1999, and amended by resolution 03-11-10-05 on November 10, 2003, and
resolution 08-12-01-05 on December 1, 2008, which includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally described in the ordinance codified
herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 1: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, described in the urban renewal plan for the Mills Parkway
Urban Renewal Area, as amended by resolution 03-11-10-05 approved on November 10, 2003, which includes the lots and parcels located within the
area described in the ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 3: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, described in the urban renewal plan for the Mills Parkway
Urban Renewal Area, as amended by resolution 03-11-10-05 approved on November 10, 2003, which includes the lots and parcels located within the
area described in the ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 4: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, described in the urban renewal plan for the Mills Parkway
Urban Renewal Area, as amended by resolution 03-11-10-05 approved on November 10, 2003, which includes the lots and parcels located within the
area described in the ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 5: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, described in the amended and restated urban renewal
plan for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by resolution 07-03-12-06 on March 12, 2007, which includes the lots and parcels located
within the area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 6: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, described in the amendment to the amended and restated
urban renewal plan for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by roll call 08-068 on March 10, 2008, and resolution 08-12-01-05 on
December 1, 2008, which includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally described in the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 2072, 12-1-
2014; amd. Ord. 2314, 7-9-2018)
B. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the amended area, legally described in subsection A of this section, by and for the benefit of the State of
Iowa, Counties of Polk and Dallas, Iowa, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date
hereof shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
C. As to the original Mills Parkway Tax Increment Subdistrict, the subdistrict was removed from the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area by amendment 4.
As to Tax Increment Subdistrict Nos. 1, 3 and 4, base period taxes shall be computed using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as
of January 1, 2002, being the first day of the calendar year preceding the effective date of ordinance 1560.
As to Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 5, base period taxes shall be computed using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of January
1, 2006, being the first day of the calendar year preceding the effective date of ordinance 1740.
As to Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 6, which consists of properties formerly included within Tax Increment Subdistrict Nos. 2, 3 and 5, base period
taxes shall be computed in the same manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 2006, being the first day of
the calendar year preceding the effective date of ordinance 1800.
As to the amendment no. 3 area, there was no base year as no property was added.
As to the amendment no. 4 area, no base period taxes are applicable because the original Mills Parkway Subdistrict was removed and any property
being retained or added by amendment no. 4 was solely right-of-way that did not create increment and therefore is not relevant to ordinance 2014.
As to the amendment no. 5 area, this section is applicable to Subdistrict No. 8 area (Glennan Square) only at this time. Base period taxes on
Subdistrict No. 8 area shall be computed using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 2013, being the first day of the
calendar year preceding the effective date hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 129/687
D. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes for the amended area, determined for each subdistrict thereof as provided in
subsection C of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the special Tax Increment Fund previously established by the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to, or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City of West Des Moines,
State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the amended area pursuant to the urban renewal
plan, as amended, except that: 1) taxes for the regular and voter approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to
Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the instructional support program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but in
each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3)
taxes imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint county-city buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19
shall be collected against all taxable property within the amended area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
E. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the subdistricts of the amended area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in said subdistricts shown by the assessment rolls referred to in subsection C of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon
the taxable property in the amended area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same
manner as all other Property Taxes.
F. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and indebtedness of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
subsection D of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the amended area shall be paid into
the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. (Ord. 2072, 12-1-2014)
G. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to continue the division of taxes from property within the Tax Increment Subdistrict Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 (less the property
removed by amendment no. 4) under the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as authorized in ordinances 1384, 1560, 1740, 1800, and
2014, and to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa with respect to the division of taxes from property within the
amendment no. 5 area as described above (Subdistrict No. 8 only at this time). Notwithstanding any provisions in any prior ordinances or other
documents, the provisions of this section and all prior ordinances relating to the urban renewal area, as amended, shall be construed to continue the
division of taxes from property within the area to the maximum period of time allowed by section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa. In the event that any
provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times
be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to the amended area and the territory contained
therein. (Ord. 2072, 12-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2314, 7-9-2018)
1-10B-8: WESTOWN V URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area legally described in the preamble of the ordinance codified herein, as amended from
time to time by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, Counties of Polk and Dallas, West Des Moines Community School
District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date hereof shall be divided as provided in this section. (Ord. 1848, 11-16-2009; amd.
Ord. 2125, 11-2-2015)
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, certifies to the County auditor the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein (which certification is directed to be made during the 2009
calendar year), shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into
which all other Property Taxes are paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest
on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the
authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole
or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that taxes for the regular and
voter approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 298.2, but only to the extent authorized in section
403.19(2), and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the urban
renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the
same manner as all other property taxes.
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, referred to in subsection C of this
section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it
shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the
code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 1848, 11-16-2009)
1-10B-9: ASHWORTH CORRIDOR URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 130/687
A. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMENDED AREA: That portion of the city of West Des Moines, state of Iowa, included within the original subarea and the amendment no. 1 subarea,
which amended area includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally described in the original subarea and the amendment no. 1 subarea.
AMENDMENT NO. 1 SUBAREA: That portion of the city of West Des Moines, state of Iowa, described in amendment no. 1 to the urban renewal plan
for the Ashworth Corridor urban renewal area approved by resolution 16-07-25-07 on July 25, 2016, which amendment no. 1 subarea includes the lots
and parcels located within the area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
ORIGINAL SUBAREA: That portion of the city of West Des Moines, state of Iowa, described in the urban renewal plan for the Ashworth Corridor urban
renewal area approved by resolution 09-11-02-10 on November 2, 2009, which original subarea includes the lots and parcels located within the area
legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
B. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the amended area, legally described in the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the state of
Iowa, county of Dallas, Iowa, Waukee community school district, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date hereof shall be divided as
hereinafter in this section provided.
C. As to the original subarea, that portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the original subarea upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the original subarea as shown on the
assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the municipality certifies to the county auditor the
amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of property tax revenue described in ordinance 1850, shall be allocated
to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid. The taxes so determined shall be referred to herein as the "base period taxes" for such area.
As to amendment no. 1 subarea, base period taxes shall be computed in the same manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment
roll as of January 1, 2015, being the assessment roll applicable to property in such subarea as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective
date hereof.
D. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes for the amended area, determined for each subarea thereof as provided in
subsection C of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the special tax increment fund previously established by the city of
West Des Moines, state of Iowa, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to, or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the code of Iowa, incurred by the city of West Des Moines,
state of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the amended area pursuant to the urban renewal
plan, as amended, except that: 1) taxes for the regular and voter approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to
Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the instructional support program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19, but in each
case only to the extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes
imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint county-city buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall
be collected against all taxable property within the amended area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
E. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the subareas of the amended area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in the subareas shown by the assessment rolls referred to in subsection C of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable
property in the amended area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as
all other property taxes.
F. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and indebtedness of the city of West Des Moines, state of Iowa, referred to in
subsection D of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the amended area shall be paid into
the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
G. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to continue the division of taxes from property within the original subarea under the provisions of section 403.19 of the code of
Iowa, as authorized in ordinance 1850, and to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the code of Iowa with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the amendment no. 1 subarea as described above. Notwithstanding any provisions in any prior ordinances or other documents,
the provisions of this section and all prior ordinances relating to the urban renewal area, as amended, shall be construed to continue the division of
taxes from property within the area to the maximum period of time allowed by section 403.19 of the code of Iowa. In the event that any provision of this
section shall be determined to be contrary to law it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to
fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the code of Iowa with reference to the amended area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2163, 8-
8-2016)
1-10B-10: FULLER ROAD URBAN RENEWAL DISTRICT:
A. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
URBAN RENEWAL DISTRICT: That portion of the city of West Des Moines within the boundaries described in the ordinance codified herein.
URBAN RENEWAL PLAN: The urban renewal plan for the Fuller Road urban renewal district, approved by resolution 10-03-08-13 on March 8, 2010,
as the same may be amended from time to time.
B. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal district legally described in subsection A of this section, by and for the benefit of the state
of Iowa, city of West Des Moines, county of Polk, West Des Moines community school district, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective
date hereof shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided. (Ord. 1862, 3-22-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 131/687
C. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal district, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of property tax revenue described herein (which certification is directed to be made during the 2011
calendar year), shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into
which all other property taxes are paid. (Ord. 1908, 2-7-2011)
D. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection C of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest
on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the
authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole
or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal district pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that taxes for the regular and
voter approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 298.2, but only to the extent authorized in section
403.19(2), and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the urban
renewal district without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
E. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal district exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property
in the urban renewal district as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection C of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal district shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the
same manner as all other property taxes.
F. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, referred to in subsection D of this
section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal district shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
G. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to continue the division of taxes from property within the urban renewal district as described above, to the full extent
authorized by section 403.19 of the code of Iowa, as amended. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law,
it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of
the code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal district and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 1862, 3-22-2010)
1-10B-11: 4125 WESTOWN PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area legally described in the preamble of the ordinance codified herein, by and for the
benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from
and after the effective date hereof shall be divided as provided in this section.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the Auditor of Polk County, Iowa, the amount of loans,
advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein (which certification is directed to be made during
the 2014 calendar year), shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid. The taxes so determined shall be referred to herein as the "base period taxes" for such area. The
property in this urban renewal area is currently the subject of a Property Tax assessment appeal. The City's first certification to the Auditor of Polk
County, Iowa, is directed to be made with the December 1, 2014 certification, and accordingly, the base period taxes shall be computed using the total
assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 2013, as adjusted by any Board action or final adjudication resulting from the Property
Tax assessment appeal.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a Special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of
and interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued
under the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that: 1)
taxes for the regular and voter approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes
for the Instructional Support Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19, but in each case only to the extent required
under Iowa Code section 403.19(2); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes imposed under Iowa Code section
346.27(22) related to joint County-City buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall be collected against all taxable
property within the urban renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the
same manner as all other property taxes.
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in subsection
C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 132/687
shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the
Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 1990, 6-10-2013)
1-10B-12: ALLUVION URBAN RENEWAL AREA (WILLOW CREEK PLAT 1):
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area legally described in the
preamble of the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines
Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date hereof shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area, as shown on the
assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to
the Auditor of Polk County, Iowa, the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described
herein, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all
other property taxes are paid. (Ord. 2091, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 2170, 9-19-2016; Ord. 2185, 11-28-2016)
1. The City Clerk is directed to file a certification of debt under Iowa Code section 403.19 on or before December 1, 2015; thus, the frozen base
assessed valuation for Willow Creek Plat 1, Lot 1 parcel shall be as of January 1, 2014. (Ord. 2091, 5-4-2015)
2. The City Clerk is directed to file a certification of debt under Iowa Code section 403.19 on or before December 1, 2016; thus, the frozen base
assessed valuation for Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 2 and 3 parcel shall be as of January 1, 2015. (Ord. 2170, 9-19-2016)
3. The City Clerk is directed to file a certification of debt under Iowa Code section 403.19 for Willow Creek Plat 1, Lot 4 parcel. (Ord. 2185, 11-28-2016)
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a Special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of
and interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued
under the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken anywhere within the urban renewal area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except
that: 1) taxes for the regular and voter approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2
and taxes for the Instructional Support Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19, but in each case only to the extent
required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes imposed under Iowa Code
section 346.27(22) related to joint County-City buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall be collected against all
taxable property within the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area
exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area as shown by
the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1,
Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in
the same manner as all other property taxes.
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in subsection
C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4
parcel of the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area as described above. In the event that any provision of this
section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to
fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban
renewal area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2091, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 2170, 9-19-2016; Ord. 2185, 11-28-2016)
1-10B-13: ALLUVION URBAN RENEWAL AREA (TRACT 3 OF AMENDMENT 2 PARCEL):
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area legally described in the preamble of the
ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community School
District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll
as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the Auditor of
Polk County, Iowa the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein, shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property
taxes are paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a Special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of
and interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued
under the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken anywhere within the Urban Renewal Area pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan,
except that: 1) taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section
298.2 and taxes for the Instructional Support Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but in each case only to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 133/687
extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes imposed under
Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint County-City buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall be collected
against all taxable property within the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area exceeds the total
assessed value of the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal
area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes.
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in subsection
C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the
urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall
be determined to be contrary to law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke
the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area and the territory
contained therein. (Ord. 2186, 11-28-2016)
1-10B-14: COACHLIGHT DRIVE URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area legally described in the preamble of the ordinance codified herein, by and for the
benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Dallas, Waukee Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after
the effective date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll on January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the Municipality certified to the County Auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds
payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described in this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the
respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a Special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of
and interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued
under the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan, except that: 1)
taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes
for the Instructional Support Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but in each case only to the extent required
under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes imposed under Iowa Code section
346.27(22) related to joint County-City buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall be collected against all taxable
property within the urban renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the
same manner as all other property taxes.
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in subsection
C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it
shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the
Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2202, 3-6-2017)
1-10B-14-1: COACHLIGHT DRIVE URBAN RENEWAL AREA 2018 ADDITION:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of taxes levied on the taxable property in the June, 2018 Coachlight Drive Urban
Renewal Area Addition of the City, each year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts or other taxing districts after the effective
date of this section in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds
proposed to be issued by the City to finance projects in such area.
B. Definitions: For use within the remainder of this section the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Dallas County, Iowa.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 134/687
2018 URBAN RENEWAL AREA ADDITION: Shall mean the June, 2018 Coachlight Drive Urban Renewal Area Addition of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa, the legal description of which is set out below, approved by the City Council by resolution adopted on the 25th day of June, 2018:
A tract of land in sections 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is
included in the Coachlight Drive TIF District and is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 'A', Villas at Bridgewood plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, with said point of beginning being located on the east line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M.,
City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and located on the centerline of 74th Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the southerly line (Lot 'A', Lot 'B', and partial Lot 'C') of said Villas at Bridgewood plat 1, to the northeast corner of Lot 'A',
Gardens at Bridgewood plat 2, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence southerly and westerly, along the south line (Lot 'A', Lot 4, Lot 5, and partial Lot 7) of said Gardens at Bridgewood plat 2, to the southeast
corner of Bridgewood South, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence westerly, along the south line of said Bridgewood South, and the projection to the west of the south line of Bridgewood South, to the west right
of way line of South 81st Street;
Thence southerly, along the west right of way line of South 81st Street, to the north right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence west, along the north right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to the northwest corner of street Lot P, Heritage Bend plat 1, an official subdivision
now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the west line of street Lot P, Heritage Bend plat 1, to the southwest corner of street Lot P, Heritage Bend plat 1;
Thence continuing southerly, along the projection of the west line of street Lot P, Heritage Bend plat 1, to the south right of way of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence easterly, along the south right of way of Mills Civic Parkway, to the west right of way of South 81st Street;
Thence south, along the west right of way line of South 81st Street, a distance of 250 feet;
Thence easterly, along a line 250 feet south of and parallel to the south right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to a point on the east line of the
southwest quarter of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, also being the
centerline of S 81st Street;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 14, to the southerly point of the north line of street Lot 'B', the Cascades At
Jordan Creek plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, to the west right of way line of South 81st Street, said point being the northwest corner of said street Lot 'B';
Thence south, along the west right of way line of South 81st Street, to the southwest corner of street Lot 'B', also being the southeast corner of lot 1,
both in the Cascades At Jordan Creek plat 1;
Thence southwesterly, along the south line and the south line extended of Lot 1, the Cascades At Jordan Creek plat 1, to the southwest corner of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 14, also being a point on the east line of Sunset Ridge, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the east line of Sunset Ridge, to the southeast corner of Lot 6, Sunset Ridge;
Thence west, along the south line of Lot 6, to the southwest corner of said Lot 6, being at the east right of way line of S 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right of way line of S 88th Street, to the south line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 14, to the southeast corner of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, also being the southeast corner of street Lot "Z" in corrected
Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence west, along the south line of said street Lot "Z", to the southwest corner of said street Lot "Z", being also the west right of way line of S 88th
Street;
Thence north, along the west right of way line of said South 88th Street, to the northeast corner of street Lot 'D' in corrected Michael's Landing plat 1,
an official subdivision now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south and westerly, along the north line of said street Lot 'D', to the southeast corner of street Lot 'H', corrected Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence northerly, along the east line of said street Lot 'H', to the intersection point of street Lot 'AA', of said corrected Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence westerly, along the south line of said street Lot 'AA', to the southwest corner of said street Lot 'AA', said point also being on the east line of the
southwest quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa; also being the south
line of street Lot 'AA', and the south right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence north, along the west line of said street Lot 'AA' to the northwest corner of said street Lot 'AA', being also the center of section, section 15,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of the southeast quarter of said section 15, to the southwest corner of Lot "A" road, Cedar Ridge, an official
plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot "A" road, Cedar Ridge, to the projection south of the west line of Lot 7, Cedar Ridge;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 135/687
Thence north along the projection of the west line of Lot 7 Cedar Ridge, to the southwest corner of Lot 7, Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 7, to the southwest corner of Lot 21, Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 21, to the southeast corner of Lot 25 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence west, along the south line of Lots 25 and 26 to the southwest corner of Lot 26 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north then southwesterly then north again, along the west line of said Lot 26, Cedar Ridge, to the northwest corner of Lot 28, of said Cedar
Ridge;
Thence west, to the southwest corner of Lot 29 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 29 of said Cedar Ridge, to the northwest corner of said Lot 29;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lots 29, 30, and 31 of said Cedar Ridge, to the southwest corner of the NE1/4 NE1/4 of section 15,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly along the south line of the NE1/4 NE1/4 of section 15, 429.06 feet to the southwest corner of an acquisition plat for Coachlight
Drive, recorded in book 2015 page 20234, recorded in Dallas County Iowa;
Thence north, to the south line of street Lot 'E', Whisper Ridge plat 3, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west along the south line of street Lot E to the southwest corner of street Lot E Whisper Ridge plat 3 now included in and forming a part of the
City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of street Lot E and Lots 18 - 20, 26, 27, 31 - 35, street Lot A and outlot "X", Whisper Ridge plat 3, to the northwest
corner of outlot 'X', Whisper Ridge plat 3, also being the southwest corner of outlot V, Whisper Ridge plat 2, an official plat, now included in and forming
a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of outlot V, to the southwest corner of outlot W, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of outlot W, to the west corner, also being a bend, on the southernmost line of Lot 11, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northwesterly, along the southwest line of Lot 11, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the southeast corner of Lot 12, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northwesterly, along the south line of Lot 12, to the southwest corner of Lot 12, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 12, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the southwest corner of Lot 13, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 13, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the southwest corner of Lot 14, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 14, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the southwest corner of Lot 15, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 15, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the southwest corner of Lot 16, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 16, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the northwest corner of Lots 16 and 17, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 17, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the northwest corner of Lot 18, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 18, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the northwest corner of Lot 19, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 19, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the northwest corner of Lot 20, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 20, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the northwest corner of Lot 21, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 21, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the northwest corner of Lot 22, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 22, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the northwest corner of street Lot A, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of street Lot A, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the northwest corner of Lot 33, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 33, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the northeast corner of Lot 33, Whisper Ridge plat 2, being also the
northwest corner of Lot 1, Whisper Ridge plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 1, Whisper Ridge plat 1, to the northwest corner of street Lot 'C', Whisper Ridge plat 1, also being a
point on the west right of way line of 88th Street;
Thence continuing northeasterly, along the north line of street Lot 'C', Whisper Ridge plat 1, to the west right of way line of 88th Street, running north of
street Lot 'C' Whisper Ridge plat 1;
Thence north, along the west right of way line of 88th Street, to the westerly projection of the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence northeast, along the westerly projection of the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest corner of street Lot 'B', Park 88, an
official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of street Lot 'B', Park 88, to the southwest corner of Lot 1, Park 88;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 136/687
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 1, Park 88, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southeast corner of said
Lot 1, also being the southwest corner of Lot 3, Stone Creek Villas, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 3, Stone Creek Villas, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 4, Stone Creek Villas;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 4, Stone Creek Villas, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 9, Stone Creek Villas;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 9, Stone Creek Villas, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 10, Stone Creek Villas;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 10, Stone Creek Villas, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 11, Stone Creek Villas;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 11, Stone Creek Villas, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 'B', Heritage Hills plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 'B', Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of outlot 'Z', Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of outlot 'Z', Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 24, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 24, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 23, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 23, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 22, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 22, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 21, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 21, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 20, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 20, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 19, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 19, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 18, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 18, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 17, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 17, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 16, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 16, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 15, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 15, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 14, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 14, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 13, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 13, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 12, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 12, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 11, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 11, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 10, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 10, Heritage Hills plat 1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to a point at the
intersection of the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway and the west right of way line of 81st Street;
Thence easterly, along the projection of the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the intersection of the north right of way line of E.P. True
Parkway and the east right of way line of 81st Street, being the southwest corner of Lot 6, Bartlett Farm plat 8, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 6, Bartlett Farm plat 8, and being the north line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southeast corner of said
Lot 6, Bartlett Farm plat 8, and also being the southwest corner of Lot 8, Arbor Springs plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the
City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the south line of Lot 8, Arbor Springs plat 1, and being the north line of Lot 'A', Bridgewood School, an official plat, now included
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, to the northeast corner of Lot 'A', Bridgewood School;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 137/687
Thence southerly and easterly, along the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the northeast corner of said E.P. True Parkway, as shown on
the acquisition plat in book 2002 page 1211, page 6 of 8 of the records of the Dallas County Recorder, being on the west right of way line of 74th
Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence east, to a point on the east line of the southeast quarter of section 11, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa; and also, being at the center of 74th Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence south, along the east line of the southeast quarter of said section 11, to the southeast corner of said section 11, being the northeast corner of
section 14 and the northwest corner of section 13, all in township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa; and also being at the center of 74th Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence south, along the west line of the northwest quarter of said section 13; and also, being at the center of 74th Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
to the southwest corner of Lot E, Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1 - replat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the south line of Lot E, Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1 - replat 1, to the northwest corner of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, an
official subdivision, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, being also on the east right of way line of
74th Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence easterly, along the north line of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the northeast corner of said Lot 3;
Thence south, along the east line of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the southeast corner of said Lot 3;
Thence southwest and westerly, along the south line of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the southeast corner of Lot 4, Hurd Jordan plat 2;
Thence westerly, along the south line of Lot 4, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the southwest corner of said Lot 4;
Thence west, on a projection of the south line of said Lot 4, to a point on the east line of said section 14; also being at the centerline of 74th
Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway and on the east line of Lot 'B', Bridgewood plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of
West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said section 14, the east line of Lot 'B', Bridgewood plat 1, and the east line of Lot 'A', Villas At Bridgewood plat 1,
to the point of beginning.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the entirety of the Coachlight Drive Urban Renewal Area as amended from time to time.
C. Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The June, 2018 Urban Renewal Area Addition: After the effective date of this section,
the taxes levied on the taxable property in the 2018 urban renewal area addition each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the
County and any school district or other taxing district in which the 2018 urban renewal area addition is located, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the 2018 urban renewal area addition, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or
bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection C2 of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the
respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied
by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the 2018 urban renewal area addition on the effective date of this section, but to
which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory
as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the 2018 urban renewal area addition to
include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds
issued under the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the
urban renewal area, and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as provided in Iowa Code section 403.22, except that
taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of
Iowa, taxes for the instructional support program levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 257.19 of the Code of Iowa and taxes for the
payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the
provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the 2018 urban renewal area addition exceeds the
total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection C1 of this section, all of the taxes
levied and collected upon the taxable property in the 2018 urban renewal area addition shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts
as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any,
and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the 2018 urban renewal area addition
shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C2 of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of
Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area.
4. As used in this subsection C, the word "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord. 2316,
7-9-2018)
1-10B-15: JORDAN CREEK URBAN RENEWAL AREA (AMENDED AREA):
A. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMENDED AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, included within the original area and the amendment 2 area, except the
portion removed by amendment 2 and amendment 4, which amended area includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally described
herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 138/687
AMENDMENT 1: Did not add or remove land.
AMENDMENT 2 AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, described in amendment 2 to the Urban Renewal Plan for the
Jordan Creek Urban Renewal Area approved by resolution 03-11-10-04 on November 10, 2003, which amendment 2 area added the lots and parcels
located within the area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
Said amendment 2 also removed the lots and parcels located within the area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
AMENDMENT 3: Did not add or remove land.
AMENDMENT 4 AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, described in amendment 4 to the Urban Renewal Plan for the
Jordan Creek Urban Renewal Area approved by resolution 17-02-21-08 on February 21, 2017, which amendment 4 area removes the lots and parcels
located within the area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
DELETED PROPERTY: Shall mean the following real property situated in the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, State of Iowa:
A tract of land in sections 11, 13 and 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in
the Jordan Creek TIF District and is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 'A', Villas At Bridgewood plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, with said point of beginning being located on the east line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M.,
City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence westerly, along the southerly line of said Villas At Bridgewood plat 1, to the southeast corner of Lot 'A', Gardens At Bridgewood plat 2, an
official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence westerly, along the south line of said Gardens At Bridgewood plat 2, to the southeast corner of Bridgewood South, an official plat, now included
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, along the south line of said Bridgewood South, to the southwest corner of said Bridgewood South, being a point on the west line of the
northeast quarter of said section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 14, and along the west line of the southeast quarter of said section 11, to the
center of section 11, being the northwest corner of Lot 'A', Bridgewood School;
Thence easterly, along the north line of Lot 'A', Bridgewood School, also being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the northeast corner
of Lot 'A', Bridgewood School;
Thence southerly and easterly, along the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the northeast corner of said E.P. True Parkway, as shown on
the acquisition plat in book 2002 page 1211 on page 6 of 8 of the records of the Dallas County Recorder, being on the west right of way line of 74th
Street;
Thence east, to a point on the east line of the southeast quarter of section 11, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the southeast quarter of said section 11, to the southeast corner of said section 11, being the northeast corner of
section 14 and the northwest corner of section 13, all in township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa and also being at the centerline of 74th Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence south, along the west line of said section 13, to the southwest corner of Lot E, Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1 - replat 1, an official plat, now
included in and forming a part of City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the south line of Lot E, Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1 - replat 1, to the northwest corner of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, an
official subdivision, now included in and forming a part of City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, being also on the east right of way line of 74th
Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence easterly, along the north line of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the northeast corner of said Lot 3;
Thence south, along the east line of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the southeast corner of said Lot 3;
Thence southwesterly and westerly, along the south lines of Lots 3 and 4, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the southwest corner of said Lot 4;
Thence west, on a projection of the south line of said Lot 4, to a point on the east line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M.,
City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, being at the centerline of 74th Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway and on the east line of Lot 'B',
Bridgewood plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said section 14 and along the east line of said Lot 'B', Bridgewood plat 1; and along the east line of said Lot 'A',
Villas At Bridgewood plat 1, to the point being the point of beginning.
ORIGINAL AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, described in the Urban Renewal Plan for the Jordan Creek Urban
Renewal Area approved by resolution 00-05-30-05 on May 30, 2000, which original area includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally
described in the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 2203, 3-6-2017; amd. Ord. 2313, 7-9-2018)
B. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the amended area, legally described in subsection A of this section, by and for the benefit of the State of
Iowa, County of Dallas, Iowa, Waukee Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date of this section shall be
divided as hereinafter in this section provided. (Ord. 2203, 3-6-2017)
The deleted property is hereby removed from the tax increment financing district for the Jordan Creek Urban Renewal Area. No division of Property Tax
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 139/687
revenues as provided under section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa shall be done with respect to the deleted property without further action by the City
Council. (Ord. 2313, 7-9-2018)
C. As to the original area (less the property removed by amendment 2 and amendment 4), that portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at
which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts taxing property in the original area (less the property removed by amendment 2
and amendment 4) upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the original area (less the property removed by amendment 2
and amendment 4) as shown on the assessment role as of January 1, 1999, being January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in
which the Municipality certified to the County auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax
revenue described in ordinance 1414, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for
the taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. The taxes so determined shall be referred herein as the "base period taxes" for such
area.
As to the amendment 2 area (less any property removed by amendment 4), base period taxes shall be computed in the same manner using the total
assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 2002, being the assessment roll applicable to property in such area as of January 1 of
the calendar year preceding the effective date of ordinance 1559.
D. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes for the amended area, determined for each sub-area thereof as provided in
subsection B of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the special Tax Increment Fund previously established by the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to, or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under authority of section 403.9 or section 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City of West Des
Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the amended area pursuant to the Urban
Renewal Plan, as amended, except that: 1) taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the Instructional Support Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section
257.19 (but in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing
district; 3) taxes imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint county-city buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code
section 403.19 shall be collected against all taxable property within the amended area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
E. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the subareas of the amended area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in the subareas shown by the assessment rolls referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable
property in the amended area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as
all other Property Taxes.
F. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and indebtedness of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
subsection C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the amended area shall be paid into
the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
G. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to continue the division of taxes from property within the amended area under the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of
Iowa. Notwithstanding any provisions in any prior ordinances or other documents, the provisions of this section and all prior ordinances relating to the
urban renewal area, as amended, shall be construed to continue the division of taxes from property within the amended area to the maximum period of
time allowed by section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law it shall not
affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of
Iowa with reference to the amended area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2203, 3-6-2017)
1-10B-16: HISTORIC WEST DES MOINES URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the TIF area legally described in the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa,
City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date of
this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the TIF area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the auditor of Polk County, Iowa the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under
the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that: 1)
taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes
for the Instructional Support Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but in each case only to the extent required
under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes imposed under Iowa Code section
346.27(22) related to joint county-city buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 in existence as of the passage of this
section shall be collected against all taxable property within the TIF area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the TIF area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in the TIF
area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the
TIF area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property
Taxes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 140/687
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in subsection
C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the TIF area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the TIF area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it shall not
affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of
Iowa with reference to the TIF area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2232, 6-12-2017)
1-10B-17: OSMIUM URBAN RENEWAL AREA (MICROSOFT PARCEL):
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of taxes levied on certain taxable property in the Osmium Urban Renewal Area of the
City of West Des Moines, Iowa, each year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts or other taxing districts after the effective
date of this section in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds
proposed to be issued by the City of West Des Moines to finance projects in such area.
B. Definitions: For use within the remainder of this section the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTIES: Shall mean Madison County and Warren County.
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING DISTRICT: Shall mean certain real property situated in the Osmium Urban Renewal Area, legally described as follows:
The southeast quarter of the southeast quarter (SE1/4 SE1/4) section 1, township 77 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Madison
County, Iowa.
And
Parcel 1:
The northwest quarter of the northwest quarter (NW1/4 NW1/4) of section 7, township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren
County, Iowa.
Parcel 2:
The northeast quarter of the northwest quarter (NE1/4 NW1/4) of section 7, township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren
County, Iowa: except that part deeded to the State of Iowa in book 125, page 121: and except that part deeded to the State of Iowa in book 2012, page
10015.
Parcel 3 & 4:
The southeast quarter of the southwest quarter (SE1/4 SW1/4) of section 6, township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren
County, Iowa: except that part deeded to the State of Iowa in book 125, page 122: and except that part deeded to the State of Iowa in book 2012, page
10015.
Parcel 5:
The southwest quarter of the southwest quarter (SW1/4 SW1/4) of section 6, township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren
County, Iowa.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the entirety of the Osmium Urban Renewal Area as amended from time to time.
C. Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The Tax Increment Financing District: After the effective date of this section, the taxes
levied on the taxable property in the tax increment financing district each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the counties and any
school district or other taxing district in which the tax increment financing district is located, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the tax increment financing district as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County auditors the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or
bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection C2 of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the
respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied
by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the tax increment financing district on the effective date of this section, but to which
the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of
January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the tax increment financing district to include
the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds
issued under the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the
urban renewal area, and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as provided in section 403.22 of the Code of Iowa,
except that taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 298.2 of the
Code of Iowa, taxes for the instructional support program levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 257.19 of the Code of Iowa and taxes
for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation
by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the tax increment financing district exceeds
the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection C1 of this section, all of the
taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the tax increment financing district shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 141/687
districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and
bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the tax increment financing
district shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C2 of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of
Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area.
4. As used in this subsection C, the word "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord. 2294,
4-16-2018)
1-10B-18: MIDTOWN URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area legally described in the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State
of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the
effective date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the auditor of Polk County, Iowa the amount of loans,
advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected be
paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under
the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that: 1)
taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes
for the Instructional Support Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but in each case only to the extent required
under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes imposed under Iowa Code section
346.27(22) related to joint county-city buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 in effect or of the date this section is
adopted shall be collected against all taxable property within the urban renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the
same manner as all other Property Taxes.
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in subsection
C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it
shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the
Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2245, 9-5-2017)
1-10B-19: E.P. TRUE PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area legally described in the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State
of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the
effective date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the auditor of Polk County, Iowa the amount of loans,
advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected be
paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid.
C. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under
the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that: 1)
taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes
for the Instructional Support Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but in each case only to the extent required
under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes imposed under Iowa Code section
346.27(22) related to joint county-city buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall be collected against all taxable
property within the urban renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 142/687
D. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the
same manner as all other Property Taxes.
E. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in subsection
C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it
shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the
Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2259, 10-30-2017)
1-10B-20: WOODLAND HILLS URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
SUB-AREA A: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 6, Sunset Ridge, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence west, along the south line extended of said Lot 6, to the intersection with the centerline of South 88th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 88th Street, to the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the east line extended of said Sunset Ridge;
Thence south, along the east line extended and the east line of said Sunset Ridge, to the southeast corner of said Lot 6;
Thence west, along the south line of said Lot 6, to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA B: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
principal meridian;
Thence east, along the north line of Cedar Ridge, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa,
to the northwest corner of Lot 38 of said Cedar Ridge, said point being the point of beginning;
Thence east, along the north line of said Cedar Ridge, to the centerline of South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of said South 88th Street, to the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the intersection of the west line extended of Lot 7 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 7, to the southwest corner of Lot 21 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line said Lot 21, to the northeast corner of Lot 6 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northeasterly, along the northwesterly line and northwesterly line extended of Lot 21 of said Cedar Ridge, to the centerline of Lot "C" road of
said Cedar Ridge;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Lot "C" road, to the west line extended of Lot 35 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 35, to the southwest corner of Lot 36 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 36, to the southwest corner of Lot 37 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 37, to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA C: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County,
Iowa, said point being on the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 143/687
Thence north, to the north right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east, along the north right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to the southwest corner of Lot 7 of Cedar Ridge, an official subdivision now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa;
Thence south, along the west line extended of Lot 7 of said Cedar Ridge, to the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the east line extended of outlot 'A' of Michael's Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now in
and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line extended and the east line of said outlot 'A', to the southeast corner of said outlot 'A';
Thence west, along the south line of said outlot 'A', to the southeast corner of outlot 'B' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence west, along the south line and the south line extended of said outlot 'B', to the southeast corner of outlot 'C' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence west, along the south line of said outlot 'C', to the southwest corner of said outlot 'C';
Thence north, along the west line of said outlot 'C', to the southwest corner of street Lot 'AA' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence north, along the west line of said street Lot 'AA', to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA D: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of South 88th Street and the south line extended of Lot 2, Forret Acres plat 1, an official plat now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 88th Street, to the centerline intersection of Cascade Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Cascade Avenue, to the centerline of South 91st Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 91st Street, to the north line extended of outlot 'F' of Michael's Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now in
and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line extended and the north line of said outlot 'F', to the west line of Lot 2, Forret Acres plat 1, an official subdivision now
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the west line of said Lot 2, to the southwest corner of said Lot 2;
Thence east, along the south line and the south line extended of said Lot 2, to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA E: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of South 88th Street and the south line extended of Lot 2, Forret Acres plat 1, an official plat now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, along the south line extended and the south line of said Lot 2, to the southwest corner of said Lot 2;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 2, to the northwest corner of said Lot 2;
Thence east, along the north line of said Lot 2, to the southwest corner of Lot 1 of said Forret Acres plat 1;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 1 and Lot 1 extended, to the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Mills Civic Parkway, to the centerline of South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 88th Street, to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA F: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in sections 22 and 23, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included
in the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County,
Iowa, with said point being the centerline intersection of Booneville Road and South 88th Street;
Thence south, to the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road;
Thence west, along the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road, to the extended centerline of South 91st Street, said intersection being on the east
line extended of Parcel "A" as recorded in book 77, page 912 in the Dallas County Recorder's Office;
Thence north, along the east line and the east line extended of said Parcel "A", to the centerline of Sugar Creek Drive in street Lot 'A' of Michael's
Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 91st Street in street Lot 'A' and street Lot 'I' of said Michael's Landing plat 1, to the centerline of Harper
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 144/687
Lane in street Lot 'F' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence north, along the centerline of 91st Street extended, to the intersection of Stagecoach Drive extended;
Thence east, along the centerline of Stagecoach Drive extended, to the east line of said section 22;
Thence continuing east, to the east right-of-way line of South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right-of-way line of South 88th Street, to the south line of the northwest quarter of section 23, township 78 north, range 26
west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 23, to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA G: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the centerline intersection of South 85th Street and Coachlight Drive, Silverwood plat 2, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 510.0 feet;
Thence south 23°00'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 330.0 feet;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), to the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the centerline of South 88th Street;
Thence northerly, along the centerline of South 88th Street, to the north line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 14, township
78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence easterly, to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA R-1: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal
meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, said point being on the west line of outlot 'E' of Michael's Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now in and forming a part
of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of said outlot 'E', to the north line of said outlot 'E';
Thence east, along the north line of said outlot 'E' and the north line of said outlot 'E' extended, to the centerline of South 91st Street in street Lot 'H' of
said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 91st Street in said street Lot 'H', to the centerline intersection of Cascade Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Cascade Avenue in street Lot 'D' of said Michael's Landing plat 1, to the west line of the southeast quarter of said
section 15;
Thence north, along the west line of said section 15, to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA R-2: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in sections 15, 22 and 23, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is
included in the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County,
Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the southeast quarter of said section 15, to the centerline of Cascade Avenue in street Lot 'D' of Michael's Landing
plat 1, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of Cascade Avenue in said street Lot 'D', to the east line of said section 15;
Thence south, along the east line of said section 15, to the south line extended of Lot 6, Sunset Ridge, an official subdivision now in and forming a part
of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the south line extended of said Lot 6, to the east right-of-way line of South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right of way line of South 88th Street, to the intersection of the extended centerline of Stagecoach Drive;
Thence west, along the centerline of Stagecoach Drive extended, to the east line of street Lot 'B' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence west, along the centerline of Stagecoach Drive in said street Lot 'B', to the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 22, to the point of beginning.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 145/687
SUB-AREA R-3: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as follows:
A tract of land in section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal
meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 22, to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter
of the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 22, to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence east, along the north line of said section 22, to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence south, along the east line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 22, to the centerline of Stagecoach Drive in street Lot
'B' of Michael's Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Stagecoach Drive extended, to the intersection of the centerline of South 91st Street extended in street
Lot 'I' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 91st Street extended, to the centerline of Harper Lane in street Lot 'F' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 91st Street in said street Lot 'I', to the centerline of Sugar Creek Drive in street Lot 'A' of said Michael's
Landing plat 1;
Thence south, along the centerline and centerline extended of South 91st Street in said street Lot 'A' and street Lot 'J' and street Lot 'X' of said
Michael's Landing plat 1, to the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road;
Thence westerly, along the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road, to the west line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section
22;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 22, to the point of beginning.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the areas of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa included within sub-areas A, B, C, D, E, F, G, R-1, R-2 and R-3,
each as described in this section, and being collectively described as follows:
A tract of land in sections 14, 15, 22 and 23, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is
included in the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal
meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 22, to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter
of the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 22, to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence east, along the north line of said section 22, to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of
the 5th principal meridian;
Thence north, along the west line of the southeast quarter of said section 15, to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of said section 15;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 15, to the north right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east, along the north right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to the intersection of the west line of Lot 7, Cedar Ridge an official subdivision
now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 7, to the southwest corner of Lot 21 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line said Lot 21, to the northeast corner of Lot 6 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northeasterly, along the northwesterly line and northwesterly line extended of Lot 21 of said Cedar Ridge, to the centerline of Lot "C" road of
said Cedar Ridge;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Lot "C" road, to the west line extended of Lot 35 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 35, to the southwest corner of Lot 36 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 36, to the southwest corner of Lot 37 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 37, to the northwest corner of said Lot 37, said point being on the north line of the southeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence east, along the north line of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 15, to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter
of the northwest quarter of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence easterly, to the centerline intersection of South 85th Street and Coachlight Drive as shown on Silverwood plat 2, an official subdivision now in
and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 146/687
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 510.0 feet;
Thence south 23°00'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 330.0 feet;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), to the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence southeasterly, to the northeast corner of Lot 1, Sunset Ridge, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said Sunset Ridge, to the southeast corner of said Lot 6;
Thence west, along the south line of said Lot 6, to the east right-of-way line of South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right-of-way line of South 88th Street, to the south line of the northwest quarter of section 23, township 78 north, range 26
west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 23, to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of
the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, with said point being the centerline intersection of Booneville Road and South 88th Street;
Thence south, to the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road;
Thence westerly, along the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road, to the west line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 22,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 22, to the point of beginning.
URBAN RENEWAL PLAN: Shall mean the Urban Renewal Plan for the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, approved by resolution no. 11-06-27-13
on June 27, 2011.
B. The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area, and each sub-area thereof, legally described in subsection A of this section, by and
for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Dallas, Waukee Community School District, and all other taxing districts from
and after the effective date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
C. As to each of sub-areas A, B, C, D, E, F, G, R-1, R-2 and R-3, that portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied
each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in each such sub-area of the urban
renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa, certifies to the auditor of Dallas County, Iowa the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of
Property Tax revenue described herein (which certification may be made separately for each sub-area), shall be allocated to and when collected be
paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. The taxes so
determined shall be referred to herein as the "base period taxes" for each such sub-area.
D. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes from the urban renewal area, determined for each sub-area as provided in
subsection C of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa,
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant to the Urban
Renewal Plan, except that taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa
Code section 298.2, but only to the extent authorized in Iowa Code section 403.19(2), and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing
district shall be collected against all taxable property within the urban renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
E. Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the sub-areas of the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in the sub-areas of the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment rolls referred to in subsection C of this section, all of the
taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by
or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes.
F. At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest thereon of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, referred to in subsection D of this
section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
G. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended and
shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it
shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the
Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 1935, 10-17-2011)
1-10B-20-1: WOODLAND HILLS URBAN RENEWAL AREA 2018 ADDITION:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to delete certain property from the tax increment district for the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and to
subsequently provide for the division of taxes levied on the taxable property in the June, 2018 addition to the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area of
the City, each year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts or other taxing districts after the effective date of this section in order
to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by
the City to finance projects in the such area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 147/687
B. Definitions: For use within this section the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Dallas County, Iowa.
DELETED PROPERTY: Shall mean the following described real property in the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa:
A tract of land in sections 14 and 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 7 Cedar Ridge, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, said corner
being on the north right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 7, to the southwest corner of Lot 21 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 21, to the northeast corner of Lot 6 of said Cedar Ridge, also being a bend point on the west side of Lot
21 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northeasterly, along the northwesterly line and northerly line extended of Lot 21 of said Cedar Ridge, to the centerline of Lot "C" road of said
Cedar Ridge;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Lot "C" road, to the west line extended of Lot 35 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 35, to the southwest corner of Lot 36 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 36, to the southwest corner of Lot 37 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 37, to the northwest corner of said Lot 37, said point being on the north line of the southeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M.;
Thence east, along the north line of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 15, to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter
of the northwest quarter of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M.;
Thence easterly, to the centerline intersection of South 85th Street and Coachlight Drive as shown on Silverwood plat 2, an official plat, now included in
and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 510.0 feet;
Thence south 23°00'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 330.0 feet;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), to the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence southeasterly, to the northeast corner of Lot 1, Sunset Ridge, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said Sunset Ridge, to the southeast corner of Lot 6, Sunset Ridge;
Thence west, along the south line of Lot 6, to the southwest corner of said Lot 6, being at the east right of way line of S 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right of way line of S 88th Street, to the south line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 14, to the southeast corner of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, also being the southeast corner of street Lot "Z" in corrected
Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence west, along the south line of said street lot "Z", to the southwest corner of said street Lot "Z", being also the west right of way line of S 88th
Street;
Thence north, along the west right-of-way line of said South 88th Street, to the northeast corner of street Lot 'D' in corrected Michael's Landing plat 1,
an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south and westerly, along the north line of said street Lot 'D', to the southeast corner of street Lot 'H', of said corrected Michael's Landing plat
1;
Thence northerly, along the east line of said street Lot 'H', to the intersection point of street Lot 'AA', being the northeast corner of street Lot 'H', of said
corrected Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence westerly, along the south line of said street Lot 'AA', to the southwest corner of said street Lot 'AA', south point being on the east line of the
southwest quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of said street Lot 'AA', also being the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 15, to the northwest corner of
said street Lot 'AA', also being the center of section of said section 15;
Thence east, along the north line of said street Lot 'AA', also being the north line of the southeast quarter of said section 15, to the projection of the
west line of Lot 7 of Cedar Ridge, to the north line of street Lot 'AA', also being on the north line of the southeast quarter of said section 15;
Thence north, along the projection of the west line of said Lot 7, to the point of beginning.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 148/687
And
A tract of land in sections 22 and 23, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the east quarter corner of said section 22, thence due south to the south right of way line of Booneville Road;
Thence west, along the south line of Booneville Road, to the southerly projection of the west line projected south of street Lot "Y" of corrected Michael's
Landing plat 1;
Thence north, along the projected west line of said street Lot "Y", to the south line of street Lot "X" of corrected Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of said street Lot "X", to the southeast corner of said street Lot "X";
Thence northerly, along the east line of said street Lot "X", to the northeast corner of said street Lot "X";
Thence southwesterly, along the north line of street Lot "X" and the north right of way line of Booneville Road, to the southwest corner of street Lot "Y"
of corrected Michael's Landing plat 1, being at the intersection of the north right of way line of Booneville Road and the west right of way line of S 88th
Street;
Thence northeasterly thence north, along the west right of way line of S 88th Street, to the northwest corner of said street Lot "Y";
Thence east, along the north line of said street lot "Y", to the centerline of South 88th Street;
Thence east, along the projection of the north line of said street Lot "Y", to the west line of Lot 1 of Sunset Ridge plat II, an official plat, now included in
and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and the east right of way line of S 88th Street;
Thence south, along the west line of Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 of said Sunset Ridge plat II, to the northwest corner of Parcel 1 as shown in book 2015 page
17802 of the Dallas County Recorders Office;
Thence east, to the northeast corner of said Parcel 1, being the east right of way line of S 88th Street;
Thence southeasterly, along the east right of way line of S 88th Street, to the south line of Lot 5 of said Sunset Ridge plat II, being also the south line of
the northwest quarter of said section 23;
Thence west, along the south line of the northwest quarter of said section 23, to the point of beginning.
TAX INCREMENT DISTRICT: Shall mean that portion of the June, 2018 addition to the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area of the City, the legal
description of which is set out below, approved by resolution of the City Council on June 25, 2018:
Area on Booneville Road
A tract of land in section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is to be included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and is more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the northeast corner of the south half of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., said point being the centerline
intersection of Booneville Road and South 88th Street;
Thence southwesterly, along the centerline of said Booneville Road, a distance of 1810.94 feet, to the centerline of vacated road (from survey, book
2018, page 3922 and book 3 page 119);
Thence south 00°09'02" east (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page 119), along said centerline of vacated road, a distance of 33.27 feet,
to the point of beginning, being at the south right of way line of Booneville Road;
Thence continuing south 00°09'02" east (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page 119), along said centerline of vacated road, a distance of
503.32 feet;
Thence south 88°50'45" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page 119), a distance of 355.30 feet;
Thence south 00°51'07" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page 119), a distance of 101.00 feet;
Thence north 87°29'50" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page 119), a distance of 168.14 feet;
Thence north 73°39'56" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page 119), a distance of 212.02 feet;
Thence south 75°03'47" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page 119), a distance of 90.06 feet;
Thence north 45°56'21" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page 119), to the south right of way line of Booneville Road;
Thence northeast, along said south right of way of Booneville Road, to the point of beginning.
Area west of 95th Street
A tract of land in sections 21 and 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is to be included
in the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M.,
Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 22, to the south right of way line of Booneville Road;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 149/687
Thence southwesterly, along the south right of way line of Booneville Road, to a point on the projection south of the southwest line, as shown on the
survey in book 2002 page 3962;
Thence north, on the projection south of the southwest line, as shown on the survey in book 2002 page 3962, to the north right of way of Booneville
Road;
Thence north 06°47'46" west, along said west line of survey in book 2002 page 3962, to a bend in the west line of said survey;
Thence north 25°46'23" west, a distance of 455.62 feet, to the southwest corner of Lot 19 in Kings Landing plat 2, an official plat, in and forming a part
of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northwesterly, along the west line of Lot 19, to the southwest corner of Lot 20, Kings Landing plat 2;
Thence northwesterly, along the west line of said Lot 20, to a bend in the west line of Lot 20;
Thence northwesterly, along the west line of said Lot 20, 21, 40, street Lot 'E', 41, 59 and 60, to a bend in the west line of said Lot 60;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 60, 61, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81 and 82, to the northwest corner of Lot 82, Kings Landing plat 2;
Thence continuing north, along the projection north of the west line of Lot 82, Kings Landing plat 2, to the north line of section 21, township 78 north,
range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line of said section 21, to the northwest corner of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 22, to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 22, also being the northeast corner of street Lot A, Kings Landing plat 1, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, on the east line of street Lot A, and lots 11, 10, 9, 8, and 7, Kings Landing plat 1, to the northeast corner of outlot "B", Kings Landing plat
2, being also the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M.,
Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, on the east line of outlot "B", to the northeast corner of outlot "Q", Kings Landing plat 2;
Thence south, on the east line of outlot "Q", also being the east line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter, to the point of beginning.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the entirety of the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, as amended from time-to-time.
C. Deleted Property: The deleted property is hereby removed from the tax increment financing district for the urban renewal area. No further division of
Property Tax revenues as provided under section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa shall be done with respect to the deleted property, unless and until such
property is re-included in a tax increment district by action of the City Council.
D. Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The Tax Increment District: After the effective date of this section, the taxes levied on
the taxable property in the tax increment district each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school district or
other taxing district in which the tax increment district is located, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the tax increment district, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable
from the special fund referred to in subsection D2 of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for
any taxing district which did not include the territory in the tax increment district on the effective date of this section, but to which the territory has
been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the tax increment district to include the annexed area, shall be
used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds
issued under the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the
urban renewal area, and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as provided in Iowa Code section 403.22, except that
taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of
Iowa, taxes for the instructional support program levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 257.19 of the Code of Iowa, and taxes for the
payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the
provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the tax increment district exceeds the total
assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection D1 of this section, all of the taxes
levied and collected upon the taxable property in the tax increment district shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or
for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest
thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the tax increment district shall be paid into the funds
for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection D2 of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of
Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area.
4. As used in this subsection D, the word "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord. 2315,
7-9-2018)
1-10B-21: GRAND RIDGE URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 150/687
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of taxes levied on the taxable property in the Grand Ridge Urban Renewal Area, each
year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts or other taxing districts after the effective date of this section in order to create a
special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the City to
finance projects in such area.
B. Definitions: For use within this section the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Polk County, Iowa.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the taxable real property situated in Grand Ridge Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out
below, such property having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the City Council by resolution adopted on October 15, 2018:
Certain real property situated in the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, State of Iowa more particularly described as follows:
All of Lot "D" (being Grand Ridge Drive) of Quail Meadows West, as filed in Book 8006 Page 121 of the records of the Polk County Recorder's Office,
and All of Lot 1 of Woodlink, as filed in Book 10605 Page 907 of the records of the Polk County Recorder's Office, and All of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 of
Grand Heights Plat 2, as filed in Book 8769 Page 959 of the records of the Polk County Recorder's Office, all being Official Plats, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, and containing 10.82 acres, including 1.70 acres of road right of way.
C. Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The Urban Renewal Area: After the effective date of this section, the taxes levied on
the taxable property in the urban renewal area each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school district or other
taxing district in which the urban renewal area is located, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable
from the special fund referred to in subsection C2 of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for
any taxing district which did not include the territory in the urban renewal area on the effective date of this section, but to which the territory has been
annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the urban renewal area to include the annexed area, shall be
used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds
issued under the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the
urban renewal area, and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as provided in Iowa Code section 403.22, except that
taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of
Iowa, taxes for the instructional support levy program of a school district imposed pursuant to section 257.19 of the Code of Iowa, and taxes for the
payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the
provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed
value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection C1 of this section, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said
taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon,
have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C2 of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of
Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area.
4. As used in this subsection C, the word "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord. 2329,
10-29-2018)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: CREATION; NUMBER OF MEMBERS; QUALIFICATIONS:
There shall be a City Planning and Zoning Commission appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council1, hereinafter referred to as the
commission consisting of seven (7) members, who shall be citizens of the City and qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the
development of a City plan and who shall not hold any elective office in the City government. (1985 Code §6-4.01)
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office of the members of the commission shall be staggered five (5) year terms expiring on April 1. (1985 Code §6-4.02; amd. 1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 151/687
2-1-3: VACANCIES:
If any vacancy shall exist on the commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the residue of said term shall be appointed in the same
manner as the original appointee. (1985 Code §6-4.03)
2-1-4: COMPENSATION:
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(1985 Code §6-4.04)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
A. Selection Of Officers: The commission shall choose annually at its first regular meeting in April of each year, one of its members to act as Chairman and
another as Vice Chairman, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairman during his absence of disability.
B. Appointment Of Assistants: Subject to the limitations contained in this chapter as to the expenditure of funds, it may appoint such assistants as it may
deem necessary and prescribe and define their respective duties and fix and regulate the compensation to be paid to the several persons employed by
it.
C. Adopt Rules And Regulations: The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem
necessary.
D. Annual Report: The commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of the progress of its
work during the preceding fiscal year.
E. Comprehensive Plan:
1. Generally: It shall have full power and authority to make or cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, plans or charts of the whole or any
portion of the City or of any land outside thereof which, in the opinion of the commission bears relation to the Comprehensive Plan and shall bring to
the attention of the Council and may publish its studies and recommendations.
2. Preparation: For the purpose of making a Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the City, the commission shall make careful and
comprehensive studies of present conditions and future growth of the City and with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall
be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the City and its environs
which will, in accordance with the present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare
as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
3. Public Hearing: Before adopting a Comprehensive Plan as referred to in the preceding paragraph, or any part of it, or any substantial amendment
thereof, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City not less than four (4) days nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of hearing. The adoption of the plan or part
or amendment thereof shall be by resolution of the commission. After adoption of said plan by the commission, an attested copy thereof shall be
certified to the Council, and the Council may approve the same. When said plan or any modification or amendment thereof shall receive the approval
of the Council, the said plan until subsequently modified or amended as hereinbefore authorized, shall constitute the official City plan. (1985 Code
§6-4.05; amd. 1993 Code)
4. Amendments: When the Comprehensive Plan as hereinbefore provided has been adopted, no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall
be made without the commission holding at least one public hearing, as referred to in the preceding paragraph, on such proposed change for its
recommendation. If the commission disapproves the proposed change, it may be adopted by the Council only by the affirmative vote of at least
three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the said Council. (Ord. 2255, 10-16-2017)
F. Recommendations Of Improvements: No memorial in a public place, and no public building, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or
erected, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the City for the erection or location thereof until and unless the design shall have been
submitted to the commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon
action for any such improvement when the commission, after thirty (30) days' written notice requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file
same. (Ord. 1905, 1-24-2011)
G. Review And Comment On Plats: All plans, plats or replats of subdivision or resubdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in
lots or plats with the streets, alleys or other portions of the same, intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the
commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
H. Review And Comment Of Park Improvements: No plan for any park or other public improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the
City or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the commission, and the latter shall have
had thirty (30) days within which to file its recommendations thereon. (1985 Code §6-4.05; amd. 1993 Code)
I. Zoning: The commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties and privileges in preparing, administering and amending the City Zoning
Code as provided by chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa. When proposed changes in the zoning regulations or districts are referred to the commission by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 152/687
the Director of Development Services, the commission shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, file its recommendations approving, disapproving, or
modifying such proposed changes with the Council. (Ord. 2255, 10-16-2017)
Chapter 2
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED:
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor with approval of City Council to five (5) year
staggered terms expiring April 1. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-1997)
2-2-2: MEETINGS:
The meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairman, and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such Chairman,
or in his absence the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the Office of the Board and shall be a
public record. The presence of three (3) members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-1997)
2-2-3: APPEALS:
A. How Instituted And When: Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of
the City affected by any decision of the Director of Community Development, or designee. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days by filing with
the Director of Community Development, or designee and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, the Director of Community
Development, or designee shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken.
B. Stay: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Director of Community Development, or designee certifies
to the Board, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board or by a court of record on application on notice to the Director of Community Development, or designee and on due cause shown.
C. Submittal Of An Application: The Board shall fix a hearing date within thirty (30) days upon receiving a completed application for the appeal, give public
notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney. Each application request for any appeals shall be accompanied by the fee specified by the City Council resolution
before it is accepted for filing and processing.
D. Determination Of Completeness: Within thirty (30) days of the date of acceptance of an application for a variance, the Director of Community
Development or designee shall determine whether an application includes the information required by this chapter, and shall notify the applicant of the
results of that determination. Failure of the Director or designee to respond within thirty (30) days of acceptance of an application with a determination
as to completeness shall be deemed as a determination that the application is complete.
If an applicant is notified that a submitted application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant for preparation and submittal of the required
additional information shall be excluded from the period within which the Director or designee must complete the determination of completeness.
Submittal of the additional staff requested information establishes a new thirty (30) day period for a determination of completeness. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-
1997)
E. Notice For Public Hearings: The Community Development Department shall set a date, time and place for the matter to be heard and shall give notice
of said hearing by mailing a written notice, postage prepaid, containing the date, time and place of hearing, not less than four (4) calendar days and not
more than twenty (20) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, to the applicant, the owners of the property involved, and the owners of the
property situated within a radius of three hundred seventy feet (370'), including public right-of-way, of the exterior boundaries of the parcel(s) on which
the proposed variance request is to be located. In addition to the mailed notice, a notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in accordance with the Iowa Code. (Ord. 1494, 10-28-2002)
2-2-4: JURISDICTION; POWERS:
A. Powers: The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
1. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the Director of
Development Services, or designee in the enforcement of the zoning regulations in title 9 of this Code.
2. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of title 9 of this Code upon which such Board is required to pass under title 9 of this Code.
a. A "special exception" is known as a permitted conditional use and permits in a particular district a use not otherwise permitted when certain
conditions specifically set out in title 9 of this Code are satisfied.
3. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of title 9 of this Code as will not be contrary to the public interest, where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of title 9 of this Code will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of
title 9 of this Code shall be observed and substantial justice done.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 153/687
a. A "variance" is authority extended to the owner to improve the property in a manner prohibited by title 9 of this Code in the situation where the
plight of the owner is due to special or exceptional circumstances, not to the general conditions in the neighborhood and where literal enforcement
would cause the owner unnecessary hardship.
b. An "unnecessary hardship" is defined by the following factors:
(1) The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return if used only for a purpose allowed in that zone;
(2) The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances not of the owner's(s') making and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood,
which may reflect the unreasonableness of the zoning ordinance itself; and
(3) The use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
B. Action: In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of law, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as it
believes proper and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the Director of Community Development or designee. The concurring vote of three (3) of
the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Director of Community Development
or designee, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter; provided, however, that the action
of the Board shall not become effective until after the resolution of the Board, setting forth the full reason for its decision and the vote of each member
participating therein has been recorded in the minutes. Such resolution, immediately following the Board's final decision, shall be filed in the Office of
the Board and shall be open to the public inspection.
C. Basis For Decision; Board Approval: Every variation and exception granted or denied by the Board shall be supported by written testimony or evidence
submitted in connection therewith. A resolution of findings will be approved by the Board and recorded with the County (refer to subsection J of this
section).
D. Appeals: Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment under the provisions of this chapter, or, any
taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City, or any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board
may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the
illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the Office of the Board.
E. Writ Of Certiorari: Upon the presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the Board to review such decision of the
Board and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto shall be made, which shall not be less than ten (10) days and may be extended
by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, upon notice to
the Board and on due cause shown grant a restraining order. The Board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall
be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth
such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified.
F. Testimony: If upon the hearing, which shall be tried de novo, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the
matter, it may take such evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact
and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the decision brought up for review.
G. Award Of Costs: Costs shall not be allowed against the Board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or
with malice in making the decision appealed from. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-1997)
H. Completion Of Construction: For any variance or special exception granted by the Board for the construction of a specific project, the applicant shall
have a period of one year to obtain site plan approval, if necessary, execute a building permit and commence with construction. If after the one year
period these requirements have not been met, the variance or special exception shall become null and void. If the project cannot meet the one year
time frame and valid reason exists for an extension, a request to the Board for approval of an extension may be submitted by the applicant. (Ord. 2303,
5-29-2018)
I. Applicability Of Variance: Any variance granted by the Board shall be for the specific project as stated in the request. Any subsequent expansions or
additions which would encroach into the required setbacks as set forth in title 9 of this Code shall be required to be reviewed by the Board of
Adjustment through the established variance process. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-1997)
J. Required Variance Findings: Approval by the Board of Adjustment shall only be granted if all of the following findings are made; or if conditions and
limitations, as the Board deems necessary, are imposed to allow it to make said findings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prove to the
satisfaction of the Board that the following findings can be made: (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
1. That the proposed development or use is consistent with the West Des Moines Comprehensive Plan and any applicable subarea plan.
2. That there are special circumstances or exceptional characteristics applicable to the subject property with regard to size, shape, topography or
location, which do not apply generally to comparable properties in the same vicinity and zones.
3. That the strict application of the zoning regulations as they apply to the subject property will result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
inconsistent with the general purpose of such regulations provided that such hardships shall not be self-imposed by the applicant or his or her
successor in interest.
4. That there have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings which detrimentally affect the environment.
5. That the granting of such variance does not, under the circumstances and conditions applied in the particular case, adversely affect the health or
safety of persons, is not materially detrimental to the public welfare, nor injurious to nearby property or improvements. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 154/687
K. Required Permitted Conditional Use Permit Findings: Permitted conditional use permits (Pc) may only be granted if all of the following findings are
made; or if conditions and limitations, as the Board of Adjustment deems necessary, are imposed to allow it to make said findings. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment that the following findings can be made:
1. That the proposed use is consistent with the West Des Moines comprehensive plan and any applicable subarea plan.
2. That the proposed use does assure compatibility of property uses within the zone and general area.
3. That all applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which protect the public health, safety and welfare.
4. That there is adequate on site and off site public infrastructure to support the proposed development use.
5. That the proposed use has met all the requirements contained in this Code.
6. That the proposed use be in keeping with the scale and nature of the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
Chapter 3
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment, powers and duties of a civil service commission in accordance with the requirements of state
law1. (1985 Code §1-1.0601)
2-3-2: APPOINTMENT, TERM AND COMPENSATION:
A. Appointment And Term: A civil service commission consisting of three (3) members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council2.
Following appointment of the initial commission according to law, one member shall be appointed after each regular municipal election to hold office for
a term of four (4) years commencing the first Monday of April following such municipal election. In the event that a vacancy occurs in the membership
of the commission by death, resignation or otherwise prior to the normal expiration of the appointee's term, the mayor, with the approval of the city
council, shall appoint a person to serve out the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 1626, 4-25-2005)
B. Compensation: Civil service commissioners shall serve without compensation. (1985 Code §1-1.0605)
2-3-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors and residents of the city. No person, while on said commission, shall hold or be a candidate for
any office of public trust. (1985 Code §1-1.0603; amd. 1993 Code)
2-3-4: APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all full time police officers and firefighters and all appointive full time employees, except:
A. City clerk, deputy city clerk, city attorney, assistant attorney, assessor, finance director, auditor, civil engineer, health physician, market master, city
manager and administrative assistants to the manager, and any other department heads except police and fire chiefs who are subject to sections
400.13 and 400.14, code of Iowa.
B. Election officials.
C. Secretary to the mayor, city manager or department heads.
D. Boards and commissioners of any kind.
E. Casual employees. (1985 Code §1-1.0610; amd. 1993 Code)
2-3-5: OFFICERS:
A. Chairman: The chairman of the commission, for each biennial period, shall be the member whose term first expires. (1985 Code §1-1.0606)
B. Clerk: The city clerk shall be clerk of the commission. (1985 Code §1-1.0607)
2-3-6: DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION EX OFFICIO MEMBER OF CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 155/687
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-3-3 of this chapter, when a human rights commission has been established, the director thereof shall ex officio
be a member, without vote, of the civil service commission. (1985 Code §1-1.0604)
2-3-7: OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have, exercise and perform all the powers and duties as are provided by chapter 400 of the code of Iowa or amendments thereto.
(1985 Code §1-1.0616)
A. Examinations; Appointments: The commission shall conduct examinations and make appointments as provided by law. (1985 Code §1-1.0614)
B. Removal, Demotion Or Suspension: The removal, demotion or suspension of persons covered by civil service provisions shall be as provided by law.
(1985 Code §1-1.0615)
2-3-8: RECORDS:
The civil service commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee, which
record shall be permanent and kept up to date. (1985 Code §1-1.0608)
2-3-9: ROOMS AND SUPPLIES:
The council shall provide suitable rooms in which the commission may hold its meetings and supply the commission with all necessary equipment and a
qualified shorthand reporter to enable it properly to perform its duties. (1985 Code §1-1.0609)
2-3-10: PREFERENCE BY SERVICE:
An employee regularly serving in or holding a position when the position becomes subject to this chapter or when the position is reclassified by the city
shall retain the position and have full civil service rights in the position under any of the following conditions:
A. The employee meets the minimum qualifications established for the position and has completed the required probationary period for the position.
B. The employee has served satisfactorily in the position for a period equal to the probationary period of the position, and passes a qualifying
noncompetitive examination for the position but does not meet the minimum qualifications established for the position.
C. An employee who has not completed the required probationary period but who otherwise meets the requirements of subsection A or B of this section
shall receive full civil service rights in the position upon the completion of the probationary period.
Appointments made after the effective date hereof are subject to this chapter. (1993 Code)
Nothing in this section shall apply to any person temporarily acting in a position regularly held by another, or in a vacancy, except to establish his rights in
his own regular position. (1985 Code §1-1.0613)
Chapter 4
WATER UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the operation of the Municipally owned water utility by a Board of Trustees. (1985 Code §6-1.01)
2-4-2: APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES; COMPENSATION:
The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council,1 five (5) persons to serve as Trustees. Trustees appointed shall serve staggered six (6)
year terms expiring on December 31. No public officer or salaried employee of the City may serve on the Board. The Council shall, by resolution, set the
compensation of Board members. (1985 Code §§6-1.03, 6-1.04; 1993 Code)
2-4-3: VACANCIES:
An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board shall be made in the same manner as an original appointment, except that such appointment shall be for the
balance of the unexpired term. (1985 Code §6-1.05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 156/687
2-4-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of a City in relation to the City utility, City utilities or combined utility system it administers, with the
following exceptions:
A. Taxes, Ordinances and Bonds: The Board may not certify taxes to be levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special
assessment bonds.
B. Property: Title to all property must be in the name of the City, but the Board has full control of such property subject to limitations imposed by law.
C. Reports to Council: The Board shall make a detailed annual report to the Council including a complete financial statement.
D. Proceedings Published: Immediately following a regular or special meeting, the Board secretary shall prepare and cause to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City a condensed statement of proceedings including a list of all claims. (1985 Code §6-1.06)
2-4-5: FUNDS AND RATES:
A. Control of Funds: The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as well as all monies derived from operations. (1985 Code §6-1.07)
B. Accounting: Utility moneys must be held in a separate utility fund, with a separate account or accounts for each utility or combined utility system. (1985
Code §6-1.08)
C. Discriminatory Rates Illegal: A utility may not provide use or service at a discriminatory rate, except to the City or its agencies, as provided in section
384.91, Code of Iowa. (1985 Code §6-1.09)
2-4-6: DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD:
A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid petition, to discontinue a utility board is subject to the approval of the voters of the City,
except that a Board may be discontinued by resolution of the Council when the City utility, City utilities, or combined utility system it administers is
disposed of or leased for a period of over five (5) years. (1985 Code §6-1.10)
Chapter 5
HUMAN SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD
2-5-1: PURPOSE OF BOARD:
The purpose of this chapter is to create an organization to advise and assist the City Council in the provision of necessary human services; to provide
visibility and accessibility to such human services; to motivate individuals to self-help; to meet minimum human needs for food, shelter, education,
environment, health and general welfare; to improve both neighborhood and individual living environments; to maximize the resources brought to bear on
any particular problem; to improve participation in program goals and development by those whom programs are intended to serve; to provide the
necessary accountability to judge program effectiveness and improve the quality thereof; to avoid duplication and wasted resources; and to formulate
programs to meet human services needs yet unknown. (Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
2-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
BOARD: The Human Services Advisory Board of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
MEMBERS, APPOINTED: The members of the West Des Moines Human Services Advisory Board who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
confirmation of the City Council. Appointed members may be drawn from the public and private sectors and the service population, and may include
representatives of schools, welfare, health, housing, private welfare, business, industry, labor, religious and other major groups and interests within the
City as part of the public/private sector.
SERVICE AREA: All of that area within the corporate boundaries of the City and those areas adjunct to the corporate boundaries as necessary to satisfy
the Federal requirements of some grant in aid programs.
SERVICE POPULATION: Those persons residing in the service area who are qualified to receive services through the West Des Moines Human Services
Advisory Board. Qualification will be determined by Federal, State and/or local requirements.
SERVICE PROVIDER: Any individual, group or organization actively engaged in the provision of a service basic to the physical, social, or economic well
being of families and individual persons. Such services shall include, but not be limited to, housing, education, economic maintenance, counseling,
medical assistance and other services of a similar or complementary nature. (Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
2-5-3: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 157/687
A. Establishment: The Human Services Advisory Board is hereby established for the purpose of advising the City Council, performing the duties of the
board, as stated herein, and as the Council shall direct, formulating, initiating, facilitating, administering and guiding services to be provided for the
disadvantaged in the City. Subject to Council approval, the board shall establish rules, regulations, operating procedures and policies designed to
effectively carry out the above purpose as stated in the purpose of this chapter. All persons and/or organizations establishing, conducting and operating
human service programs and other similar services for the benefit of the disadvantaged citizens of the City shall coordinate and cooperate with the City.
Nothing in this chapter shall be intended to interfere with or preclude the provision of services to families and individuals as set forth by State or Federal
Statute and as administered by any branch or political subdivision of said State or Federal government.
B. Membership: The West Des Moines Human Services Advisory Board shall consist of fifteen (15) members, appointed in a manner as described in this
subsection.
1. Composition Of Board: Board composition shall consist of the following:
a. Thirteen (13) members of the board shall be appointed by the Mayor with confirmation of the City Council from the public and private sectors of the
community.
b. Two (2) members of the board may be appointed from the service population, including current or former members of the service population, using
procedures as may be established by the Council. If the City is unable to find two (2) current or former members of the service population to serve
on the board, then the Mayor may appoint these two (2) members of the board in the same manner set forth in subsection B1a of this section.
c. Two (2) alternate members of the board may be appointed by the Mayor with confirmation of the City Council. Said alternate members shall
exercise the same powers as regular board members with the exception of voting. Said alternate members shall have voting powers only in the
occasion that a regular board member or members are absent or a vacancy or vacancies exist in the regular board membership.
2. Qualifications: All members of the board shall be eighteen (18) years of age or older. Human Services Advisory Board membership shall be
extended to individuals who:
a. Are residents of the City, or are current or former members of the service population; or
b. By virtue of their profession, education or experience, and their employment within the service area, can offer substantial contributions to the
achievement of goals and objectives as defined in this chapter.
C. Compensation: All members of the board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2218, 5-1-2017)
2-5-4: TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
A. Term Of Office: Terms of office shall be three (3) years expiring June 30, except in the case of the initial board seating where terms shall be staggered
on a one (1), two (2), or three (3) year basis with approximately one-third (1/3) of the board assigned to each term through either the election or
appointment process. The term of office for alternate board members shall be three (3) years expiring on June 30 except that the initial alternate board
members' terms shall run from the date of their appointment through the third June 30 after their initial appointment.
B. Maximum Number Of Terms: Board members may serve a maximum of two (2) terms absent a compelling reason to make an exception as approved by
the Mayor. Those members filling a seat that has been vacated midterm may complete that term then serve two (2) consecutive terms.
C. Vacancies: If a vacancy shall exist on said board, caused by resignation or otherwise, said vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments. Successors shall reign for the residue of said original term. (Ord. 2154, 6-27-2016)
2-5-5: BOARD ORGANIZATION:
A. Chairman And Vice Chairman: The board shall, at its first full meeting and at each designated annual meeting, choose a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from the board membership. The Chairman shall preside over meetings and shall select individuals to sit upon committees. The Vice Chairman shall
assume the duties of the Chairman during those times that the Chairman is absent.
B. Executive Committee: The board shall, at its first full meeting and at each designated annual meeting, which shall be held in July of each year, choose
from the board membership an Executive Committee of six (6). The Executive Committee shall act on behalf of the board in various administrative
functions between regular board meetings. The Executive Committee shall possess such administrative and fiscal powers as the full board shall grant
by resolution. Both the Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be members of the Executive Committee. (Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
2-5-6: SERVICE PROVIDERS' COUNCIL:
A. A Service Providers' Council is hereby established for the purpose of providing a vehicle for exchange of information and ideas, coordination of total
services, joint program provision and as a mechanism for the resolution of joint service conflicts. Members of the Service Providers' Council shall
include representatives of those agencies or organizations who shall provide a significant contribution to the provision of human services in the City. No
agency or organization shall maintain more than one (1) representative of the Service Providers' Council. The Human Services Advisory Board shall
designate and maintain a list of those agencies or organizations eligible for membership to the Service Providers' Council.
B. The Service Providers' Council shall stand in an advisory capacity to the Human Services Advisory Board. Where present ineffectual service provisions
or unmet service needs are expressed by the board, the Service Providers' Council shall assist in attempting to furnish, through individual and/or
collective effort, programming concepts and plans yielding financial and manpower commitments capable of meeting the needs as expressed. (Ord.
1187, 6-3-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 158/687
2-5-7: MEETINGS; QUORUM:
A. Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the board shall be held on a week and day of each month as shall be determined by a vote of the members.
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings shall be held at the request of the board Chairman or with a majority vote of the membership.
C. Quorum: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the board members on the roster at each given meeting. (Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
2-5-8: POWERS, DUTIES AND LIMITATIONS OF THE BOARD:
A. Duties: The Human Services Advisory Board shall be charged with the responsibility to assess human service needs, advise the Council as to plans
designed to meet such needs; and assist the Council in the creation and maintenance of human service programs in fulfillment of these objectives. The
board shall work to prevent duplication of services, provide for standardization of reporting, provide direction and equitable distribution of private and
public funds, and provide an avenue for City participation in human service needs. The Human Services Advisory Board shall coordinate their activities
in cooperation with the Service Providers' Council.
B. Powers:
1. The board shall possess the ability to utilize City staff members to assess needs and implement human service programs per the Council's authority.
2. The board shall also possess the power to create or dissolve, when necessary, any standing or ad hoc committees created for the purpose of
investigatory and analysis duties. Committees shall have a Chairman who is a member of the board and chosen by the board Chairman. Other
members of the committee may be nonmember residents of the City who possess special knowledge or skills necessary or valuable to the proper
function of the committee. At least an appropriate fifty one percent (51%) representative proportion shall be maintained on committees.
C. Veto By The Council: The City Council shall have the power and authority to veto any program or action taken by the board which is not in the best
interest of the service population and/or the citizens of the City. (Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
2-5-9: REPORTS:
The board shall make written reports to the Council on a monthly and annual basis or upon Council request. Said reports shall contain all reportable items
required by contract and/or law. Monthly reports shall be submitted no later than the fifteenth day of the following month. Annual reports shall be submitted
no later than July 31 of each year. A copy of such reports shall be forwarded to each governmental unit or political subdivision as required by contract
and/or law. (Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
2-5-10: BUDGETS:
The board shall provide input in the preparation of the budget for human services programs. (Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
2-5-11: ACCOUNTING:
The City shall perform all financial management services for the board, including, but not limited to, supply billings, audits, and such other services as shall
be necessary or required. (Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
2-5-12: PETITION BY CITIZENS FOR ADEQUATE REPRESENTATION:
A. If members of any special segment or group of the community feel that they have inadequate representation on the Human Services Advisory Board,
they may petition for adequate representation. For a petition to be recognized it shall contain the signatures of not less than fifty (50) persons who are
residents of the City, members of the service population and eighteen (18) years of age or older. Petition shall be filed with the City Clerk and a public
hearing shall be publicized and scheduled by the Council no later than thirty (30) days following the receipt of said petition.
B. The petitioners shall be given the right to orally present their case to the Council at the public hearing. The petitioners shall also be given the right to
submit a written statement of grievances with background data supporting their action, as well as suggestions for alternative actions to the Council.
Said petition shall be considered by the Council at the publicized meeting which shall be conducted and recorded in accordance with all applicable
regulations and guidelines. (Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
Chapter 6
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE LIBRARY
2-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment of a city library board of trustees, and to specify that board's powers and duties. (1985 Code
§4-1.01)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 159/687
2-6-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The board of trustees of the library, hereinafter referred to as the board, consists of seven (7) resident members. All members are to be appointed by the
mayor with the approval of the council1. All members of the board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the city. Resident members shall be over the
age of eighteen (18) years. (1985 Code §§4-1.03, 4-1.04)
2-6-3: ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD; COMPENSATION:
The organization of the board shall be as follows:
A. Term Of Office: All appointments to the board shall be for four (4) years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every year of one-fourth (1/4) the total number, or as near as possible, to stagger the terms. (Ord. 1091, 5-23-1994)
B. Vacancies: The position of any trustee shall be vacant if he moves permanently from the city, or if he is absent from six (6) consecutive regular meetings
of the board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the city. Vacancies in the board shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, with
approval of the council, and the new trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
C. Compensation: Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services. (1985 Code §4-1.05)
2-6-4: PUBLIC LIBRARY DESIGNATED:
The public library for the city shall be known as the West Des Moines Public Library. It shall be referred to in this chapter as the library. (1985 Code §4-
1.02)
2-6-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: (1985 Code §4-1.06; amd. 1993 Code)
A. Officers: To meet and elect from its members a president, a secretary, and such other officers as it deems necessary. The city finance director shall
serve as board treasurer but shall not be a member of the board. (1985 Code §4-1.06; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
B. Physical Plant: To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
C. Charge Of Affairs: To direct and control all affairs of the library.
D. Hiring Of Personnel: To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants
and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the board voting in favor thereof.
E. Removal Of Personnel: To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetency or inattention to duty, subject however, to the provisions of chapter 70, code of Iowa.
F. Purchases: To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library within budgetary limits set by the board.
G. Use By Nonresidents: To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the city and to fix charges therefor.
H. Rules And Regulations: To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations not inconsistent with code and the law for the care, use,
government and management of the library and the business of the board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
I. Expenditures: To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for library purposes by the council, and of all monies available by gift or
otherwise for the erection of library buildings, and of all other monies belonging to the library including fines and rentals collected under the rules of the
board.
J. Gifts: To accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said
property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bill of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to extend the funds received by them from
such gifts for the improvement of the library.
K. Enforce The Performance Of Conditions On Gifts: To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the
city by action against the council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 160/687
L. Record Of Proceedings: To keep a record of its proceedings.
M. County Historical Association: To have authority to make agreements with the local county historical association where such exists, and to set apart the
necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The trustees are further authorized to purchase
necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature
and pay for the same out of funds allocated for library purposes. (1985 Code §4-1.06; amd. 1993 Code)
2-6-6: CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES:
The board shall have power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the following:
A. Contracting: The board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free public libraries, any other city, school corporation, private or semiprivate
organization, institution of higher learning, township or county, or with the trustees of any county library district for the use of the library by their
respective residents.
B. Termination: Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of
the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing body of
a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the election.
The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in the territory of the party who is seeking to terminate the contract. (1985
Code §4-1.07)
2-6-7: NONRESIDENT USE:
The board may authorize the use of the library by persons not residents of the city in any one or more of the following ways:
A. Lending: By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the city, or upon
payment of a special nonresident library fee.
B. Depository: By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
C. Bookmobiles: By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
D. Branch Library: By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library materials to nonresidents. (1985 Code §4-1.08)
2-6-8: EXPENDITURES:
All money appropriated by the council for the operation and maintenance of the library shall be set aside in an account for the library. Expenditures shall be
paid for only on orders of the board, signed by its president and secretary. The check writing officer is the finance director. (1985 Code §4-1.09; amd. 1993
Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
2-6-9: ANNUAL REPORT:
The board shall make a report to the city council immediately after the close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of
the library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the
library during the year, together with such further information as may be required by the council. (1985 Code §4-1.10)
2-6-10: INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY:
Any person who shall wilfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book, map,
pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the library or reading room shall be in violation of this code. (1985 Code §4-1.11; amd. 1993 Code)
Chapter 7
PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
2-7-1: BOARD CREATED; ELECTION; TERM:
There shall be a Park and Recreation Advisory Board for the City consisting of five (5) citizens of legal age whose members shall be elected for staggered
terms of four (4) years each, expiring December 31 or odd-numbered years. (Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 161/687
2-7-2: ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION:
A. Organization: At its first meeting in January of each year, the Board shall elect one of its members as Chairman, one as Vice Chairman and one as
Secretary.
B. Committee Appointments: The Chairman shall make all committee appointments, with the approval of the majority of Board members present.
C. Compensation: There shall be no compensation attached to the Park and Recreation Advisory Board, and all services performed by said Board
member(s) shall be rendered without compensation therefor. (Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996)
2-7-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Recommend plans for the development of the park and recreation system, consistent with the overall City Comprehensive Plan;
B. Make recommendations on the purchase, sale, lease or exchange of park property;
C. Make recommendations on policies and regulations for the control, operation, supervision and maintenance of park and recreation programs;
D. Make recommendations on fees and charges and any conditions under which services may be rendered to users of park and recreation facilities;
E. Make recommendations on applications for grants or subsidies from any other unit of government;
F. Provide input in the preparation of the operating and capital budget requests for park and recreation programs;
G. Develop and implement a program for informing the community of the park system and of recreational programs;
H. Lease, under reasonable rules and requirements, parks or portions thereof, as follows:
1. For a period not in excess of ten (10) days to charitable, fraternal and patriotic organizations, for the purpose of permitting such organizations to
conduct celebrations, anniversaries and entertainments.
2. For a period not to exceed six (6) months, as the board shall deem proper, for the purpose of permitting the playing of amateur or professional
contests or games, programs and recreational programs;
I. Have access to City staff to carry out the powers and duties described in this Section, per the authority of the City Council. (Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996)
2-7-4: RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the Board to file with the City Clerk, for public inspection, copies of minutes of all board meetings and resolutions duly
passed by the Board within fifteen (15) days of the meeting during which such action was taken. (Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996)
2-7-5: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER CITY POLICIES:
All administrative, accounting, budgetary and procurement policies of the City shall govern the Board in all of its operations. (Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996)
Chapter 8
ADA COMPLIANCE
2-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a grievance procedure for the sole purpose of providing a forum for individuals to file a complaint and receive
prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint which alleges that the City has taken action which is prohibited under the rules governing
nondiscrimination on the basis of disability. (Ord. 1030, 9-28-1992)
2-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 162/687
CITY: The City of West Des Moines, Iowa, conducting business at 4000 George M. Mills Civic Parkway, P.O. Box 65320, West Des Moines, Iowa 50265-
0320.
PETITIONER (Also Referred To As "Complainant"): Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the ADA Coordinator and files a written petition of
appeal with the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-3: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
All complaints regarding access or alleged discrimination based on disability shall be submitted in writing to the City's ADA Coordinator for resolution.
Letters should be clearly addressed to: City of West Des Moines' ADA Coordinator, c/o City Manager's Office; P.O. Box 65320; West Des Moines, Iowa
50265-0320.
The ADA Coordinator will provide a written response, in the form of a decision, to the complainant within fifteen (15) working days. The decision will
describe any action to be taken by the City and an expected compliance date. A copy of the complaint and the action will be maintained in the office of the
ADA Coordinator.
If the complaint cannot be resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant by the designated local governmental official, it will be forwarded to the Mayor
and City Council. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-4: APPEALS PROCEDURE:
Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the ADA Coordinator regarding the access or alleged discrimination to public facilities or services and
programs may appeal to the Mayor and City Council. The appeal shall be completed by filing with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the
written decision by the ADA Coordinator, a notice of appeal requesting a hearing of the appeal setting forth the complaint of discrimination.
Failure to file a timely written petition as required herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and the decision of the ADA Coordinator shall
constitute a final determination.
Upon receipt of a timely filed written petition with the Mayor and City Council, the City Clerk shall place the appeal on the next regular City Council agenda.
Written notification of the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be given to the petitioner within five (5) working days after the written petition is filed
with the City Clerk.
The hearing shall be scheduled no later than twenty (20) working days after the date on which the written petition was filed and may be extended for a
reasonable period by the Mayor, at his or her discretion, or upon written request from the petitioner or the ADA Coordinator, for good cause shown. A
hearing notice shall be placed with a wide range of media. Request will be made that notice shall appear in at least one of each of the following as is
available in the media market: newspaper, radio and closed caption television. Upon written notification of the petitioner or any interested citizen, the City
Clerk will provide information in Braille or on audiocassettes for vision impaired. Further, a sign language interpreter for the hearing impaired will be
available at the hearing, upon written notice made to the City Clerk seven (7) working days in advance of the hearing.
Due to the failure of a petitioner to appear at a scheduled hearing of an appeal, the Mayor and City Council may proceed with the hearing and make a
decision in the absence of the petitioner. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-5: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded, transcripted and maintained. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to respond and
present evidence and argument on all issues involved. Parties may represent themselves or may be represented by legal counsel or other individuals
of their choosing.
B. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
C. Witnesses at the hearing, or available persons whose testimony has been submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross-examination by any party
as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
D. The Mayor shall conduct the hearing and have the power to administer oaths. The Mayor and City Council may cause subpoenas to be issued for such
witnesses and the production of such books and papers as either party may designate. The subpoenas may be signed by the Mayor and City Council.
E. No hearing shall be valid unless a majority of the Mayor and City Council is present and no decision at the hearing shall be valid and binding unless
reached by a majority of those members of the Mayor and City Council present and eligible to vote on the item. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-6: RULING:
The Mayor and City Council shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of the hearing. The Mayor and City Council decision may affirm, modify or
reverse any decision of the ADA Coordinator. The decision shall include findings of fact. Following the decision of the Mayor and City Council, all parties
shall be notified of the decision by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-7: COMPLAINANT'S RIGHT TO OTHER REMEDIES:
The complainant's right to prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint shall not be impaired by the pursuit of other remedies, such as the filing of a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 163/687
complaint with the United States Department of Justice or any other appropriate Federal agency. Furthermore, the filing of a lawsuit in State or Federal
district court can occur at any time. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-8: RECORD OF ACTION:
A record of action taken on each request or complaint must be maintained as a part of the records or minutes at each level of the grievance process and
shall be made a part of the official record held in the office of the ADA Coordinator. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
Chapter 9
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
2-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a nonjudicial Human Rights Commission consistent with the Iowa Civil Rights Act; to recognize the authority of
the Iowa Civil Rights Commission and foster use of its procedures and programs; and to proclaim a public policy of nondiscrimination by securing freedom
from discriminatory practices, protecting individual dignity, ensuring their full productive capacities, preserving the public safety, health, and general
welfare, and promoting the interests, rights, and privileges of individual citizens within the City. (Ord. 1344, 12-14-1998)
2-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
COMMISSION: The West Des Moines Human Rights Commission created by this chapter.
COMMISSIONER: A member of the commission.
COMMUNITY DIVERSITY APPRECIATION TEAM: A community-wide coalition organized for the purpose of developing and implementing a community
plan to appreciate diversity and to discourage or eliminate discriminatory practices.
DISABILITY: The physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial handicap, and the condition of a person with a positive human
immunodeficiency virus test result, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome-related
complex, or any other condition related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
EMPLOYEE: Any person employed by an employer.
EMPLOYER: The State of Iowa or any political subdivision, board, commission, department, institution, or school district thereof, and every other person
employing employees within the State.
PERSON: One or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, receivers, and the State of Iowa and all
political subdivisions and agencies thereof.
STUDY CIRCLE: A small group of community members which meets regularly with a trained facilitator to address critical public issues in an open,
participatory deliberation of personal experiences and perspectives. (Ord. 1344, 12-14-1998)
2-9-3: COMMISSION APPOINTED:
A. The City Human Rights Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council. Appointments shall
take into consideration the various racial, religious, cultural, and social groups and geographical areas within the City insofar as may be practicable.
B. The term of appointment shall be three (3) years from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made, except that for the purpose of
maintaining an appropriate staggering of terms, the Mayor may prescribe a shorter term for any appointment or reappointment. In the event that a
vacancy occurs in the membership of the commission by death, resignation or otherwise prior to the normal expiration of the appointee's term, the
Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a person to serve out the remainder of the unexpired term.
C. Any member or all members of the commission may be removed from office at any time by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The
commission shall annually elect one of its members to be Chairperson.
D. The members of the commission shall serve without salary, wages or other compensation provided that they may receive reimbursement for actual and
necessary expenses incurred as allowed by the City Council pursuant to such procedures and policies for the reimbursement of expenses as shall be
established by the City from time to time. (Ord. 2261, 11-13-2017)
2-9-4: RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall have the following responsibilities: (Ord. 1344, 12-14-1998)
A. Study the existence, character, causes, and extent of discrimination within the City because of race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, national origin, religion, ancestry or disability, and to attempt the elimination of such discrimination by education and understanding. (Ord.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 164/687
2213, 4-17-2017)
B. Issue such publications and reports of research as in the judgment of the commission shall tend to promote good will among the various racial,
religious, and ethnic groups within the City and which shall tend to minimize or eliminate discriminatory practices. The commission shall prepare and
distribute a brochure explaining its mission and purpose for dissemination within the City.
C. Formulate and carry out a comprehensive educational program designed to prevent and eliminate discriminatory practices, including the provision of
training and educational services to business, professional groups, and educational agencies requesting workshops, seminars, or speakers to address
specific issues and concerns, as well as maintaining as a part of the commission's formal educational program a series of public forums addressing
various matters about which there is the need to increase public awareness and response.
D. Encourage participation of citizens in study circles and small-group deliberations to address discriminatory practices in a democratic and collaborative
way; and to advocate participation in community diversity appreciation teams comprised of representatives from business, schools, law enforcement,
realtors, local government and other community representatives to facilitate public forums and activities, to foster acceptance, to create opportunity for
all community members, to lessen tensions, or to improve understanding within the community.
E. Provide intake assistance for complaints from individuals who may be victims of discriminatory practices and refer such complaints to the Iowa Civil
Rights Commission for investigation and adjudication.
F. Recommend responsibilities of designated staff consistent with this chapter. The staff shall be a person or persons designated by the City Manager.
G. With approval of the City Council, to receive, administer, dispense and account for any City funds that may be allocated, any donations that may be
voluntarily contributed to the commission, or any grants that may be awarded to the commission for furthering the purposes of this chapter.
H. Utilize volunteers to aid in the conduct of the commission's activities and functions. (Ord. 1344, 12-14-1998)
I. Make recommendations to the City Council for such further legislation concerning discrimination because of race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, national origin, religion, ancestry or disability as it may deem necessary and desirable. (Ord. 2213, 4-17-2017)
J. Prepare and transmit to the Mayor and City Council from time to time, but not less often than once each year, reports describing its activities and
functions. (Ord. 1344, 12-14-1998)
Chapter 10
CITY SHADE TREE COMMISSION
2-10-1: PURPOSE:
To recognize the value of trees on public and private properties within the City, and to encourage the citizens of West Des Moines to become involved in
the planning, proper planting, and care of public and private trees within the City. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
2-10-2: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT:
A. There is hereby created and established a City Shade Tree Commission which shall consist of six (6) members and one City Council representative
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Representatives chosen by the City Parks and Recreation Department and Public Works
Department shall advise this Commission.
B. The term of appointment shall be three (3) years from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made, except that for the purpose of
maintaining an appropriate staggering of terms, the Mayor may prescribe a shorter term for any appointment or reappointment. In the event that a
vacancy occurs in the membership of the Commission by death, resignation or otherwise prior to the normal expiration of the appointee's term, the
Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a person to serve out the remainder of the unexpired term.
C. Any member or all members of the Commission may be removed from office at any time by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. No person
shall serve on the Commission for more than six (6) years.
D. The members of the Commission shall serve without salary, wages or other compensation, provided that they may receive reimbursement for actual
and necessary expenses incurred as allowed by the City Council pursuant to such procedures and policies for the reimbursement of expenses as shall
be established by the City from time to time. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
2-10-3: RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Commission to study, investigate, counsel, and develop plans and recommendations for the planting, maintenance,
care, removal, and replacement of trees and shrubs on City rights of way, alleys, and boulevards or parkways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 165/687
B. The Commission, when requested by City Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report, and propose recommendations on any special
matter of questions within the scope of its work.
C. The Commission shall establish its own rules and regulations, and shall keep a record of its proceedings. A majority of the Commission members shall
be a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
2-10-4: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the City Forester regarding the pruning, treatment or removal of public trees/shrubs or private
trees/shrubs may appeal to this Commission. The appeal shall be completed by filing with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of a written
decision by the City Forester, a notice of appeal requesting a hearing and setting forth the reasons for the appeal.
B. Failure to file a timely written petition as required herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and the decision of the City Forester shall
constitute a final determination.
C. Upon receipt of a timely filed written petition, a hearing shall be scheduled within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt, giving public notice of the hearing,
and providing due notice to the parties in interest.
D. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the City Forester certifies to the Commission, after notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him/her, that by reason of the facts stated in the petition, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Commission or by a court of
record on application on notice to the City Forester and on due cause shown. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
2-10-5: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to respond and present evidence and argument
on all issues involved. Parties may represent themselves or may be represented by legal counsel or other individuals of their choosing.
B. In the event of the failure of a petitioner to appear at a scheduled hearing of an appeal, the Commission may proceed with the hearing and make a
decision in the absence of the petitioner.
C. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
D. Witnesses at the hearing, or unavailable persons whose testimony has been submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross-examination by any
party as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
E. The chairperson shall conduct the hearing and have the power to administer oaths. No hearing shall be valid unless a majority of the Commission is
present, and no decision at the hearing shall be valid and binding unless reached by a majority of those Commission members present. (Ord. 1397, 3-
20-2000)
2-10-6: RULING:
The Commission shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of the hearing. The decision may affirm, modify or reverse any decision of the City
Forester. The decision shall include findings of fact. All parties shall be notified of the decision by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt
requested. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
Chapter 11
PUBLIC ARTS ADVISORY COMMISSION
2-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a public arts advisory commission, hereinafter referred to as the "arts commission", to advise and assist the
West Des Moines city council in the promotion of public art within the city's physical environment and public spaces. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-2: COMMISSION CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The arts commission shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The appointment of each member
of the arts commission shall be for staggered terms of four (4) years. At the time of the initial appointment, the mayor shall designate the length of term for
each member to provide for staggered terms. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 166/687
2-11-3: ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL:
A. Upon appointment, the arts commission shall be called together by the mayor and shall organize by electing one member as chair and one as secretary
from any of its members. The chair and secretary shall each serve one year terms, but would be eligible for reelection.
B. A majority of the membership of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The director of parks and recreation, or designee, shall act as city staff to
the commission.
C. All members of the arts commission shall serve as such without compensation except for reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses,
subject to the approval of the city council.
D. Any commission member may be removed from the arts commission by the mayor, with the concurrence of the council. Any such removal shall be
stated in writing and filed with the city clerk's office and a copy thereof filed with the chair of the commission. Continued absence of any member from
meetings of the arts commission shall, at the discretion of the mayor, render any such member subject to immediate removal from appointment, with
final approval by the city council. Any member consistently absent from the arts commission meetings, without sufficient excuse, shall be considered to
have vacated his or her appointment. In the event a vacancy arises, a new commission member shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of
the city council, and the commission member so appointed shall serve the balance of the unexpired term. Any such vacancies shall be filled within sixty
(60) days after the position becomes vacant. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
Membership shall be open to a balanced, diverse mixture of citizen representatives of the community at large who are recognized for their interest or
experience in connection with visual arts. Members shall reside in the city. Members shall not hold any other elective or appointed office within the city
government. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The arts commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Advise the city council on the acquisition, placement, and maintenance of public art on property of the city, including public art in connection with a
capital improvement program project. No public art shall be installed or existing work of public art removed from public spaces without a review by the
arts commission.
B. Hold regular public meetings and maintain a written record of its proceedings.
C. Establish guidelines to carry out the public art program which shall include methods of selecting artists or public art and for the placement of public art.
These guidelines, to be adopted by the city council, may enumerate in detail the arts commission's roles and responsibilities in overseeing the public
art program.
D. Make recommendations to the city council on the amount and allocation of budgeted city funding for visual arts programs and services.
E. Prepare an annual report to the city council summarizing its activities during the preceding year and recommendations for the proposed activities for the
succeeding year.
F. Adopt and present to the city council for its consideration and approval, such rules and regulations to govern its internal organization and procedures as
it may deem necessary and which are not in conflict with federal, state, and municipal laws.
G. Consistent with city council policy, serve as advocates for public art with the city council, as well as the private sector, local, regional, state, and federal
governments.
H. Explore and advocate for new, noncity sources of funding for the visual arts.
I. Receive input from the city manager and city council regarding the operation and maintenance expenses associated with a work of public art. If the
proposed work of art requires extraordinary operation or maintenance expenses, the arts commission shall recommend another work of art or submit a
statement of overriding consideration why the public art should be utilized notwithstanding its extraordinary operation or maintenance expense. (Ord.
1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-6: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by a decision by the arts commission may file an appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the date the action was taken or
decision was made. The city council shall have the ultimate authority regarding these matters. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-7: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER CITY POLICIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 167/687
All administrative, accounting, budgetary, and procurement policies of the city shall govern the arts commission in all of its operations. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-
2011)
Chapter 12
BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMISSION
2-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a bicycle advisory commission, hereinafter referred to as the "commission", to advise and assist the West Des
Moines city council in the development, maintenance and promotion of bicycle facilities and programs within the city. (Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2342 - BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2-12-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The commission shall consist of nine (9) members, appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The appointment of each member of the
commission shall be for staggered terms of three (3) years. At the time of the initial appointment, the mayor shall designate the length of term for each
member to provide for staggered terms. (Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
2-12-3: ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL:
A. Upon appointment, the commission shall be called together by the mayor and shall organize by electing one member as chair and one as secretary
from any of its members. The chair and secretary shall each serve one year terms, but would be eligible for reelection.
B. A majority of the membership of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The parks and recreation director or designee shall act as lead city staff to
the commission. The city engineer, as well as other city department representatives as needed, shall also serve the commission in an advisory
capacity.
C. All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation except for reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses, subject to
the approval of the city council.
D. Any commission member may be removed from the commission by the mayor, with the concurrence of the council. Any such removal shall be stated in
writing and filed with the city clerk's office and a copy thereof filed with the chair of the commission. Continued absence of any member from meetings
of the commission shall, at the discretion of the mayor, render any such member subject to immediate removal from appointment, with final approval by
the city council. Any member consistently absent from the commission meetings, without sufficient excuse, shall be considered to have vacated his or
her appointment. In the event a vacancy arises, a new commission member shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council, and
the commission member so appointed shall serve the balance of the unexpired term. Any such vacancies shall be filled within sixty (60) days after the
position becomes vacant. (Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
2-12-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
Membership shall be open to a balanced, diverse mixture of citizen representatives of the community at large who are recognized for their interest or
experience in connection with bicycling. Members shall reside in the city, shall work for companies with their headquarters located in the city, or shall work
for one of the top ten (10) major employers ranked by the highest number of employees working within the city. There shall be a minimum of six (6)
members of the commission who are residents of West Des Moines, and only one nonresident of West Des Moines can be appointed in any given year.
Members shall not hold any other elective or appointed office within the city government. (Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
2-12-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Make recommendations to the city council on the planning and development of the city's bicycle network and facilities.
B. Advise the city council on updating city plans, ordinances and programs related to bicycling.
C. Collaborate with other cities and agencies to facilitate a regional bicycle network.
D. Hold regular public meetings and maintain a written record of its proceedings.
E. Prepare an annual report to the city council summarizing the commission's activities during the preceding year and recommendations for the proposed
activities for the succeeding year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 168/687
F. Adopt and present to the city council for its consideration and approval, such rules and regulations to govern its internal organization and procedures as
it may deem necessary and which are not in conflict with federal, state, and municipal laws.
G. Explore and advocate for new, noncity sources of funding for bicycling. (Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
2-12-6: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER CITY POLICIES:
All administrative, accounting, budgetary, and procurement policies of the city shall govern the commission in all of its operations. (Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
Chapter 13
SISTER CITIES COMMISSION
2-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Sister Cities Commission, hereinafter referred to as the "commission", to advise and assist the West Des
Moines City Council in:
A. Allowing community citizens and the people of similar cities in foreign nations to acquire a mutual understanding of one another as individuals, as
members of their communities, as citizens of their countries and as members of the family of nations.
B. To promote educational and cultural exchanges between institutions and citizens in our community and citizens of West Des Moines sister cities.
C. To coordinate and facilitate communication between businesses in the Des Moines metropolitan area wishing to make contact with businesses in sister
cities, and to coordinate business and trade inquiries from West Des Moines sister cities directed to potential business partners.
D. To assist individuals and educational institutions in the Des Moines metropolitan area in acquiring and exchanging professional and technical skills with
individuals and institutions in sister cities.
E. To develop awareness of the international sister cities program, its goals, missions, and accomplishments, and to create a bridge of understanding
between different cultures of the world. (Ord. 1980, 3-18-2013)
2-13-2: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The appointment of each member of
the commission shall be for staggered terms of three (3) years. At the time of the initial appointment, the Mayor shall designate the length of term for each
member to provide for staggered terms. (Ord. 1980, 3-18-2013)
2-13-3: ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL:
A. Upon appointment, the commission shall be called together by the Mayor and shall organize by electing one member as Chair and one as Secretary
from any of its members. The Chair and Secretary shall each serve one year terms, but would be eligible for reelection.
B. A majority of the membership of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The City Manager or his/her designee shall act as lead City staff to the
commission. The Director of Community and Economic Development, as well as other City department representatives as needed, shall also serve the
commission in an advisory capacity.
C. All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation except for reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses, subject to
the approval of the City Council.
D. Any commission member may be removed from the commission by the Mayor, with the concurrence of the Council. Any such removal shall be stated in
writing and filed in the City Clerk's Office and a copy thereof filed with the Chair of the commission. Continued absence of any member from meetings
of the commission shall, at the discretion of the Mayor, render any such member subject to immediate removal from appointment, with final approval by
the City Council. Any member consistently absent from the commission meetings, without sufficient excuse, shall be considered to have vacated his or
her appointment. In the event a vacancy arises, a new commission member shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council, and
the commission member so appointed shall serve the balance of the unexpired term. Any such vacancies shall be filled within sixty (60) days after the
position becomes vacant. (Ord. 1980, 3-18-2013)
2-13-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
Membership shall be open to a balanced, diverse mixture of citizen representatives of the community at large who are recognized for their interest or
experience in economic or educational development, community growth or international relations. Members shall reside in the City, or shall work for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 169/687
companies with their headquarters located in the City, or shall work for one of the top ten (10) major employers ranked by the highest number of
employees working within the metropolitan Des Moines area, or shall have relevant expertise regarding a foreign nation that would assist the commission
in the performance of its duties. There shall be a minimum of five (5) members of the commission who are residents of West Des Moines, and a maximum
of two (2) nonresidents of West Des Moines may be members of the commission in any given year. Members shall not hold any other elective or appointed
office within the City government. (Ord. 2330, 11-12-2018)
2-13-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To further economic cooperation and cultural and educational exchanges on the basis of mutual friendship and amity between similar worldwide
municipalities;
B. To develop, compile, coordinate and exchange information with officials and citizens of such cities;
C. To plan and/or develop and carry out and/or facilitate mutual economic, educational and cultural activities with officials and/or citizens of sister cities,
other cities outside the United States, or foreign visitors;
D. To encourage and cultivate mutual understanding of the respective economic situations and cultural development of sister cities;
E. To recommend to the Mayor and West Des Moines City Council as to the potential designation of official sister cities;
F. Hold regular public meetings and maintain a written record of its proceedings;
G. Prepare an annual report to the Mayor and City Council summarizing the commission's activities during the preceding fiscal year and recommendations
for the proposed activities for the succeeding fiscal year;
H. Adopt and present to the City Council for its consideration and approval, such rules and regulations to govern its internal organization and procedures
as it may deem necessary and which are not in conflict with Federal, State, and Municipal laws. (Ord. 1980, 3-18-2013)
2-13-6: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER CITY POLICIES:
All administrative, accounting, budgetary, and procurement policies of the City shall govern the commission in all of its operations. (Ord. 1980, 3-18-2013)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSING
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
3-1-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business, occupation or pursuit mentioned in this Title, or for which a license is required by
any other provision of this Code, within the City, without having first obtained a license therefor, issued by the City Clerk. (1993 Code)
3-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this Code shall be made in writing to the City Clerk in the absence of provision to the contrary. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the period for which requested and the fee to
be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the City officials in the issuance of the
permit or license applied for. (1993 Code)
3-1-3: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging
in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to such requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he
holds himself forth as being engaged in such business or occupation, or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or performs or attempts to
perform any part of such business or occupation within the City. (1993 Code)
3-1-4: SIGNATURES REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 170/687
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the City Clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (1993 Code)
3-1-5: INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where provisions of this Code necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such permit or license, the City Clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten
(10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. The Health Officer shall make or cause to be made inspections in regard to such licenses with
respect to the care and handling of food, the preventing of nuisances and the spread of disease, for the protection of the public health; the Chief Building
Inspector shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations, except
where otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chiefs of the Police or Fire Departments, the Director of Public Works or by some other officer designated
by the City Manager. (1993 Code)
3-1-6: FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to
the City Clerk, and no such fee shall be less than the annual amount provided therefor, unless more than six (6) months of the current fiscal year has
expired in which case one-half (1/2) the annual fee shall be paid. (1993 Code)
3-1-7: VEHICLE TAG:
Whenever the number of vehicles or machines used is the basis for any license fee, the City Clerk shall furnish each licensee with a tag, emblem or sticker
for each vehicle or machine covered by the license, and such tag, emblem or sticker shall be posted in a permanent and conspicuous place on each such
vehicle or machine while it is in use. (1993 Code)
3-1-8: BOND OR INSURANCE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE:
Wherever a bond or insurance is required by any provision of this Code as a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, no license shall be issued until all
requirements relating thereto have been complied with and a satisfactory certificate of indemnity, cash or insurance is filed with the City Clerk. (1993 Code)
3-1-9: TERMINATION OF LICENSES:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year of the City, where no provision to the contrary is made.
The City Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the City a statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if annual, three (3) weeks prior
to the date of such expiration; provided, however, that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the
licensee from a failure to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be defense in an action for operation without a license. (1993 Code)
3-1-10: BUILDINGS AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and buildings to be used for
the purpose do not fully comply with all provisions of this Code.1 No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance
of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning regulations of the City.2 (1993 Code)
3-1-11: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided that ten (10) days' written notice thereof is given to
the City Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided further, that all building, zoning and frontage consent requirements of this Code are
complied with. (1993 Code)
3-1-12: NUISANCES:
No business, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact.3 (1993 Code)
3-1-13: POSTING OF LICENSES REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting or operating any licensed business within the City to keep the license therefor posted in a prominent place,
and at all times, upon the premises used for such business or upon such vehicle or machine in the manner prescribed by the City Clerk. (1993 Code)
3-1-14: WAIVER OF FEES FOR DISABLED VETERANS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 171/687
The City Council shall have the power to waive the fees for vending licenses required under any provisions of this Code, upon application for such license
by disabled veterans who are residents of the City. (1993 Code)
3-1-15: INSPECTIONS; ANALYSES; PENALTY FOR INTERFERENCE:
A. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
law, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any provision of this Code, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in control of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of
the City who is authorized to make such inspection, at any reasonable hour that admission is requested.
B. Whenever an analyses of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any provision of this Code, or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the
City requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request.
C. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the City Manager may revoke the license of any proprietor of any business in the City who
refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make such analysis or take an
adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection.
Provided, however, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in control of the
premises, in the name of the City, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample.
(1993 Code)
3-1-16: REVOCATION; SUSPENSION; NO REFUND OF FEE:
A. Any license or permit may be revoked, or suspended for a limited time, by the City Manager at any time during the duration of such license or permit for
any violation by the licensee or permittee or their agents of any provision of this Code relating to such license or permit, including the failure to secure
the same or the intentional misrepresentation as to any material fact upon the application therefor, or to the premises occupied or used, or of any State
or Federal law relating thereto; and such revocation or suspension may be in addition to any monetary fine imposed.
B. In case of revocation or suspension of any license, no part of any license fee shall be refunded by the City. (1993 Code)
3-1-17: NOTICE OF REVOCATION; REQUEST FOR HEARING; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Unless any provision of this Code provides to the contrary, no revocation or suspension of any license or permit issued hereunder shall be deemed
effective until notice thereof has been served personally upon or mailed to the named licensee or permittee at the address specified in the application
for the said license or permit.
B. If, within five (5) days of the date of notice of the revocation or suspension of any license or permit, the named licensee or permittee submits to the City
Clerk in writing a request for a hearing concerning such revocation or suspension, said revocation or suspension shall be suspended until such time as
the City Council shall grant the licensee or permittee a special hearing.
C. If the Council after such hearing affirms the revocation or suspension of said license or permit, the same shall become immediately effective; if the
Council by a majority vote overrules the revocation or suspension, the same shall be deemed null and void. (1993 Code)
Chapter 2
BEER AND LIQUOR CONTROL
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions provided in Iowa Code (2005) section 123.3 are adopted and shall govern the meaning of language in this
chapter unless such term is specially defined elsewhere. In addition, the following definitions are adopted for this chapter:
CHILDCARE CENTER: A facility that provides childcare or preschool services as defined by Iowa Code (2005) section 237A.1(4), which is adopted by
reference.
CHURCH: Any building or site whose primary use is public religious worship.
DRINKING PLACE: A licensed premises primarily engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine and liquor, for consumption on the
premises. "Primarily engaged" shall mean gross sales of fifty percent (50%) or greater of total gross sales which shall be the burden of the licensee to
establish.
OUTDOOR SERVICE AREA: An area outside of but immediately adjacent to a building housing a licensed or permitted premises, which area has been
approved for use for the sale, dispensing or consumption of alcoholic beverages or beer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, chapter 123, code of
Iowa, as amended, and chapter 150 of the Iowa administrative code, as amended. An outdoor service area shall include any outdoor area where beer or
liquor is to be sold, served, carried or consumed by the public and shall be considered as part of the licensed premises. The same federal and state laws
and local ordinances which apply to the licensed premises shall also apply to the outdoor service area.
PRESCHOOL: A facility as defined by Iowa Code (2005) section 237A.1(14) which is adopted by reference.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 172/687
SCHOOL: A public or private elementary, middle, junior or senior high school. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-2: LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or keep for sale alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine without first securing a liquor control license, beer permit, or
wine permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and state law. Iowa Code (2005) sections 123.2, 123.122, or 123.171 are adopted herein by
reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-3: NATURE OF A LICENSE OR PERMIT AND TRANSFERABILITY:
The provisions of Iowa Code (2005) section 123.38 are hereby adopted by reference. The council may, in its discretion, authorize a licensee or permittee
to transfer the license or permit from one location to another within the city; provided, that the premises to which the transfer is to be made would have
been eligible for a license or permit in the first instance, and such transfer will not result in the violation of any law or ordinance. An applicant for such a
transfer shall file with the application a transfer fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-4: CLASSES OF LICENSES AND PERMITS, APPLICATION, INVESTIGATION, APPROVAL, FEES, AND REFUNDS:
The following sections of the code of Iowa (2005) are adopted by reference and shall govern the classes of permits and licenses under this chapter, and
the application, investigation, approval, and fees of such applications and fee refunds: sections 123.30, 123.31, 123.32, 123.35, 123.36, 123.123, 123.124,
123.125, 123.127, 123.128, 123.129, 123.130, 123.131, 123.132, 123.134, 123.139, 123.140, 123.172, 123.173, 123.174, 123.175, 123.177, 123.178,
123.178A, 123.178B, 123.179. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-5: INVESTIGATION PROCEDURE:
A. Upon submission of an original application for a liquor license or beer or wine permit to the city clerk, each person listed in the original application, or
who possesses an ownership interest in the establishment, shall also obtain and provide the city clerk with an officially sealed Iowa division of criminal
investigation ("DCI") personal background check at that person's own expense. Each such person who is not a resident of the state of Iowa shall
submit an officially sealed criminal investigation personal background check issued from that person's state of residence. The city clerk may forward a
copy of the original application documents to the police chief. The police chief may then conduct an investigation as to the truth of the facts averred in
the application documents and transmit the results to the city clerk who will make a recommendation to the city council for approval or disapproval of
the application. No approval of the license or permit shall occur until the city clerk has received the results of any such investigation.
B. Upon submission of an application for renewal of a current liquor license or beer or wine permit to the city clerk, any person listed in the renewal
application, or who possesses an ownership interest in the establishment, who did not previously obtain and provide the city clerk with an officially
sealed DCI personal background check must do so at that person's own expense. Each such person who is not a resident of the state of Iowa shall
submit an officially sealed criminal investigation personal background check issued from that person's state of residence. The city clerk may forward a
copy of the renewal application documents to the police chief. The police chief may then review and comment on the renewal application to the city
clerk who will make a recommendation to the city council for approval or disapproval of the renewal application. No approval for renewal of a license or
permit shall occur until the city clerk has received the results of any such investigation. (Ord. 1912, 3-7-2011)
3-2-6: LOCATION OF PREMISES:
A licensed or permitted premises must be located where the applicable zoning ordinance allows such land use. In addition, a licensed or permitted
premises must be in compliance with applicable fire and building codes. No such licensed or permitted premises in which a class A, B, C, or D liquor
control license or a class B beer permit or class C native wine permit shall be located within two hundred feet (200') of a church, school, preschool, or
childcare center building if said premises is a "drinking place" as defined in this chapter. In determining the distance set out in this section, the
measurements shall be taken on a direct line from the nearest point of a building wherein the said licensed premises is located to the nearest part of a
church, school, preschool, or childcare center building. Any licensed or permitted premises that held such license and permit prior to September 26, 2005,
and which does not conform to the provisions of this section, or any licensed or permitted premises that is rendered out of compliance with this section by
the establishment of a church, school, preschool or childcare center within two hundred feet (200') of such preexisting drinking place, shall be permitted to
continue at such location, providing the applicant for such license or permit is qualified and complies with the provisions of chapter 123 of the code of Iowa,
as amended, and there is no discontinuance of such use of the premises for a period of six (6) months. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-7: OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS:
A. Intent: To provide standards for the approval of requests for outdoor service areas in conjunction with a bar or restaurant in which the serving and
consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted.
B. Application: A licensee or permittee pursuant to this chapter may apply to the city clerk's office for local permission to serve the type of alcoholic liquor,
beer or wine permitted by the license or permit in an outdoor service area. Such local approval is subject to the approval of the Iowa alcoholic
beverages division. The licensee or permittee must demonstrate through its application and support materials the following:
1. The outdoor area is contiguous with the licensed establishment.
2. The boundary of the outdoor area is delineated by a barrier which clearly identifies the area in which outdoor consumption of alcohol is allowed.
3. The barrier is of a design that discourages the free movement of people between the outdoor service area and nonlicensed or nonpermitted areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 173/687
4. If the outdoor service area is to be used for more than a two (2) week period, it shall be constructed of a material that is in character with the
architecture of the contiguous building and shall be in character with the surrounding areas. Snow fence, field fence, or galvanized chainlink shall not
be an accepted material to delineate the space for outdoor service areas used for more than a two (2) week period.
5. Densely planted shrubbery in conjunction with an approved railing or fencing may be permitted if it is determined that the intent is met.
6. The outdoor service area must provide emergency exits sized and spaced in accordance with the fire and building codes. Such exits shall be clearly
identified and provide unobstructed areas to a public way.
C. Construction, Expansion Or Redevelopment: Construction, expansion or redevelopment of an outdoor service area shall be subject to all other
applicable zoning, development, building, and fire safety provisions of this code. Prior to such construction, expansion or redevelopment of an outdoor
service area, the applicant must submit the following materials to the city clerk's office for review by applicable city departments and approval:
1. A diagram which illustrates the outdoor area, in relation to the adjacent licensed establishment and other adjacent buildings.
2. A dimensioned plan of the proposed outdoor area that identifies all exitways.
3. An illustration of the barrier which identifies materials, dimensions and the method of anchoring. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-8: EXPIRATION AND SEASONAL PERMITS:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.34 is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-9: CIVIL LIABILITY:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.92 is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-10: PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or drink any alcoholic beverages on any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley, or public walkway in the city,
except as expressly authorized by the city council or specifically allowed elsewhere in this code. A violation of this section is a simple misdemeanor and
shall be punished as provided in Iowa Code (2009) 903.1.1(a), maximum sentence for misdemeanants, which is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1841, 9-21-
2009)
3-2-11: PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE; PENALTY:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.47, subsections (1), (2), and (3) are adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-12: PARENTAL AND SCHOOL NOTIFICATION FOR PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.47B is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-13: MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS:
A. A person shall not sell, dispense, or give to an intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer.
1. A person other than a person required to hold a license or permit under Iowa Code chapter 123 who dispenses or gives an alcoholic beverage, wine,
or beer in violation of this subsection is not civilly liable to an injured person or the estate of a person for injuries inflicted on that person as a result of
intoxication by the consumer of the alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer.
2. The Iowa general assembly declares that this subsection shall be interpreted so that the holding of Clark v. Mincks, 364 N.W.2d. 226 (Iowa 1985) is
abrogated in favor of prior judicial interpretation finding the consumption of alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer rather than the serving of alcoholic
beverages, wine, or beer as the proximate cause of injury inflicted upon another by an intoxicated person.
B. A person or club holding a liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit under Iowa Code chapter 123, and the person's or club's agents or
employees, shall not do any of the following:
1. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa Code chapter 99B, 99D, 99F, or 99G, or knowingly permit solicitation for immoral
purposes, or immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage or beer on the premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the
hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on a weekday, and between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Sunday and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following Monday, however, a holder of a liquor control license or retail beer permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic
liquor or beer on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor or beer between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday and two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. on the following Monday.
3. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer to any person on credit, except with a bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club
to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, nor to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic
center, or events center.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 174/687
4. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the Iowa
alcohol beverages division, and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption. This prohibition does not apply
to common carriers holding a class D liquor control license.
5. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the
addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original
package which has been so reused or adulterated.
6. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the premises where
sold.
7. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee, or employees of the licensee or permittee, to use or keep on the licensed premises any
alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as permitted in Iowa Code section
123.95. This subsection does not apply to the lodging quarters of a class B liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee, or to common carriers
holding a class D liquor control license.
8. Sell, give, or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer to any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain
whether the person is under legal age, or permit any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether the person is under
legal age, to consume any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer.
9. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine, or any other
beverage in or about the permittee's place of business.
10. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered by the license or permit.
11. Sell or dispense any wine on the premises covered by the permit or permit the consumption on the premises between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on a weekday, and between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Sunday and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the
following Monday, however, a holder of a wine permit authorized to sell wine on Sunday may sell or dispense wine between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. on Sunday and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the following Monday.
C. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person's age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage,
wine, or beer from any licensee or permittee. If any person under legal age misrepresents the person's age, and the licensee or permittee establishes
that the licensee or permittee made reasonable inquiry to determine whether the prospective purchaser was over legal age, the licensee or permittee is
not guilty of selling alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer to a person under legal age.
D. No privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer on Sunday as provided in Iowa Code sections 123.36, subsection 6, and 123.134, subsection 5,
shall be granted to a club or other organization which places restrictions on admission or membership in the club or organization on the basis of sex,
race, religion, or national origin. However, the privilege may be granted to a club or organization which places restrictions on membership on the basis
of sex, if the club or organization has an auxiliary organization open to persons of the other sex. (Ord. 1726, 1-29-2007)
3-2-14: UNLIMITED SERVINGS:
A person or club holding a liquor control license or beer or wine permit, and the person's or club's agents or employees shall not sell, offer to sell, dispense
or serve for on premises consumption an unlimited number of servings of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for a fixed price.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a holder of a liquor control license or wine or beer permit, or its employees or agents, from: a)
including servings or drinks of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer as part of a hotel or motel package which includes overnight accommodations; b) providing a
fixed price for an unlimited or indefinite amount of drinks for a "private event", which is defined as an event restricted to a particular group or persons,
provided that the licensee or permittee shall provide means or method by which to identify persons participating in the private event, such as the use of a
separate room or a means to identify such participants; or c) as otherwise permitted for a special event by the city council (provided, however, that no
permit holder shall be allowed to hold such a special event under this provision c more than twice per year). (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-15: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, WINE OR BEER:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.51 is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-16: CRIMINAL AND CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of section 3-2-13 of this chapter, or Iowa Code section 123.49, except subsection 3-2-13B8 of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. A person who violates subsection 3-2-13B8 of this chapter, or Iowa Code section 123.49, commits a
simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code section 805.8C, subsection 2.
B. The conviction of any liquor control licensee, wine permittee, or beer permittee for a violation of any of the provisions of section 3-2-13 of this chapter, or
Iowa Code section 123.49, subject to subsection C of this section, is grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license or permit by the Iowa
alcohol beverages division or the local authority. However, if any liquor control licensee is convicted of any violation of subsection 3-2-13B1, B4 or B5 of
this chapter, or any wine or beer permittee is convicted of a violation of subsection 3-2-13B1 or B5 of this chapter, the liquor control license, wine
permit, or beer permit shall be revoked and shall immediately be surrendered by the holder, and the bond, if any, of the license or permit holder shall be
forfeited to the Iowa alcohol beverages division.
C. If any licensee, wine permittee, beer permittee, or employee of a licensee or permittee is convicted or found in violation of subsection 3-2-13B8 of this
chapter, or Iowa Code section 123.49, the administrator or local authority shall, in addition to criminal penalties fixed for violations by this section,
assess a civil penalty as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 175/687
1. A first violation shall subject the licensee or permittee to a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty
as ordered under Iowa Code section 123.39 shall result in automatic suspension of the license or permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2. A second violation within two (2) years shall subject the licensee or permittee to a thirty (30) day suspension and a civil penalty in the amount of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
3. A third violation within three (3) years shall subject the licensee or permittee to a sixty (60) day suspension and a civil penalty in the amount of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
4. A fourth violation within three (3) years shall result in revocation of the license or permit.
5. For purposes of this subsection:
a. The date of any violation shall be used in determining the period between violations.
b. Suspension shall be limited to the specific license or permit for the premises found in violation.
c. Notwithstanding Iowa Code section 123.40, revocation shall be limited to the specific license or permit found in violation and shall not disqualify a
licensee or permittee from holding a license or permit at a separate location.
D. In addition to any other penalties imposed under this section or chapter, the Iowa alcohol beverages division shall assess a civil penalty up to the
amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) upon a class E liquor control licensee when the class E liquor license is revoked for a violation of Iowa
Code section 123.59. Failure to pay the civil penalty as required under this subsection shall result in forfeiture of the bond to the Iowa alcohol
beverages division. (Ord. 1725, 1-29-2007)
3-2-17: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; CIVIL PENALTY:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.39 is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-18: HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The city council shall conduct a hearing on each suspension or revocation in the following manner:
A. Notice: The permit holder, and the surety on his bond, shall be served with written notice containing a copy of the complaint against him, the ordinance
provisions or state statutes allegedly violated and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.
B. Hearing: The council shall conduct a hearing, at which both the permit holder and complainants shall be present, the purpose of which is to determine
the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint. Should the permit holder or his authorized representative fail to appear without good cause, the council
may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
C. Rights Of Permit Holder: The permit holder shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to testify and present witnesses in his own behalf and to
cross examine adverse witnesses.
D. Evidence: The council shall admit only reliable and substantial evidence into the revocation or suspension proceeding and shall give all admitted
evidence its natural probative value.
E. Criminal Charges: In the event that criminal charges have been brought against the permit holder on the same facts and circumstances as are the basis
for the revocation or suspension complaint, the council shall await a judgment in the criminal action before conducting the revocation or temporary
suspension hearing required by this section.
F. Record And Determination: The council shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke or suspend a permit under this
section only when, upon review of the entire record, it finds clear and convincing evidence of a substantial violation of this chapter or state law. (Ord.
1648, 9-26-2005)
Chapter 3
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
3-3-1: IMPOSITION; RATE:
A tax is hereby imposed upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and all rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in any hotel or motel as defined
herein, at the rate of seven percent (7%) of such gross receipts derived from the renting of a room, apartment or sleeping quarter while rented by the same
person for a period of not more than thirty one (31) consecutive days. (1985 Code §1-5.01; amd. 1993 Code)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings in this section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 176/687
HOTEL AND MOTEL: Any hotel, motel, inn, or any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or
without meals, except the gross receipts from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and in memorial unions of all state of Iowa universities and
colleges.
LONG TERM RENTAL: Lodging within a dwelling unit available for use or is used to accommodate guests paying a fee or other compensation for a period
of more than thirty one (31) consecutive days.
RENTING AND RENT: Any kind of direct or indirect charge for any room, apartment or sleeping quarters in a hotel, motel or short term or "long term
rental" as defined herein.
SHORT TERM RENTAL: Lodging within a dwelling unit available for use or is used to accommodate guests paying a fee or other compensation for a
period of less than thirty one (31) consecutive days. (Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016)
3-3-3: PAYMENT OF TAX:
Such tax shall be paid as is provided in senate file 336, acts of the 67th general assembly, second session1, and the proceeds of such tax shall be used
for the purposes stated in section 2, subsection 4 of said act:
1.The revenue derived from any hotel and motel tax authorized by this Act shall be used as follows:
A. Each county or city which levies the tax shall spend at least fifty percent of the revenues derived therefrom for the acquisition of sites for, or
constructing, improving, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating, or maintaining of recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities including
but not limited to memorial buildings, halls and monuments, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, and parking areas or facilities
located at those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities or the payment of principal and interest, when due, on bonds or other
evidence of indebtedness issued by the county or city for those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities; or for the promotion and
encouragement of tourist and convention business in the city or county and surrounding areas.
The remaining revenues may be spent by the city or county which levies the tax for any city or county operations authorized by law as a proper
purpose for the expenditure within statutory limitations of city or county revenues derived from ad valorem taxes.
Any city or county which levies and collects the hotel and motel tax authorized by this Act may pledge an amount not to exceed thirty percent of the
revenues derived therefrom to the payment of bonds which the city or county may issue for one or more of the purposes set forth in paragraph (A) of
this subsection. Any revenue pledged to the payment of such bonds may be credited to the spending requirement of paragraph (A) of this subsection.
(1985 Code §1-5.04)
3-3-4: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The tax herein established shall be imposed after voter approved, and such tax shall then be imposed upon the first day of the calendar quarter following
such election; i.e., January 1, April 1, July 1 or September 1, as to which effective notice of such imposition can be given. (1985 Code §1-5.03; amd. 1993
Code)
Chapter 4
ALARM SYSTEMS
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the general public traveling the streets and the West Des Moines police, fire and emergency medical services
departments and their personnel from dangers created in response to erroneous, false and mistaken response calls from security, fire or other specialized
electronic or mechanical alarms or alarm systems.
It is the further purpose of this chapter to provide penalties for the operation of faulty alarm systems and penalties for the unnecessary expenditure of
resources due to erroneous, false and mistaken response calls. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise:
ALARM COMPANY: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association who owns, manages, conducts or carries on the business of installing,
servicing, maintaining, repairing, monitoring, replacing, moving or removing, or leasing in any building or other property within the jurisdiction of the city
any known alarm system as defined herein.
BUILDING: Includes any house, dwelling, apartment, business, structure or place within the city.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical and including all forms of audible exterior and interior alarms arranged
to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry, holdup, and/or medical or other activity, requiring urgent attention, and to which police officers or emergency
medical technicians are expected to respond.
CHIEF: Refers to the police, EMS and/or fire chief (or their designee) of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 177/687
CITY: Refers to the West Des Moines police, fire and emergency medical service departments and their authorized personnel and may be one or more of
such departments where appropriate.
FALSE ALARM: Any alarm that is activated on purpose or by accident or by system malfunction when there is no intrusion, fire, smoke or medical
emergency. The city shall have full authority and discretion to determine those situations and/or circumstances that may constitute a false alarm but which
are not defined below. However, such determinations shall be subject to the appeal process set forth in section 4-4-9 of this code.
A. Error Or Mistake: Any action by any person, firm, corporation or other entity owning or operating any dwelling, building, or place, or any action by an
agent or employee of said person, firm, corporation, or any other entity which results in the activation of an alarm system when no emergency exists.
B. Malfunction: Any unintentional activation of any alarm system caused by a mechanical malfunction, flaw in the design, installation, or maintenance of
the system. This shall not include any activation caused by extraordinary violent conditions of nature such as tornadoes, floods and earthquakes.
C. Intentional Misuse: Any intentional activation of an alarm system when no burglary, holdup, fire or other emergency exists or is in progress.
D. Canceled Alarms: Alarms that are canceled by the alarm companies before the responding police officer arrives at the scene will not be classified as
a false alarm. However, with the exception of fire alarms, if an alarm has been canceled three (3) times during the same thirty (30) day period
(month), the fourth alarm will constitute a false alarm.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical and including all forms of audible exterior and interior alarms arranged to
signal the occurrence of a fire emergency requiring urgent attention, and to which firefighters and emergency medical technicians are expected to respond.
OWNER: Includes any person, firm, corporation, entity or leaseholder causing any alarm system to be installed in any "building" as defined herein. The
owner, or designee on behalf of the owner, shall make application for a permit as required by this chapter.
PERMIT (OR REGISTRATION): Authorization granted by the chief to an owner to operate an alarm system.
RECURRING ALARM: Three (3) or more alarms in a twenty four (24) hour period.
TAGGED OR TAGGING: The method by which the fire department identifies the condition of the alarm system and/or the system's compliance with all
relevant city codes.
VERIFY: An attempt to avoid an unnecessary burglar alarm dispatch request by the monitoring company, or its representative, by attempting to contact the
burglar alarm site and/or burglar alarm user by telephone or other electronic means to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law
enforcement dispatch. As a minimum, a second call shall be made to a different number if the first verification call attempt fails to reach a burglar alarm
user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. Audio verification,
video verification, or cross zoning shall be permitted in addition to the first and second verification call.
WESTCOM: A joint emergency dispatch center providing services for the cities of Clive, Urbandale and West Des Moines. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-3: LICENSING, INSTALLATION AND PENALTIES:
A. Alarm Company Licensing: Any alarm company operating within the jurisdiction of the city shall be licensed with the city clerk or the clerk's designee
prior to conducting business within the jurisdiction of the city.
1. Alarm installation licenses shall be issued annually on a calendar year basis. All applications for licenses shall be filed with the city clerk on forms
provided for that purpose. The annual license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), except, however, if an application is filed on or after July 1
of a calendar year the license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). A license shall thereafter be renewed annually on January 1. Combined license fees
for companies installing both security and fire alarms will be assessed an additional twenty five dollars ($25.00). License fees shall be payable to the
city clerk prior to the issuance of the annual license.
2. An alarm company also providing monitoring of alarms shall have a separate monitoring license. Additional annual license fees are twenty five
dollars ($25.00).
3. The completed alarm company license application, license fee and if applicable, the names and copies of the certifications of those individuals that
will be stamping plans as required by subsection B2 of this section shall be included with the license application.
B. Installation Of Fire Alarm Systems:
1. Commercial Buildings: Installations, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving or removing, or causing to be sold, or leasing of fire alarm
systems in any commercial building within the city shall be installed in accordance with the most recently adopted edition of NFPA 72 and the most
recently adopted West Des Moines fire code.
2. Commercial Fire Alarm Plans: All commercial fire alarm plans submitted for review shall be designed and stamped by an individual holding at a
minimum one or more certifications or designations as required and adopted in the most recent addition to the West Des Moines fire code.
3. Testing Commercial Systems: All new commercial fire alarm systems shall be tested according to the most recently adopted edition of NFPA 72 prior
to the final inspection by the fire department. The fire department will observe a cursory test during the final inspection. Copies of inspections
regarding maintenance, revision and repair of commercial fire alarm systems that have been tagged "RED", indicating noncompliance with this code,
shall be provided to the fire department within five (5) working days after completion of such maintenance, revision or repair.
4. Monitoring Systems: Fire alarm systems shall be monitored by an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) or Factory Mutual (FM) listed monitoring company.
Documents associated with such listings or certifications shall be submitted for approval by the fire department. Tagging of fire alarm systems shall
be by tags approved by the fire department.
5. Licensing Conditions: No system shall be designed to signal an alarm directly to the Westcom dispatch center. No system shall be placed in service
until the owner has applied for or obtained a permit from the city clerk's office. As a condition of licensing all alarm companies are required to use a
UL or FM listed or an approved listed system for monitoring all fire alarm systems. The fire chief shall have the right to review the type of installation
of any fire alarm system being installed. Such review shall not constitute an approval of the type, installation or method of signalization being utilized
or employed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 178/687
6. Initiating Device Installed: Beginning March 1, 2002, all new fire alarm systems shall be installed with each initiating device on a separate point or
zone.
7. Control Panel: Only one fire alarm control panel is allowed per building.
8. Registration Form And Fee: Alarm companies are responsible for providing the owner with an alarm permit registration form provided by the city
clerk's office. They are also responsible for collecting the ten dollar ($10.00) registration fee and submitting the fee and fully completed registration
form to the city clerk's office within three (3) working days of receipt. Licensed alarm companies/installers shall provide a quarterly list of actively
monitored customers and addresses indicating where service is provided in the city of West Des Moines.
9. Notification Of Changes: All alarm companies shall, upon notice from a customer of cessation of existing service, notify the city clerk's office in the
next required quarterly list. The quarterly cessation of existing service list must be clearly differentiated from the quarterly actively monitored
customers lists.
C. Installation Of Burglar Alarm Systems:
1. Beginning March 1, 2002, only security control panels that comply with the ANSI/SIA CP-01 standard and dual technology or PIR-01 compliant
motion sensors shall be installed.
2. Multiple tenants of a building should each have their own separate security system. A separate permit must be obtained for each alarm system
within a multiple tenant building indicating the alarm holder's unique address, including suite or unit number. Businesses, condominium owners,
apartment leasers and other occupied spaces which are located inside of a building such as a mall, strip mall or business suite which may be
secured at a centralized entrance will be responsible for their own burglar alarm and for making arrangements on how public safety personnel will
gain access to their respective property when responding to the alarm. A property manager will not be held liable for tenant/occupant's false alarms.
Monitoring devices active at shared entrances to, or shared areas within, a multiple tenant building must be registered to a single responsible party
or the property manager/owner.
3. Alarm companies are responsible for providing the owner with an alarm permit registration form provided by the city clerk's office. They are also
responsible for collecting the ten dollar ($10.00) registration fee and submitting the fee and fully completed registration form to the city clerk's office
within three (3) working days of receipt. Licensed alarm companies/installers shall provide a quarterly list of actively monitored customers and
addresses indicating where service is provided in the city of West Des Moines.
4. All alarm companies shall, upon notice from a customer of cessation of existing service, notify the city clerk's office in the next required quarterly list.
The quarterly cessation of existing service list must be clearly differentiated from the quarterly actively monitored customers lists.
5. All new multizone burglar alarms activated after July 1, 2003, shall have a "swinger suppression" function. "Swinger suppression" is a feature that is
activated at the panel which can deactivate a bad sensor or zone alarm.
D. Penalties:
1. Penalties For Violation Of Licenses: Unless otherwise provided by section 1-4-1 of this code and/or Iowa Code section 364.22, violation of any rule
or regulation as provided in this chapter shall result in a fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation. A second violation within
one year of license issuance shall result in a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). A third violation within one year of license issuance shall
result in a fine of up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and revocation of the license for the remainder of the license period. An alarm company
operating without a license shall be subject to the penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Any outstanding fines shall be paid by the license
applicant before a new license is issued. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-4: INITIAL REGISTRATION FEE, MONTHLY MONITORING FEE:
A. All residential or business property locations in which an alarm system has been or will be installed shall be registered with the city. The registration fee
shall be ten dollars ($10.00). The owner or occupant of the residential or business property shall complete the alarm permit registration, using the form
provided by the city clerk for that purpose, and pay the registration fee to the alarm company representative, who shall be responsible for the collection
of the alarm permit registration and registration fee for alarms the company sells and/or services. The alarm company representative shall forward the
alarm permit registration and registration fee within three (3) working days of receipt to the city clerk's office.
B. Any owner causing any alarm system to be installed in any building shall, prior to allowing such alarm system to be placed in service, provide to the
alarm company, on the form provided by the city clerk's office, a completed alarm permit registration form that lists the name, address and telephone
number of one person responsible for the alarm system. This person shall be designated as the primary responsible person, and another person, if
available shall be designated as having secondary responsibility. Each responsible person shall have access to the building and the alarm system and
shall have the knowledge and ability to make the system secure in the case of activation. The owner shall also provide on the alarm permit registration
form, the name, address and telephone number of any person, firm, or corporation responsible for servicing and monitoring (where applicable) the
alarm system. It shall remain the responsibility of the owner of any alarm system to ensure that the names and telephone numbers of the responsible
persons maintained by the city clerk are current.
C. Each newly installed burglar alarm system shall be placed in a test mode for seven (7) days prior to the monitoring and reporting of alarms to the city.
This test period provides an opportunity for the new users to become thoroughly familiar with the operation of the system without risking a response to
a false alarm. Deviations from this requirement shall require the approval of the chief.
D. Alarm companies will be required to collect a monthly monitoring fee from customers whose alarms they monitor. Monitoring fees will be one dollar
($1.00) per month for residential dwellings and two dollars ($2.00) per month for commercial establishments. The monitoring fees shall be remitted by
the alarm company to the city clerk's office on a quarterly basis with a listing of the names and addresses of all actively monitored customers as well as
the locations and owner information of any newly installed, unmonitored alarms.
E. Alarm companies shall submit to the city clerk's office, on a quarterly basis, a listing of the names and addresses of all actively monitored customers as
well as the locations and owners of any newly installed, unmonitored alarms. This quarterly list must clearly differentiate between alarm companies'
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 179/687
actively monitored customers and newly installed unmonitored alarms. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
A. The city clerk, upon receipt of the required alarm permit registration and registration fee for all security or residential fire alarms, shall issue or renew a
permit.
B. The city clerk, upon receipt of the required alarm permit registration and registration fee for all commercial fire alarms, and upon written approval of the
chief, shall issue or renew a permit. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-6: SERVICE AVAILABLE:
Every alarm company or agent doing business within the city shall have an alarm agent, supplies and equipment so located as to be able to respond within
twenty four (24) hours to a request for repair, service, or adjustment on any alarm system that such business or agent sold, maintains, or inspects. (Ord.
1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-7: RESPONSE:
A. Prior to notification to the city that a burglar alarm has occurred, the monitoring company shall attempt to "verify" (as defined under section 3-4-2,
"Definitions", of this chapter) every such alarm. When the city is aware that any alarm system is activated, the police, EMS or fire department shall
notify the person or persons listed pursuant to subsection 3-4-4B of this chapter. Said person(s) shall immediately go to the location of the alarm to
meet the police, EMS and/or fire personnel at a safe distance from the facility. The person(s) shall, under the direction of the applicable department,
secure the building and reset the alarm. In the case of a fire alarm, the alarm shall not be reset until the fire department has had the opportunity to fully
investigate the location within any building and determine the reason for the alarm signal. The owner in control of the premises may enter into an
agreement with an alarm company to make the responses required herein. In the event of a recurring burglar alarm, the decision to respond will be
within the discretion of the police supervisor.
B. Any person responsible for any alarm system who refuses or fails to respond when notified of the alarm's activation shall be subject to the penalties
provided in subsection 3-4-11A5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-8: FALSE ALARMS:
A. No alarm system shall be activated by error, mistake, intentional misuse, or malfunction in any dwelling, building or place when no emergency exists.
B. No person shall knowingly or intentionally activate any alarm system when no emergency situation exists. Any person who knowingly or intentionally
activates any false alarm shall be guilty of a municipal infraction pursuant to sections 1-4-1 and 1-4-2 of this code.
C. No person shall knowingly or intentionally test any actively monitored alarm system without first notifying and receiving approval from the Westcom
dispatch center. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-9: LIABILITY OF CITY LIMITED:
A. Upon receipt of an alarm signal by Westcom or the city, the city shall act upon the signal with reasonable dispatch. The city shall not be liable for:
1. Any defects in the operation of any alarm devices or signal lines system;
2. Any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of notification from an alarm system;
3. The failure or neglect of any person or entity regarding the installation and/or operation of the alarm system; and
4. The transmission of alarm signals or the delaying of such signals. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-10: AUDIBLE ALARMS; TIME OUT:
Any exterior audible burglar alarm system installed on or within any building, structure, residence or place of business shall be designed and installed to
"time out" or cease omitting its signaling activities within fifteen (15) minutes of activation. However, commercial or residential fire alarm systems shall not
be designed or installed to "time out" or cease emitting annunciation. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION AND FALSE ALARM FEES:
A. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation And Applicable Service Charges And Penalties:
1. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: The following shall constitute grounds for suspension and/or revocation of a license or permit:
a. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 180/687
b. When an alarm system is knowingly activated by a licensee, permit holder, owner or an employee or agent of said parties, in a situation where no
burglary, fire, intrusion, robbery, medical emergency or other emergency is actually in progress; or
c. When the licensee, permit holder, owner or an employee or agent of said parties has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for a license, permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city; or
d. When an alarm system actuates excessive false alarms and thereby constitutes a public nuisance. Three (3) false alarms, as defined herein, in
the period of one calendar year shall be deemed excessive. New alarm installations shall be granted a thirty (30) day break-in and adjustment
period before being subject to the provisions of this subsection; or
e. When the person or persons listed pursuant to subsection 3-4-4B of this chapter refuse or fail to respond promptly, or are frequently unavailable
for notification of alarm activation pursuant to section 3-4-7 of this chapter; or
f. Failure to pay applicable fees.
2. Service Charge: A service charge shall be made for each false alarm beyond the number permitted in this section. The service charge for each false
alarm shall be:
Number Of False
Alarms In One
Calendar Year
Service
Charge
3 or less $ 0.00
4 50.00
5 100.00
6 or more 100.00 for each
occurrence
3. Revocation Or No Permit Service Charge: If a permit is under revocation or if no permit has been issued, the service charge shall be twice the
service charge established above.
4. Nonregistered Alarms: If an alarm has not been registered pursuant to the requirements of this code, the owner or responsible party will have thirty
(30) days following notification by the city to register the alarm. Failure of the owner or responsible party to register within thirty (30) days of
notification will subject the owner or responsible party to a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) penalty.
5. Failure To Respond Penalty: After being personally notified, failure of an alarm owner or responsible party to respond to the location of an activated
alarm following a request from the police, fire or EMS department to do so will subject the owner or responsible party to a two hundred fifty dollar
($250.00) penalty.
B. Procedure: The city clerk, in the case of suspension, shall serve the permit holder with a written order of suspension stating the reasons for the
suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served or five (5) working days after the order of suspension has been deposited by
ordinary mail postage prepaid in the U.S. mail to the address provided on the permit. When an order becomes effective, the permit holder shall
immediately discontinue the use of any alarm system requiring a permit under this chapter and cease all operations conducted under the authority of
any permit, unless such alarm is mandated or required as a matter of federal, state, or local law and cannot be disconnected. If the owner or operator
of such alarm system continues to maintain the use of the alarm, for each "false alarm" as defined in section 3-4-2 of this chapter, the owner or
operator of the alarm shall be charged a fee per response according to the provisions contained in subsections A2 and A3 of this section.
C. Revocation: A suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15) days after the order of suspension becomes effective unless the permit holder files an
appeal of the order of suspension in the manner as set forth in section 4-4-9 of this code. When an appeal is filed, the order of suspension shall be
stayed pending final determination of the appeal. The suspension shall become a revocation if the decision of the hearing officer upholds the
suspension unless the decision is ultimately overruled by an appellate body pursuant to section 4-4-9 of this code. The suspension shall be dissolved
immediately if the decision of the hearing officer reverses the suspension. If the hearing officer and/or the appellate body concur in the suspension and
at least fifteen (15) days have elapsed since notification to the permit holder of the suspension, the suspension shall be deemed a revocation of the
permit.
D. Surrender Of Permit: If any permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, the permit holder shall immediately surrender the permit to the city clerk.
E. Reinstatement Of Alarm Privilege: Whenever an alarm system which is under suspension, revocation or renewal has been repaired or modified so as to
be capable of functioning properly, or as appropriate, additional user training has been provided and the chief has received from a properly licensed
alarm company written certification to such effect, the chief may recommend to the city clerk reinstatement of the alarm permit, and the permit shall
then be issued or reinstated. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any permit holder aggrieved by the decision of the city shall have the right of appeal regarding a denial of an application for a permit or renewal thereof, or
for any penalty assessed or any order of suspension issued. The appeal will follow the process set forth in section 4-4-9 of this code. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-
2004)
3-4-13: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 181/687
The city finance director or his/her designee shall have the authority to promulgate rules, procedures and forms in order to carry out the terms of this
chapter. Said director or designee shall have the authority to interpret the terms of this chapter in order to effectuate the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 1569,
2-2-2004; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
Chapter 5
BANKRUPT, GOING OUT OF BUSINESS, FIRE SALES
(Rep. by Ord. 2009, 10-14-2013)
Chapter 6
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND TECHNICIANS
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
State of Iowa licensed massage therapists and businesses offering massage therapy services perform an important service in addressing the health and
well-being of West Des Moines residents. Unfortunately, there are businesses that advertise they provide massage therapy and/or other therapeutic
services, but they engage in various illegal activities, which may include prostitution and/or human trafficking. It is not the intention of this chapter to
discourage legitimate, licensed massage therapists or massage therapy businesses from providing their services within West Des Moines. The purpose of
this chapter is to identify and address businesses that engage in the practice of massage therapy without valid licenses and/or are involved in illegal
activities, which may include prostitution and/or human trafficking. Businesses providing massage therapy, but also conducting various types of illegal
activity, are harmful to the health, safety, and welfare of the City and negatively impact the massage therapy profession. The implementation of this
chapter will better enable the City to proactively screen, monitor, and remove businesses that engage in illegal activity. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different
meaning is intended.
APPLICANT: Means any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity applying for a license to operate a massage therapy business.
EMPLOYEE: Means any person who performs any service on the premises of a massage therapy business on a full time, part time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the person is considered an employee, independent contractor, agent, apprentice, trainee, or otherwise.
LICENSE: Means permission granted by competent authority to exercise a certain privilege that, without such authorization, would constitute an illegal act.
The document that confers permission to a person engaged in massage therapy shall be issued by the State of Iowa Board of Massage Therapy. Massage
therapy business licenses shall be issued by the City of West Des Moines.
MASSAGE PATRON: Means any person who receives, or pays to receive, a massage or massage services from a massage therapist for value.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Means a person licensed to practice the health care service of the healing art of massage therapy under Iowa Code chapter
152C.
MASSAGE THERAPY: Means performance for compensation of massage, myotherapy, massotherapy, bodywork, bodywork therapy, or therapeutic
massage, including hydrotherapy, superficial hot and cold applications, vibration and topical applications, or other therapy which involves manipulation of
the muscle and connective tissue of the body, excluding osseous tissue, to treat the muscle tonus system for the purpose of enhancing health, muscle
relaxation, increasing range of motion, reducing stress, relieving pain, or improving circulation.
MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS: Means any business or place of business, including mobile, temporary, and transient businesses, wherein, or on
whose behalf, any of the treatments, techniques, or methods of treatment referred to as "massage therapy" are administered, practiced, used, given, or
applied.
PREMISES: Means the real property, or portion thereof, upon which the massage therapy business is located, including but not limited to, the buildings,
grounds, private walkways, parking lots, and parking garages through which the business has access, control, or ownership.
REFLEXOLOGY: Means manipulation of the soft tissues of the human body which is restricted to the hands, feet, or ears, performed by persons who do
not hold themselves out to be massage therapists or to be performing massage therapy.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Means any of the following specified crimes:
A. Any crime identified in Iowa Code chapter 709 - Sexual Abuse (2017), Iowa Code chapter 710 - Kidnapping and Related Offenses (2017), or Iowa
Code chapter 710A - Human Trafficking (2017);
B. Prostitution, leasing premises for prostitution, pimping, or pandering, as those crimes have been identified in Iowa Code chapter 725 (2017), or any
crime identified in Iowa Code chapter 726 - Protection of the Family and Dependent Persons (2017);
C. Any crime identified in Iowa Code chapter 728 - Obscenity (2017);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 182/687
D. Any crime that requires sex offender registration pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 692A - Sex Offender Registry (2017);
E. Any crime involving serious injury or death to another person, robbery, burglary, felony theft, fraud, forgery, identity theft, aggravated harassment, or
stalking; and
F. Any criminal offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Iowa, would have constituted any of the foregoing
offenses. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall operate a massage therapy business, either exclusively or in connection with another business,
without first obtaining a license from the City as provided in this chapter. Licenses shall be subject to renewal on an annual basis. A separate license shall
be obtained for each business or place of business. The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed business at all times. (Ord.
2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-4: LICENSE FEE:
At the time of submittal of a massage therapy business license application, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk the applicable license fee. The City
Council shall establish the amount of the license fee for initial and renewal licenses by resolution. Any licenses surrendered, suspended, or revoked prior
to the date of expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the license fee. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a massage therapy business license shall be submitted on forms provided by the City Clerk's Office. The application shall include the
following information:
A. The address of the massage therapy business property and documentation establishing the applicant's interest in the premises on which the business
will be located, which shall be in the form of a lease, deed, or other document that establishes the applicant's interest in the property.
B. The full legal name, date of birth, and residential address of each applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent, contractor, or other person who is or will
be present on the premises to perform massage therapy, regardless of the legal relationship between the licensee and the persons performing
massage therapy services.
C. Dates and locations of other places the applicant has owned or operated as a massage therapy business.
D. Each new applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent, contractor, or other person who is or will be present on the premises to perform massage
therapy, who resides in the State of Iowa, shall provide, at the applicant's expense, an officially sealed State of Iowa Division of Criminal Investigation
(DCI) personal background check to the City, which is dated no more than thirty (30) days prior to the application. Those who do not reside in the State
of Iowa shall provide, at the applicant's expense, an equivalent personal background check from the applicant's state of residence.
E. Each new applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent, contractor, or other person who is or will be present on the premises to perform massage
therapy shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the City's Police Department at the applicant's expense.
F. A statement as to whether each applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent, contractor, or other person providing massage therapy on behalf of the
massage therapy business has ever been convicted of specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter. The statement shall include details
regarding the type of each charge and the date and location of the incident(s) in question.
G. A statement as to whether the applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent, contractor, or other person providing massage therapy on behalf of the
massage therapy business has had any license to perform massage therapy denied, revoked, or suspended in any city, county, state, or any country
and the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension.
H. A copy of a state government issued photo identification of each new applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent, contractor, or other person present
on the premises who has or will provide massage therapy, or other proof that the person is legally authorized to work in the United States.
I. Provide proof of current State of Iowa massage therapy licenses for all persons present on the premises who have or will provide massage therapy.
J. All applicants and licensees shall be required to promptly notify the City during the application review or the term of the license if there are any new
owners, managers, employees, agents, contractors, or other persons who are or will be present on the premises to perform massage therapy and shall
immediately submit updated information to the City pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to a personal background check, photographing,
fingerprinting, and proof of identification, as well as any amendments to the statements provided as required by this chapter. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-6: GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 183/687
License applications shall be reviewed by the City and the City shall either grant or deny the license. The City shall inform the applicant regarding the
reasons for a license denial. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-7: CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE:
A. No license shall be issued if the applicant or any of its owners, managers, employees, contractors, agents, or other persons performing massage
therapy at the massage therapy business has a criminal conviction for specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or who is a registered sex
offender. No license shall be issued if the applicant has been denied a license by another community unless the applicant has provided the City with
sufficient proof that the basis for the license denial has been remedied.
B. Licenses shall be issued only if the applicant and all of its owners, managers, employees, contractors, agents, or other persons performing massage
therapy at the massage therapy business are free of convictions for specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or which relate directly to such
person's ability or fitness to legally and safely perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the licensed activity.
C. Licenses shall only be issued to applicants who have provided all of the information requested in the application, have paid required license fees, and
have cooperated with the City during its review of the application.
D. If issued, the license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the business premises so that it can be readily seen by the public upon entering the
business. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-8: LICENSE PERIOD:
Licenses shall be granted by the City on an annual, calendar year basis. Each license issued shall terminate on December 31 of that year. Licensees shall
obtain a renewal license from the City prior to expiration of an existing license. Licensees shall apply to the City for a renewal license by December 1 of
that year to allow the City sufficient time to review a license renewal application. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-9: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the following businesses:
A. Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are licensed to practice medicine or surgery, osteopathic medicine or surgery,
chiropractic, cosmetology arts and sciences, or podiatry in the State of Iowa; or athletic trainers, nurses, occupational therapists, physical therapists, or
physician assistants licensed, certified, or registered in the State of Iowa or acting under the prescription or supervision of a person licensed to practice
medicine or surgery or osteopathic medicine and surgery in the State of Iowa.
B. Massage therapists who are employed or are contracted to perform massage therapy in a business identified in subsection A of this section.
C. Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are licensed, registered, or certified in another state, territory, the District of Columbia,
or a foreign country when incidentally and temporarily present in the State of Iowa to teach a course of instruction related to massage and bodywork
therapy.
D. Businesses which offer the services of students enrolled in a program recognized by the State of Iowa Board of Massage Therapy while completing a
clinical requirement for graduation performed under the supervision of a licensed person.
E. Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons practicing reflexology.
F. Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with established standards and ethics
utilizing touch, words, and directed movement to deepen awareness of existing patterns of movement in the body as well as to suggest new
possibilities of movement, provided that the practices performed or services rendered are not designated or implied to be massage therapy. Such
practices include, but are not limited to, the Feldenkrais method, the Trager approach, and mind-body centering.
G. Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with established standards and ethics
in which touch is limited to that which is essential for palpitation and affectation of the human energy system, provided that the practices performed or
services rendered are not designated or implied to be massage therapy.
H. Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons incidentally present in the State of Iowa to provide services as part of an emergency
response team working in conjunction with disaster relief officials. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-10: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In addition to any other reasons set forth in this chapter, it shall be grounds for denial, suspension, and/or revocation of a massage therapy application or
business license if one or more of the following conditions have occurred:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 184/687
A. If the applicant or licensee has not complied with or has a history of violations of the laws and ordinances that might adversely impact public health or
safety.
B. If the applicant or licensee solicits or advertises to offer services that are in violation of this chapter.
C. If the applicant or licensee has been convicted of any violation, reasonably related to the activity to be or that has been licensed, or has occurred on the
licensed premises, of any City ordinance, State Statute, or Federal law.
D. If there has been any fraud or deception involved in the license application process.
E. If the licensee has been found to be in control or possession of any narcotic drugs or controlled substances on the business premises for which they are
licensed to operate, possession of which is illegal as defined by City ordinance, State Statute, or Federal law.
F. If the applicant or licensee has engaged in willful disregard of Health or Safety Codes and regulations.
G. If the applicant fails to provide all of the information required by this chapter, including any failure to promptly submit updated information.
H. If the licensee permits an unlicensed individual or unlicensed individuals to conduct massage therapy services at the licensee's premises.
I. If the licensee refuses to allow any police officers or government officials to inspect the premises or operations.
J. If the licensee has been found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the Iowa Code.
K. If the business promotes its services through websites that are known to advertise services that are illegal. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-11: NOTICE; APPEAL:
A. Notice: The City Clerk shall have the applicant or licensee served with notice either in person or by regular mail to the licensee's address shown on the
license application notifying the licensee of the license denial, suspension, or revocation and the specific reason(s) for such action. The applicant or
licensee shall be prohibited from any further activities covered by the license during the term of any suspension or revocation, including during any
appeal periods unless otherwise allowed by court order.
B. Appeal: The applicant or licensee shall have ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice to appeal the City's denial, suspension, or revocation of
a massage therapy business license. The appeal must be in writing and filed with the City Clerk during normal City Hall business hours. The Municipal
Code Hearing Officer, as provided in section 4-4-9 of this Code, shall hear the appeal and may reverse, modify, or affirm the City's decision.
C. Appeal Of Adverse Appeal Decision: The applicant or licensee or the City may then appeal an adverse decision by the Municipal Code Hearing Officer
to the Polk County, Iowa, District Court within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the Hearing Officer's decision.
D. Waiver To Contest: Failure to appeal any decision within the provided time frame shall constitute a waiver of any right to contest the decision. (Ord.
2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-12: RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS:
A. Compliance With Law: The licensee and all of its employees and contractors shall comply with all applicable regulations and laws of the City and State
of Iowa.
B. Person In Charge: If the applicant or licensee is a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, the applicant or licensee shall designate a local
representative to serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the business and provide the local representative's telephone
number, e-mail address, and mailing address. The applicant or licensee shall promptly notify the City Clerk in writing of any change to the identity or
contact information of the local representative.
C. Hours Of Business: The licensed premises shall not be open for business nor shall patrons be permitted on the premises between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. No person shall be or remain inside the licensed premises between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., unless the premises is a residence with a valid home occupancy permit.
D. Therapist Required On Premises: Each licensed business shall have at least one licensed massage therapist on the premises at all hours that the
business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. If, during an inspection, there is no licensed massage therapist on the premises, the business
must cease operations and close until a licensed massage therapist is on the premises. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-13: UNLAWFUL ACTS; PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 185/687
A. A person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of an act constituting a violation of this chapter,
whether individually or in connection with one or more persons, or as principal, agent, or accessory, has committed an unlawful act for purposes of this
chapter. A person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly, or willfully, induces, causes, coerces, permits, or directs another person to violate a provision of this
chapter has also committed an unlawful act for purposes of this chapter.
B. Commission of any act declared unlawful and in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided
in section 5-2-1 of this Code. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall also constitute a Municipal infraction punishable pursuant to
section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
Chapter 7
SOLICITORS AND MOBILE FOOD UNITS
3-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents against fraud, protect them from intrusion into the privacy of their homes, and to ensure the safety of the
residents by licensing and regulating solicitors and mobile food units. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED EVENT: A larger event, such as a farmers' market, music festival, or similar activity that has been approved by the city through a special
event permit (typically on public property), a temporary use permit (on private property) or a block party permit. An approved event would also include
events within the city park with the approval of the director of parks and recreation or their designee.
CATERED EVENT: For the purposes of this title, any event where a business or entity has requested the mobile food unit to provide food for a targeted
audience and which the food is served to the customers within a building, structure, or facility and not directly from the mobile food unit, or where the
business or entity requesting the service is paying for the food in a single lump sum payment rather than individual patrons paying for their food
themselves.
CATERING BUSINESS: A business, social or home catering service providing food and incidental services for a social affair, event, or for a private
dwelling, which does not use commercial vehicles that are equipped in any manner for the purpose of the distribution of food directly from such vehicles to
individually paying patrons.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT: Any type of annually licensed food establishment that is a readily movable vehicle (on wheels), that is self-propelled (driven), or can
be pulled or pushed to a location and used for the vending of food or beverage items to the public.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT CLASSIFICATION: The type of mobile food unit based upon the type of menu items being served and preparation and storage
requirements for the defined menu items based upon the Iowa department of inspections and appeals "Mobile Food Unit Guide".
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: A person engaged in the business of selling food or beverages from a mobile food unit.
PERSON: Natural persons, corporations, firms, and organizations of any description, whether acting in person or through agents, employees, or other
persons.
PUSHCART: A nonself-propelled mobile food unit that is pushed or pulled by the mobile food vendor to a location and serves a limited offering of food or
beverage items.
SOLICITOR: Any person who initiates or attempts to initiate personal contact with other persons at or near residences or businesses, including upon
private driveways, parking lots, or public sidewalks in an apparent effort to solicit or attempt to solicit monies or orders for goods, services, subscriptions,
or merchandise to be delivered immediately or at a future date.
STATE LICENSING LEVEL CLASSIFICATION: The Iowa department of inspections and appeals has established classification levels for mobile food
vendors that will be referenced as a part of this chapter. There are more requirements for each of the levels but in general the levels are as follows:
Class I: Nonrefrigerated vending units that serve only intact, nonpotentially hazardous commercially prepackaged food and beverages. Examples include
chips, crackers, cookies, soda, and sweets in manufacturer's packaging.
Class II: Refrigerated or hot vending units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous commercially prepackaged foods from an approved source.
Examples include packaged sandwiches, ice cream bars, individually wrapped and cooked hot dogs. No cooking is allowed as part of a class II unit.
Class III: Units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous packaged food and unpackaged foods with limited assembly. These units are limited to
precooked foods from an approved source that may be reheated on the unit. Examples include pushcart operations, packaged salads, hot dogs, shaved
ice.
Class IV: Units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous foods that are prepared, cooked, cooled or reheated and assembled on the unit.
Examples include self-contained mobile food units, food trucks and any units that are capable of preparing and producing food items from precooked
and/or raw products (meat, fish, poultry, plant foods and dairy products) to finished product for consumption.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant merchandising business selling direct to the public from a temporary
location or structure through a temporary association with a local property owner or business owner. The term "transient merchant" does not include
mobile food vendors. Transient merchants shall be regulated by the provisions of the temporary use permit regulations within title 9, "Zoning", of this code,
unless defined and regulated elsewhere within this code. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-3: SOLICITOR REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 186/687
Any person defined in section 3-7-2 of this chapter as a "solicitor", shall comply with the following requirements:
A. License Required: No solicitor shall engage in business in the city without having first obtained a license as provided by this chapter.
B. License Fee: At the time of the submittal of a license application, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk the applicable license fee in addition to the
nonrefundable application fee. If after review the determination is made that the request should be denied, the license fee will be refunded.
1. The city council shall establish the amount of the license fee for thirty (30) day and ninety (90) day solicitor licenses by resolution.
2. Any licensee who surrenders his/her license prior to the date of expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
C. License Application: An application for a solicitor license shall be filed with the city clerk. The application shall contain the following information:
1. Name, permanent and local address, and local phone number;
2. Date of birth and physical description;
3. Company name and address;
4. Description of merchandise;
5. Last three (3) places of business, including the complete addresses from which business was conducted;
6. Applicant's supervisor or manager and his/her local address;
7. Length of time to be covered by license;
8. A list of all convictions for criminal misdemeanor offenses (excluding traffic offenses) during the ten (10) years prior to application, and a list of all
convictions for criminal felony offenses during the applicant's lifetime. The lists shall include the type of offense, the city, county, and state where the
offense occurred, and the date of conviction of each offense;
9. A list of all pending criminal misdemeanor and felony charges, including the type of offense charged, and the city, county, and state where the
offense allegedly occurred.
10. Applicants who reside in the state of Iowa shall provide, at the applicant's expense, an officially sealed state of Iowa division of criminal
investigation (DCI) personal background check to the city, which is dated no more than thirty (30) days prior to the application. Applicants who do not
reside in the state of Iowa shall provide, at the applicant's expense, an equivalent personal background check from the applicant's state of residence.
D. Photographing And Fingerprinting Of Applicant: Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and a photograph shall be taken of each applicant by the city's
police department and at the applicant's expense.
E. Issuance Of Solicitor's License: The city clerk, upon review of said license application request with the city's development services department, the
police department, and any other appropriate department or agency, shall determine whether a license will be issued to the applicant. A waiting period
of not less than five (5) business days from date of application shall be in effect to provide sufficient time for the city clerk's decision making process. In
making his/her decision, the city clerk shall consider the following factors:
1. The information in the application is found to be correct.
2. The required bond is paid.
3. The applicant has not been convicted of an offense involving sexual abuse and/or a crime requiring sex offender registration.
4. The applicant has not been convicted of a criminal offense involving serious injury or death to another person, kidnapping, false imprisonment,
robbery, burglary, theft, fraud, forgery, identity theft, trespass, harassment, or stalking.
5. Any other relevant considerations that, in the city clerk's determination, would undermine the stated purposes of this chapter.
F. License Exemptions: The following are excluded from the application of this chapter, except such persons or entities must comply with subsection K of
this section and section 3-7-5 of this chapter:
1. Newspaper carriers.
2. Members of local Boy Scout, Girl Scout, Camp Fire or 4-H clubs, and Future Farmers Of America, if the sales are to benefit the parent organization
in its recognized operation and programs.
3. Students representing local schools or local youth sports organizations conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the schools or
youth sports organizations.
4. City, county, state, or federal government officials and employees while in the performance of their official duties.
5. Representatives of any public utility lawfully doing business in the city, while acting in such capacity.
G. Charitable And Nonprofit Organizations:
1. Representatives of charitable organizations exempt from federal taxation and/or nonprofit organizations shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter, except that they shall not be required to submit license fees nor provide a bond. They shall be required to submit an application and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 187/687
application fees under subsection C of this section. In addition to this application, all such organizations shall be required to submit in writing to the
city clerk the following information:
a. Name of organization;
b. Federal identification number;
c. A description of the proposed activity, including use for any money solicited;
d. Period during which activities will take place;
e. Whether any commissions, fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor for his/her efforts and the amount thereof;
f. Names and addresses of officers and directors of the organization; and
g. Names and addresses of all people who will be soliciting or distributing in the name of the organization.
2. If the city clerk shall find that the organization qualifies for the exemption provisions and if he/she finds that all required information has been
submitted in writing, he/she shall issue a license without payment of the required license fees under subsection B of this section.
3. The city clerk may elect to waive the application and fee requirements for charitable and nonprofit organizations based upon the following
considerations: a) if there are many persons soliciting on behalf of the organization; b) if the many persons soliciting on behalf of the organization are
all volunteers; c) if there is a limited duration for the organization's soliciting efforts; and d) if there is a limited location for the organization's soliciting
efforts. The city clerk shall not waive the application and fee requirements for charitable and nonprofit organizations that solicit or attempt to solicit
from residences and businesses.
H. Bond: At the time of application, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a personal surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all ordinances of the city and laws of the state of Iowa regulating solicitors and transient
merchants, guaranteeing attendance at all scheduled hearings and court appearances, and guaranteeing to any resident of the city that all money paid
as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the licensee. Action on such bond may be brought by the
person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond is given. Said bond shall provide an expiration period not less than twelve (12)
months from the date of the application for a license.
I. Display Of License: Upon the approval of a solicitor license, the city shall provide each solicitor with a city issued license that the solicitor must wear
around his/her neck with a lanyard or upon another conspicuous place on his/her person so that other persons can readily see the license at all times
while the person engages in soliciting. The city clerk may elect to waive these license display requirements based upon the considerations detailed in
subsection G3 of this section.
J. Hours To Do Business: All licenses issued to solicitors shall be in force and effect only between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and the time of sunset. No
soliciting shall occur on nationally recognized holidays. Any person found to be acting as a solicitor without a license shall also be limited to these
hours.
K. Prohibited Solicitor Activities:
1. Prohibited Soliciting: No solicitor shall do business or attempt to do business upon any property on which is posted notice that peddling and/or
soliciting is prohibited.
2. Supervisor Or Employer: No person supervising or employing another to solicit or as defined in this chapter shall knowingly allow a person under
their supervision or employment to engage in an unlawful act as defined in this section. Each such unlawful act by each employee or supervised
person may be charged as a separate offense. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the supervisor or employer has knowledge of such
unlawful acts if a police officer or employee of the city clerk's office gives notice to the supervisor or employer of such unlawful acts and,
subsequently, further unlawful acts are committed by the employee or person supervised.
3. Solicitors On Travel Portion Of Streets Or Highways: No person, with or without a solicitor license, shall stand, sit, or otherwise be present in or on
the travel portion of a public or private street or highway in order to solicit or attempt to solicit from pedestrians or vehicle occupants. The entire width
of the roadway shall be deemed the travel portion of a public or private street or highway, including the edge or curb of the roadway and any median
or island that separates directional traffic on the street or highway. Solicitors may submit a written request to the city clerk to be allowed to solicit from
a traffic median or island. Any such request shall include a diagram or map indicating the location for the proposed solicitation, and a specific date
and time for the proposed solicitation. Upon receiving such a written request, the city clerk shall provide the requesting party with the city's
expectations that must be satisfied before the city clerk decides to grant or deny the request. The city clerk shall then grant or deny the request in
part or in its entirety. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-4: MOBILE FOOD UNITS:
A. Mobile Food Unit Licensing: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale of food or beverages to the public from a temporary or mobile
facility within the corporate limits of the city of West Des Moines without first obtaining a mobile food unit license from the city, in addition to any other
state, federal, or county permits, certifications and licenses.
1. A mobile food unit license is an annual license that expires at eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on April 14 each year and must be renewed prior
to the first event after that date.
2. Each mobile food unit shall be licensed separately. No license transfer is allowed.
3. Although certain activities may be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter, any food service to the public in the city of West Des
Moines is expected to comply with all other local, county and state requirements for health inspections, licensing, safety and fire code requirements.
4. The following shall be exempt from this requirement:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 188/687
a. Catering businesses.
b. Grilling and food preparation activities of brick and mortar establishments on the establishments' premises for immediate consumption by patrons
or employees.
c. Concession stands associated with sports or recreational venues that have been approved as part of a site plan or permitted conditional use
permit for the venue.
B. License Fee: At the time of the submittal of a license application, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk the applicable license and permit fees in
addition to any application fees.
1. The city council shall establish the amount of the license fee by resolution.
2. Any licensee who surrenders their license prior to the date of expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
C. Fire Department Inspection:
1. All mobile food units that have cooking facilities or use products with grease laden vapors (class III and class IV state licenses) shall be inspected by
the fire department prior to initiation of business operations within the city.
2. Inspections are required annually and prior to submittal of a license application to the city. It shall be the obligation of the mobile food vendor to
schedule the inspection with the fire department. Class I and II state license classifications are not required to meet this inspection requirement.
3. All class III and IV mobile food units shall have an acceptable suppression system, as determined by the West Des Moines fire department, installed
by April 15, 2017.
4. Upon completion of the annual fire inspection, if the fire department determines that the mobile food unit passes the inspection, the fire marshal or
his/her designee shall sign the mobile food unit vendor license application and identify any conditions for operation as deemed appropriate as a
result of said inspection.
5. At the discretion of the West Des Moines fire department, they may accept the inspection of the mobile food unit by another city's fire inspector to
satisfy the annual inspection requirement. Applicant is obligated to contact the fire department to verify whether or not another community's
inspection is adequate to fulfill obligation of city inspection requirements. The license application will still need to be signed by the West Des Moines
fire department.
D. Mobile Food Unit Vendor Licensing Application:
1. License Required: All mobile food vendors operating within the city of West Des Moines, including those participating under a multiple vendor permit,
short term temporary use permits, long term temporary food and beverage permit, or special event permit issued by the city must obtain a mobile
food vendor license from the city.
Application requests shall be filed with the city clerk on the form provided by the city. No application request shall be accepted for filing and
processing unless it conforms to the requirements of this title. This would include a complete and true application and all of the required materials
and information prescribed, accompanied by the appropriate fees.
2. Submission Time Frame: Applications must be submitted not less than ten (10) business days prior to the proposed start date of the mobile food unit
activities. The city reserves the right to reject any applications that have not been timely submitted to the city. The city clerk shall have the
discretionary right to accept an application made less than ten (10) business days prior to desired start date.
3. Additional Approvals: Receiving approval of a mobile food unit license from the city shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the
applicant's responsibility to obtain any additional permits, licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
4. Application Contents: Application shall be made on a form provided by the city and shall include:
a. Full name of the applicant.
b. Applicant's contact information including mailing address, phone numbers and e-mail address.
c. State health inspection certificate with the classification level of the state license identified.
d. Description of the kitchen facilities, cooking facilities, preparation area, safety features (suppression system, etc.) of the mobile food unit.
e. Photographs of the mobile food unit.
f. Make, model and year of vehicle to be used.
g. County, state and license plate number.
h. Overall size of the vehicle; length and width.
i. Fire department signature on application confirming a passing fire department inspection of class III and class IV mobile food units.
j. Application and license fee(s).
5. Applications Deemed Withdrawn: Any application received shall be deemed withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of
additional requested information from the applicant, and if the applicant has not communicated in writing with the city and made reasonable progress
within thirty (30) days from the last written notification from the city to the applicant. The application fee is nonrefundable. Any application deemed
withdrawn shall require submission of a new application and fees to begin a new review and approval process.
6. Issuance Of License: Upon completion of the review process and a determination of compliance with the applicable regulations, the city clerk will
issue a mobile food unit license and a sticker. The sticker shall be placed in the upper left (passenger side) of the front windshield or the left front
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 189/687
side of a trailer or cart to aid in the visual verification of the licensing for that year.
7. Modification Of License After Issuance: Should the mobile food vendor change the food or beverage being offered during the term of an issued
license that would change the designation of the mobile food unit to a higher state licensing level classification, a new application and fire inspection
shall be required.
E. Mobile Food Units On Public Property: No mobile food unit may be operated on public property except as part of an event approved under a special
event permit by the city clerk's office or as authorized by the director of parks and recreation, or their designee, within a city park.
F. Unattended Mobile Food Unit: No mobile food unit shall be left unattended on any site overnight, unless that property is under the ownership of the
operator of the unit and in compliance with all other city code requirements. No mobile food unit shall be allowed to be stored on a site that is not zoned
appropriately for storage and warehousing, screened in accordance with city code requirements, and/or having received prior city council approval
through an entitlement process. Any mobile food unit found unattended shall be considered in violation of these regulations and subject to license
revocation, municipal infraction, towing, or any other action legally allowed.
G. Music And Sound Making Devices: The use of music or sound making devices as a part of a mobile food unit shall be prohibited, unless expressly
allowed as part of an approved event.
H. Mobile Food Unit Performance Standards: Persons conducting business from a mobile food unit must do so in compliance with the following standards:
1. The mobile food vendor must obtain expressed written consent of the property owner to use the business property on which they propose to operate.
The written consent must be kept in the unit at all times that the unit is on the property.
2. The operator of the mobile food unit shall display their city license in full view of the public in the unit, and have the annual sticker placed in the upper
left (passenger side) of the front windshield, or left front side of a trailer or cart.
3. Mobile food units shall only be allowed on nonresidential properties, unless part of an approved event permit.
4. Mobile food units within three hundred feet (300') of a residential use or residentially zoned property, shall be limited to hours of operation between
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.
5. Mobile food units shall be limited to a maximum duration of eight (8) hours per day on any site, unless part of an approved event permit. A mobile
food unit shall be at one location a maximum of five (5) consecutive days per week (Sunday through Saturday).
6. Only one mobile food unit shall be allowed on a property, unless part of an approved event or the property has received a multiple vendor permit.
Mobile food units not under a multiple vendor permit and on adjacent properties must maintain a minimum separation between units of fifty feet (50').
7. Mobile food units shall serve patrons which are on foot only; no drive-up service to the mobile food unit itself shall be provided or allowed.
8. The mobile food unit must be located on a paved surface, unless approved as part of an event permit.
9. No mobile food unit may be located on a vacant property or lot with a vacant building.
10. No mobile food unit may operate within one hundred feet (100') of a permanent restaurant or business offering food or beverage services unless
they receive expressed written consent of the restaurant or business owner.
11. No alcoholic beverages may be sold as a part of a mobile food unit.
12. Any class I or II mobile food unit, or any class III or IV units that have a city approved suppression system, shall maintain a minimum five foot (5')
separation from a building as measured to the closest building element including awnings or canopies, tents or membrane structures. Location of the
mobile food unit shall not impede pedestrian entering or exiting of a building. Prior to April 15, 2017, a class III or IV mobile food unit that does not
have a suppression system, shall maintain a minimum fifteen foot (15') separation from a building as measured to the closest building element
including awnings or canopies, tents or membrane structures.
13. The window or area where a patron orders and receives their purchase shall be located so as to not require a patron to stand, or create a line that
may cause pedestrians to be in the public right of way, vehicle travel lane, including parking lot drive aisles, or similar situation that may create a
potential safety hazard. Adequate safe space for patrons waiting for their order must be available on the property where the mobile food unit is
located.
14. With the exception of pushcarts as allowed herein, no mobile food unit shall be placed on a public or private sidewalk. Pushcarts may locate on or
adjacent to a private sidewalk or may locate on a public sidewalk as part of an approved event permit, however, a minimum forty eight inch (48")
open walkway must be maintained for passing pedestrians. The placement of the pushcart shall be in such a manner so as to minimize
encroachment into the forty eight inch (48") walkway by patrons waiting in line for service from the pushcart.
15. Signs are limited to those that are attached to the exterior of the mobile unit and must be mounted flat against the unit and not project more than six
inches (6") from the exterior of the unit. No freestanding signs, banners, flags, etc., are allowed. Off premises signs directing patrons to the mobile
food unit are prohibited.
16. During business hours, the mobile food vendor shall provide a trash receptacle for use by customers.
17. The mobile food vendor shall keep the area around the mobile food unit clear of litter and debris at all times.
18. All mobile food units shall be located in such a manner as to not create a safety hazard, such as blocking emergency access to buildings and the
site, obstructing access to fire hydrants and fire department connections, impeding entering and exiting from a building, creating a visual impediment
for the motoring public at drive entrances, intersections, pedestrian crossings, etc.
19. No mobile food unit shall be parked in or otherwise impact access to/from ADA parking stalls.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 190/687
I. Multiple Vendor Permit: The intent of allowing multiple food vendors within a site shall be to provide services to a targeted audience and not to create
pop up commercial centers. A property owner may obtain an annual multiple vendor permit from the city to allow more than one mobile food unit on a
property at a given time. Said permit shall be valid from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight April 15 to eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. April 14 of the
following year. A maximum of four (4) vendors shall be allowed within a grouping within a site/development with the approval of a multiple vendor
permit. Multiple groupings may be allowed. Groupings shall be separated by a minimum of five hundred feet (500') as measured along the shortest
anticipated pedestrian pathway or otherwise separated by a four (4) lane major collector, major arterial or minor arterial roadway or other obstacle that
impacts and/or limits pedestrian movement, such as, but not limited to, water retention ponds, vegetation, or topography. The multiple vendor permit
shall be kept readily available for review in the event issues arise with operations within the site.
The city shall maintain the right to determine the maximum number of mobile food units appropriate for a site. In making that determination the city
shall consider the following: adequate emergency access into and through a site, pedestrian safety and presence of potential pedestrian and vehicle
conflicts, availability of parking to accommodate the mobile food units and patrons without affecting the functioning of the primary use of the site,
potential impact to adjacent streets and/or properties and other potential safety issues that may arise from or be related to the proposed operation.
Additionally, the city shall maintain the right to modify the permit to decrease the number of mobile food units allowed, or prohibit multiple food units
altogether should problems arise with regards to safety or negative impacts on the function of the primary use, adjacent roadways, or adjacent
properties. Site activities which are deemed to be an event (e.g., multiple mobile food units within a site in conjunction with an advertised car show)
shall be governed and permitted under a short term temporary use permit. Additionally, a short term temporary use permit shall be required anytime
that the number of mobile food units desired for a site exceeds the maximum number allowed under an approved multiple vendor permit.
J. Property Owner Responsibility: By allowing the mobile food unit on their property, the property owner shares in the responsibility of ensuring that the
performance standards listed above and the safety of pedestrians and access of emergency vehicles to and around the site are maintained. Failure to
do so could result in the property owner being party to any enforcement actions or penalties allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the alteration
or revocation of a multiple vendor permit. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-5: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Fraudulent Representation/Harassment: No licensee shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quality, character, or quantity of any article, item, or
commodity offered for sale, or sell any unwholesome or tainted food or foodstuffs. No licensee shall harass, intimidate, coerce, or threaten any
individual to induce a sale.
B. Other Licenses And Permits To Be Maintained: Failure of any applicant to maintain the appropriate county, state and federal licenses and permits,
during the term of the local license or permits shall be considered an unlawful act and subject to revocation or any other penalties available to the city.
(Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the city as follows:
1. Grounds: The city clerk may suspend any license issued under this chapter, pending the outcome of an administrative hearing, for any of the
following reasons:
a. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in his/her application for the license or in the conduct of his/her business.
b. The licensee has violated this chapter or any other chapter of this code or has otherwise conducted his/her business in an unlawful manner.
c. The licensee has conducted his/her business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
d. The city clerk has received and investigated three (3) or more found complaints during the licensed period related to the manner in which the
licensee is conducting business.
2. Notice: The city clerk shall have the licensee served with notice either in person or by regular mail to the licensee's address shown on the license
application notifying them of the license suspension, the specific reason(s) for such action, and date and time of hearing with the city clerk to review
the particulars of the suspension. The licensee shall be prohibited from any further activities covered by the license until such time that the hearing
has been held and a determination of suspension and revocation resolved.
3. Hearing: A hearing shall be conducted by the city clerk not more than five (5) business days after he/she has suspended a license. The licensee and
any complainants may be present to determine the truth of the alleged violation of this chapter. Should the licensee or his/her authorized
representative fail to appear without good cause, the city clerk may proceed with the hearing and make his/her findings.
4. Revocation: After the city clerk has reviewed the facts, he/she shall revoke a license if he/she finds by the preponderance of the evidence that a
violation has occurred. The revocation shall be effective immediately.
5. Appeal: If the city clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the licensee or the applicant shall have a right to a hearing before the municipal code
hearing officer as provided in section 4-4-9 of this code. The municipal code hearing officer may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the city
clerk.
6. Effect Of Revocation: Revocation or denial of any license shall bar the licensee or applicant from being eligible for any license under this chapter for
a period of one year from the date of the revocation or denial. There shall be no refund of any fees for any revocation. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-7: PENALTY:
Commission of any act declared unlawful and in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in
Iowa Code section 903.1. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall also constitute a municipal infraction, punishable pursuant to section 1-
4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 191/687
Chapter 8
PAWNBROKERS
3-8-1: DEFINITION:
Unless other expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following term shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, have the
following meaning:
PAWNBROKER: Every person who makes loans or advancements upon pawn, pledge, or deposit of personal property, or who receives actual possession
of personal property as security for loans, with or without a mortgage, or bill of sale thereon, or who by advertisement, sign or otherwise holds himself out
as a pawnbroker, is a "pawnbroker" within the meaning of this Chapter. (1985 Code §7-1.0601)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person or organization shall engage in, or carry on the business of a pawnbroker in the City, without obtaining a license as required by this Chapter.
(1985 Code §7-1.0602)
3-8-3: APPLICATION CONTENTS:
Every person or organization desiring a pawnbroker's license shall apply to the City for a license on an application form approved by the City Clerk. The
application shall contain all information required by the City Clerk, including:
A. Name, place and date of birth and street residence of the applicant.
B. The business address and the name and address of the owner of the premises.
C. A statement whether, within the preceding ten (10) years, the applicant has been convicted of any public offense relating to theft, damage or trespass to
property or operation of a business and the nature and date of the offense and the penalty assessed.
D. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation or partnership.
1. If the applicant is a corporation, the state of incorporation and the names and addresses of all officers and directors.
2. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners.
3. The name of the manager or proprietor of the business. (1985 Code §7-1.0603)
3-8-4: EXECUTION OF APPLICATION:
If the applicant is a natural person, the application shall be signed and sworn to by the person; if a corporation, by an agent authorized to sign; if a
partnership, by a partner. (1985 Code §7-1.0603)
3-8-5: POLICE DEPARTMENT INVESTIGATIVE REPORT:
The Police Department, upon investigation into the truthfulness of the statements set forth in the application, shall report to the City Clerk of its findings
thereon. The applicant shall furnish to the Police Department such evidence as it may reasonably require in support of the statements set forth in the
application. (1985 Code §7-1.0603)
3-8-6: LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEES:
The Police Department shall make a written report of its investigation to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of the application. Upon receipt of
a favorable police report, the City Clerk shall approve the application if the applicant has fully complied with all the requirements of this Chapter, and has
paid the required application fee (nonrefundable) of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for an initial license, and thirty five dollars ($35.00) for any subsequent
renewal thereof. The license shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and renewals thereof, if approved, shall expire on the anniversary date of
such date of issuance. In the event that the City Clerk determines that the applicant for a new or renewal license has not fully complied with all of the
requirements of this Chapter, or the applicant is not a person of good moral character, or the applicant has falsified his or her application, or the applicant
is in violation of any of the provisions herein, then the City Clerk shall, after consideration with the legal counsel, advise the City Council of the basis for
questioning the applicant's qualifications or renewal of license, and the procedures for notice and hearing as set forth in Section 3-8-14 of this Chapter
shall apply before the license shall be issued. Any re-application for license after a denial, suspension, or revoked license shall be considered a new
application. (1985 Code §7-1.0603)
3-8-7: SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED; TRANSFERABILITY:
A license under this Chapter shall authorize the licensee to carry on its business only at the fixed premises designated in the license. No license may be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 192/687
transferred to a different location or to a different person. No licensee or agent thereof shall store any items at any location other than the address listed on
the license. Any person or organization conducting several or separate places of business shall pay the license fee and procure a license for each such
place. (1985 Code §7-1.0603)
3-8-8: AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES LIABLE FOR COMPLIANCE:
Every clerk, agent, or employee of any pawnbroker shall be subject to, and bound by the provisions of this Chapter, and liable to the same penalties and to
the same extent as his employer or principal for any violation hereof. (1985 Code §7-1.0602)
3-8-9: BOND REQUIRED:
Before a pawnbroker's license will be issued the applicant shall submit a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) bond, which shall be conditioned that the
principal named will observe all laws in relationship to pawnbrokers and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and that the principal will account for
and deliver to any person legally entitled any goods which may have come into the principal's hand through the principal's business as a pawnbroker, or in
lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value in money to the person. (1985 Code §7-1.0613)
3-8-10: REPORTS AND RECORDS REQUIRED:
A. At Time of Purchase:
1. Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of purchasing or receiving any personal property, immediately record accurately and intelligently, in ink, in the
English language, complete information on record forms supplied by the City, which form shall include the following information:
a. The name of the person from whom the property is purchased or received, his or her place of residence, Iowa driver's license, social security
number or other identifiable record.
b. A particular, detailed, and accurate description of each article.
c. An estimated value of each article.
d. The amount paid, advanced, or loaned.
e. The date and hour of transaction.
f. The time when the article is to be redeemed or available to be purchased.
g. Any mortgage or bill of sale taken, or receipt or pawn ticket given.
h. When, and by whom, the article was bought back or redeemed.
i. When, to whom, and how, an article was disposed of, if not redeemed.
2. The records required in paragraph 1 above shall be the property of the City, and the pawnbroker shall be the custodial keeper of such records and
make the same available to the City or its designee at any time so that the records may be examined or upon demand by the City or its designee, the
pawnbroker shall immediately surrender possession of such records to the City or its designee. Such records shall be retained for at least a three (3)
year period. (1985 Code §7-1.0604)
B. Daily Reports to Police Department; Information to be Shown: Every pawnbroker who shall purchase or receive from any person any waste, discarded
or secondhand copper, brass, lead, zinc or babbitt metal, or articles made therefrom, any articles of jewelry or precious stones, or any secondhand
sheet copper or brass, copper, or brass wire, lead (sheet or pipe), zinc (sheet or pipe), plumbing or plumbing materials or fixtures; electric wire,
apparatus or fixtures, door locks, knobs, bolts, plates, bells, hinges or other door fixtures, window locks, bolts, weights, curtain rods and hooks, and
other window fixtures, nickel or nickel-plated articles, silver-plated articles, car or railroad brasses or any guns, pistols, tools, instruments, or
implements, or parts thereof, or any used bicycle, motorcycle or automobile, or parts thereof, or who shall purchase or receive, except from the
manufacturer thereof, any bicycle, motorcycle, or automobile tube, tire or other accessory shall within twenty four (24) hours after purchasing or
receiving such articles report the same in writing to the Police Department and shall keep and maintain records of such personal property as required
under this Chapter. (1985 Code §7-1.0605)
3-8-11: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. No pawnbroker, nor any agent or employee thereof, shall purchase or receive any personal property from any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. No pawnbroker shall purchase or receive any property or surrender any property between Saturday seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and Sunday twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight.
C. No pawnbroker shall conceal, secrete, or destroy for the purpose of concealing, any article purchased or received by him for the purpose of preventing
identification thereof by a police officer of any person claiming to own the same.
D. No pawnbroker shall sell or otherwise dispose of any article during the time any person has the right to buy back or redeem the same.
E. No pawnbroker shall clean, repair, dye, or alter in any manner whatsoever any article of clothing taken in pawn or purchased outright for a period of
fifteen (15) days following receipt thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 193/687
F. No pawnbroker nor any agent or employee thereof, shall purchase or receive on deposit any item from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated
person.
G. No pawnbroker shall sell, or permit to be redeemed or otherwise disposed of any article which he has reason to believe has been stolen, or which is
adversely claimed by any person, or which he has been notified in writing by a police officer not to sell, release, or otherwise dispose of by a police
officer. The pawnbroker shall acknowledge receipt of notification by the police officer, and such notification not to sell, release or dispose of any article
shall not exceed thirty (30) days from acknowledgment of notice by pawnbroker.
H. Any pawnbroker, agent or employee thereof who shall fail to keep records as required under this Chapter, or fail to make the required record entries, or
shall intentionally or knowingly make any false or unintelligible record entry, or make any record entry which he or she has reason to believe is untrue,
or who shall fail to make the reasonable inquiries necessary to enable him or her to make bona fide record entries, or who shall fail to produce records
upon request by an officer having authority to examine the records, or who shall destroy or negligently permit the records to be destroyed or lost, shall
be guilty of a prohibited act under this Chapter. (1985 Code §7-1.0611)
3-8-12: PAWNED ARTICLES; REQUIREMENTS FOR:
A. Destroying, Disposing, or Dismantling Articles for Fifteen Days: No person purchasing or receiving any article described in the preceding Section shall
melt, alter, mutilate, destroy, or dispose of the same within fifteen (15) days after the report is made to the Police Department except upon written
consent from the Chief of Police or his designee. Every bicycle, motorcycle, or automobile purchased or received shall be kept intact for a period of
fifteen (15) days unless permission to dismantle the same has been obtained in writing from the Chief of Police. (1985 Code §7-1.0606)
B. Change or Mutilation of Jewelry: No article of jewelry shall be changed in its form or altered, dismantled, or mutilated in any way within the time fixed for
sale or redemption. (1985 Code §8-1.0607)
3-8-13: STOLEN PROPERTY:
A. Search for Stolen Property: Whenever any police officer shall have reason to believe that any pawnbroker has in its possession or on the premises
listed on the license any stolen property, he shall have the right and duty to enter and search the premises of such pawnbroker for the purpose of
discovering stolen property. (1985 Code §7-1.0608)
B. Examination of Premises by Officer: No pawnbroker or any other person shall refuse, resist or attempt to prevent any peace officer with or without
warrant, from examining the premises listed on the license by the pawnbroker for the purpose of discovering stolen property. (1985 Code §7-1.0609)
C. Segregation of Suspected Stolen Goods: Every pawnbroker shall, upon request of a police officer, segregate items or categories of items which said
police officer reasonably suspects may be stolen goods. All segregated items shall be held for thirty (30) days unless sooner released from segregation
by the police officer ordering such segregation. (1985 Code §7-1.0610)
3-8-14: LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Grounds for Denial, Suspension, or Revocation: Any license under this Chapter may be denied, suspended, or revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. The proposed use is in conflict with the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance.1
2. The proposed use is in conflict with any health, building, building maintenance or other provisions of the City Code or State law.
3. The violation of any provision of this Chapter.
4. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements in securing a license.
5. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made in the course of the licensee's business.
6. Conviction within the preceding five (5) years, or any public offense relating to theft, damage or trespass to property or operation of a business.
7. A finding that the applicant or licensee is not a person of good moral character.
B. Denial, Suspension or Revocation Proceedings: The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of information alleging that grounds exist to deny, suspend or revoke
the license of any applicant or licensee under this Chapter and after consulting with the legal department report the circumstances to the City Council. If
the City Clerk believes reasonable grounds exist to deny the application for a license or to suspend or revoke the license of the pawnbroker, he shall
cause a notice to be sent by ordinary mail to the applicant or licensee which notice shall state that a denial, suspension or revocation hearing has been
set before the City Council, the grounds for the proposed denial, suspension or revocation, the date and time of hearing and the place where the
hearing will be conducted. Upon such hearing, if the City Council shall determine that one or more of such grounds do exist, it may deny any
application or suspend or revoke any existing license. In the event such license is revoked, no license under this Chapter shall be issued to that
licensee for a period of one year. (1985 Code §7-1.0612)
Chapter 9
HOUSE MOVERS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 194/687
3-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect and preserve the public safety and well-being by licensing and regulating house and building movers. (1985 Code
§7-1.0201)
3-9-2: HOUSE MOVER DEFINED:
A "house mover" shall mean any person who undertakes to move a building or similar structure upon, over or across the public streets, alleys, walks or
property using skids, jacks, dollies or any method other than upon a properly licensed motor vehicle. (1985 Code §7-1.0202)
3-9-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as herein defined without a valid permit from the City for
each house, building or similar structure to be moved. (1985 Code §7-1.0203)
B. Permit Fee: A permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the City Clerk. A separate permit shall
be required for each house, building or similar structure to be moved. (1985 Code §7-1.0207)
3-9-4: APPLICATION:
Application for a house mover's permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk. The application shall include:
A. Name and Address: The applicant's full name and address and if a corporation the names and addresses of it's principal officers.
B. Building Location; An accurate description of the present location and future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
C. Routing Plan: A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, City Engineer and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the shortest route
compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety. (1985 Code §7-1.0204)
3-9-5: PERMIT ISSUANCE AND TERM:
Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and payment of the required fee the Clerk shall issue a permit. Such permits shall
be valid only for a period of six (6) months following their issuance. (1985 Code §7-1.0208)
3-9-6: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Bond Required: The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company
authorized to issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee's payment for any damage done to the City or to public property,
and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure. (1985 Code §7-1.0205; 1993 Code)
B. Insurance Required: Each applicant shall also have filed a certificate of insurance indicating that he is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the
duration of the permit covering himself and his agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
1. Bodily Injury: Two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per person; five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident.
2. Property Damage: Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident. (1985 Code §7-1.0206; 1993 Code)
3-9-7: TIME LIMIT:
No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve (12)
hours without having first secured the written approval of the City. (1985 Code §7-1.0210)
3-9-8: PROTECTION OF LIFE AND PROPERTY:
A. Public Safety: At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall
maintain flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times
when the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or flares
at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. (1985 Code §7-1.0210)
B. It shall be unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is
moved shall be at least one inch (1") in width for each one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of such building. If there is any question as to the weight
of a house or building, the estimate of the Engineer as to such weight shall be final. (1985 Code §7-1.0212; 1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 195/687
C. Electric Wires: The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, telegraph and electric wires and poles are removed when
necessary and replaced in good order and shall be liable for the costs of the same. The holder of the permit for moving a building shall give twenty four
(24) hours notice to the owner of any telephone, telegraph or electric wires to remove such wires, and the owner of such wires may either remove or
direct the removal and replacing of such wires, and the holder of the permit shall pay the reasonable costs thereof. (1985 Code §7-1.0213)
3-9-9: REMOVAL BY CITY:
In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of Section 3-9-7 of this Chapter, the City is authorized to remove such building or
structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on his bond. (1985 Code §7-1.0211)
Chapter 10
CIGARETTE SALES
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter the following terms are defined:
CIGARETTE: Any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of being flavored, adulterated or mixed
with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material. It also shall mean cigarette papers, wrappers and
tubes. It shall further include cigarillos provided their weight does not exceed three (3) pounds per thousand. However, this definition shall not be
construed to include cigars.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any building or structure in which cigarettes are sold, or are kept for the purpose of sale, by a retailer.
RETAILER: Every individual, firm, corporation or other association that sells, distributes or offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of
sale for consumption, cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales. (1985 Code §7-2.01)
3-10-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES:
A. Permit Required: No retailer shall distribute, sell or solicit the sale of any cigarettes within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The
permit shall be displayed publicly in the place of business so that it can be seen easily by the public. No permit shall be issued to a minor. (1985 Code
§7-2.02)
B. Fees: The fees for issuing or renewing a cigarette permit shall be as follows:
For Permits Issued
or Renewed During
Fee
July, August or September $100.00
October, November or December 75.00
January, February or March 50.00
April, May or June 25.00
(1985 Code §7-2.04)
C. Refunds: A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the City, except during April, May or June, as follows:
Permits Surrendered
During
Amount of
Refund
July, August or September $75.00
October, November or December 50.00
January, February or March 25.00
(1985 Code §7-2.08)
3-10-3: APPLICATION:
A completed application on forms provided by the State Department of Revenue and accompanied by the fee provided in subsection 3-10-2B shall be filed
with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is
not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant. (1985
Code §7-2.03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 196/687
3-10-4: ISSUANCE; TERM:
A. Issuance: The Council shall issue or renew a permit upon a determination that such issuance or renewal will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or morals, and shall certify its action in issuing a permit to the State Department of Revenue.
B. Term: Permits expire on June 30 of each year. (1985 Code §7-2.07)
3-10-5: PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE:
A permit shall not be transferable to another place of business or retailer. However, if a retailer who holds a valid permit changes his place of business, the
Council, if it decides to issue a new permit to him, shall not charge any additional fee for the unexpired term of the original permit if the retailer has not
received a refund for surrender of the original permit. (1985 Code §7-2.06)
3-10-6: REVOCATION:
The Council, after notice and hearing, shall revoke a permit if it finds the retailer has substantially violated the provisions of this Chapter or chapter 98,
Code of Iowa, or if grounds exist that would be sufficient for refusal to issue such a permit. The Clerk shall give five (5) days' written notice to the retailer by
mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail to the place of business as it appears on his application for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the
contemplated revocation and the time and place at which he may appear and be heard. The hearing shall be held at the regular meeting place of the
Council. (1985 Code §7-2.09)
3-10-7: RENEWAL AFTER REVOCATION:
Upon revocation, no new permit shall be issued to the retailer or for the place of business for one year from the date of revocation unless good cause to
the contrary is shown the Council. (1985 Code §7-2.10)
Chapter 11
PUBLIC DANCE HALLS
(Rep. by Ord. 1649, 9-26-2005)
Chapter 12
ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES
3-12-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle for commercial purposes on any street or for any purpose on a street within the City except in
accordance with the terms of a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-2: PERMIT ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS; FEE; TERM:
A. Issuance Requirements: Upon application, the City Clerk shall issue an animal-drawn vehicle permit if it is found that:
1. The proposed animals, vehicles, routes, hours, frequency and other aspects of use of the streets will not unreasonably interfere with the efficient
movement of other traffic.
2. The applicant presents a workable plan for sanitation and the disposal of animal excrement.
3. If the applicant houses animals in the City, the applicant presents a workable plan for feeding, sheltering, quartering and stabling the animals used
that is in compliance with this Code and all other applicable law.
4. The commercial use applicant provides an insurance certificate to the City issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State,
demonstrating insurance coverage to the applicant with a minimum liability of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for the injury or death of
any one person and subject to the same limit per person, a minimum liability of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for the injury or death of
any number of persons in one accident, and a minimum liability of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for damage to property of others, but
excluding property of the insured. The insurance certificate shall provide that notice shall be given to the City Clerk thirty (30) days prior to any
cancellation or termination of insurance. The cancellation or termination of the insurance shall automatically revoke the permit.
B. Fee: The applicant shall pay a permit fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) per commercial use vehicle.
C. Term: The term of a permit is one year, beginning on the date of approval. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 197/687
3-12-3: RESTRICTIONS:
The City Clerk shall prescribe the form of the application and may require such information as is reasonably necessary to make the required findings. The
City Clerk shall place in the permit such restrictions on time, place and manner as reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of this Section.
Permittees are in any case restricted to operating within the terms of their own application. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-4: VEHICLE COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
All animal-drawn vehicles shall comply with all applicable statutes of the State and this City Code. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-5: HEALTH AND SANITATION:
The permit holder shall comply with all applicable health and sanitation laws and regulations of the City, County and State, and further shall meet at least
the following specific sanitation conditions:
At the permit holder's expense, the operator or permit holder of an animal-drawn vehicle shall, as soon as possible, remove any animal excrement caused
by said animal that falls upon the City streets. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-6: DAMAGES AND EXPENSES:
A permit holder shall pay, and, by acceptance of a permit, specifically agrees to pay, any and all damages or penalties that the City may be legally required
to pay as a result of the permittee's operation or maintenance of an animal-drawn vehicle under this Chapter, whether or not the acts or omissions
complained of are authorized, allowed or prohibited by the City.
A permit holder shall also pay all expenses incurred by the City in defending itself with regard to any and all damages and penalties mentioned in this
Chapter. These expenses include all out-of-pocket expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees and the reasonable value of services rendered by any
employee of the City. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-7: PERMIT REVOCATION; APPEAL:
A permit may be revoked for violations of this Chapter. Prior to revocation, the permit holder shall be given ten (10) days' written notice. Upon request, the
permit holder may appear before the City Clerk to appeal the revocation. The permit holder may appeal the City Clerk's final decision to the City Council if
such appeal is filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of that decision. The City Clerk may refuse to re-issue a permit for a period of one year for
violations of this Chapter. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-8: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this City Code. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
Chapter 13
AFTER HOURS BUSINESSES
3-13-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the reasonable regulation of existing after hours businesses within the city of West Des Moines and to prohibit
new after hours businesses from entering the city of West Des Moines. The city council finds that the existence of after hours businesses, which allow the
on premises consumption of alcohol during early morning hours, in the greater Des Moines metropolitan area has caused detrimental effects on the health,
safety, welfare, and quality of life of residents, visitors, and upon cities in general. The city council has deemed it necessary to limit the number of after
hours businesses located within the city of West Des Moines. The city council also intends that the existing after hours businesses within the city of West
Des Moines eventually will be discontinued, removed, or replaced by other types of businesses. Based on these findings and intentions, the city council
has enacted the following regulations for after hours businesses in the city of West Des Moines. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED: The building or part of the building which houses the after hours business has not been occupied for that business purpose for a period of
six (6) consecutive months. An after hours business license suspension or revocation shall be included in the calculation of the six (6) month abandonment
period.
AFTER HOURS BUSINESS: Any business open during any time between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. any day of the
week and where patrons are allowed to bring their own beer and wine onto the business premises.
BEER: Any liquid capable of being used for beverage purposes made by the fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley, malt, and hops, with or
without unmarred grains or decorticated and degerminated grains or made by the fermentation of or by distillation of the fermented products of fruit, fruit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 198/687
extracts, or other agricultural products, containing more than one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) of alcohol by volume but not more than five percent (5%) of
alcohol by weight but not including mixed drinks or cocktails; or, as otherwise defined by succeeding state legislation.
BUSINESS PREMISES OR LICENSED PREMISES: All buildings and properties including parking lots owned or leased for the benefit of the operation of
the after hours business.
DESIGNATED SECURITY EMPLOYEE: An agent, contract employee, independent contractor, servant, or employee of a licensee or permittee who works
in a security position in any capacity at a commercial establishment licensed or permitted under this chapter.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Premises licensed by the state department of inspections and appeals and regularly or seasonally kept open in a bona fide manner
for the lodging of transient guests and with twenty (20) or more sleeping rooms.
OCCUPIED: Operating the after hours business on a regular basis, which consists of allowing members of the public to enter the premises at least once a
week for the purposes for which the person obtained the after hours business license.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, corporation, or club owning or operating an after hours business.
PERSON OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER (Or As Otherwise Defined By Succeeding State Legislation): Any person who meets all of the following
requirements:
A. The person has such financial standing and good reputation as will satisfy the city that the person will comply with this chapter and all laws,
ordinances, and regulations applicable to the person's operations under this chapter.
1. In evaluating an applicant's "financial standing" the city may consider the following: an applicant's "financial standing" may include, but is not
limited to, verified source(s) of financial support and adequate operating capital for the applicant's proposed after hours business, a record of
prompt payment of local or state taxes due, a record of prompt payment to the city and the various utility companies of fees or charges due the city
or the utility companies for municipal services or utilities provided, and prompt payment of or satisfaction of any fee, fine, or civil penalty imposed
pursuant to any chapter of this code.
2. In evaluating an applicant's "good reputation", the city may consider such factors as, but not limited to, the following: a pattern or practice of
violating any of the requirements or prohibitions set out in this chapter to which the licensee or licensee's agents or employees have pleaded guilty
or been found guilty in a criminal court or have been otherwise sanctioned under this chapter, a pattern or practice of violating any of the state
alcoholic beverages laws and regulations for which corrective action has been taken, convictions of licensee of laws relating to operating a motor
vehicle while under the influence of drugs or alcohol, convictions of any laws relating to illegal drug use, possession or sale, convictions of
misdemeanor charges, their recency and severity.
B. The person is not subject to or prohibited from obtaining a liquor control license or a wine or beer permit.
C. Notwithstanding subsection E of this definition, the applicant is a citizen of the United States and a resident of the state of Iowa, or licensed to do
business in the state of Iowa in the case of a corporation. Notwithstanding subsection E of this definition, in the case of a partnership, only one
general partner need be a resident of the state of Iowa.
D. The person has not been convicted of a felony. However, if the person's conviction of a felony occurred more than five (5) years before the date of
the application for a license or permit, and if the person's rights of citizenship have been restored by the governor, the city may determine that the
person is of good moral character notwithstanding such conviction.
E. The requirements of this definition apply to the following:
1. Each of the officers, directors, and partners of such person.
2. A person who directly or indirectly owns or controls ten percent (10%) or more of any class of stock of such person.
3. A person who directly or indirectly has an interest of ten percent (10%) or more in the ownership or profits of such person.
4. For the purposes of this subsection, an individual and the individual's spouse shall be regarded as one person.
WINE: Any beverage containing more than five percent (5%) of alcohol by weight but not more than seventeen percent (17%) of alcohol by weight or
twenty one and twenty five hundredths percent of alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other
agricultural products but excluding any product containing alcohol derived from malt or by the distillation process from grain, cereal, molasses, or cactus;
or, as otherwise defined by succeeding state legislation. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-3: LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED; ELIGIBILITY:
No person shall operate an after hours business in the city without first applying for and paying the license fee to procure an after hours business license.
This chapter, however, shall not apply to hotels or motels. Upon meeting the requirements imposed by this chapter, a person who is of good moral
character as defined by this chapter, may apply for and hold an after hours business license. For a corporation or partnership, the officers of the
corporation and the partners of a partnership shall be persons of good moral character as defined by this chapter or state law. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-4: CONDITIONS FOR LICENSE APPROVAL:
The following conditions and regulations must be met by an applicant for an after hours business license:
A. The applicant must give consent in writing on the application that members of the fire and police departments and the building inspector may enter upon
the business premises without warrant to inspect for violations of the provisions of state and municipal law, as well as for compliance with other
applicable fire, building, and health code regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 199/687
B. The premises for which an after hours business license is sought must be located within an area where such business is permitted and conforms to the
city's zoning requirements.
C. The premises for which an after hours business license is sought must also have been lawfully established as an after hours business on or before
December 31, 2010, and must have been in active use. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof to show that the premises have been actively used
as an after hours business on or before December 31, 2010, and that the use has not been abandoned.
D. All applicable permits and licenses provided for by this code shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises of the license holder and at all
times shall be subject to inspection.
E. No after hours business license shall be approved for premises which do not conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, and health and fire
regulations. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
All applicants for an after hours business license shall apply in writing to the city clerk. Applications for the issuance of an after hours business license shall
be filed at the time and in the number of copies as the city clerk shall prescribe, on forms prescribed by the city clerk.
All applications shall be made in the name of the owner of the business, whether an individual, a partnership, or a corporation, and shall contain the
following:
A. The full name, residence address, business address, date of birth, and social security number of the applicant and, when the applicant is a partnership
or corporation, of the partners or officers.
B. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the names
and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each stockholder holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation; if
the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and the residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If
one or more of the partners is a corporation, the subsections of this section pertaining to a corporate application apply.
C. The name and address of the owner of the building where such after hours business will be located.
D. If required by the city clerk, a sketch or diagram of the proposed licensed premises, in such form and containing such information as the city clerk may
require.
E. A copy of a valid Iowa sales tax permit for operation of the after hours business. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-6: SECURITY REQUIRED; SECURITY EMPLOYEE TRAINING:
A. An after hours business license holder shall provide adequate security to provide for crowd control and the safety of patrons.
B. The city may, as a condition of obtaining and holding an after hours business license or permit, require a "designated security employee" as defined in
this chapter to be trained and certified in security methods. This training shall include, but is not limited to, mediation techniques, civil rights or unfair
practices awareness, and providing instruction on the proper physical restraint methods used against a person who has become combative. (Ord.
1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-7: INVESTIGATION PROCEDURE:
A. Upon submission of an original application for an after hours business license to the city clerk, each person listed in the original application shall also
obtain and provide the city clerk with an officially sealed Iowa division of criminal investigation ("DCI") personal background check at that person's
expense. The city clerk may forward a copy of the original application documents to the police chief. The police chief may then conduct an investigation
as to the truth of the facts averred in the application documents and transmit the results to the city clerk who will make a recommendation to the city
council for approval or disapproval of the application. No approval of the license or permit shall occur until the city clerk has received the results of any
such investigation.
B. Upon submission of an application for renewal of a current after hours business license to the city clerk, any person listed in the renewal application
who did not previously obtain and provide the city clerk with an officially sealed DCI personal background check must do so at that person's own
expense. The city clerk may forward a copy of the renewal application documents to the police chief. The police chief may then review and comment
on the renewal application to the city clerk who will make a recommendation to the city council for approval or disapproval of the renewal application.
No approval for renewal of a license or permit shall occur until the city clerk has received the results of any such investigation.
C. The city's building official, zoning enforcement officer, and the fire chief or their designees shall inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the
city's requirements. No license or permit shall be approved or issued unless or until the city clerk finds that the applicant has fully complied with all
requirements of this chapter and all applicable ordinances and codes regulating fire, buildings, health, and zoning. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-8: LICENSE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 200/687
A. An applicant for an after hours business license shall submit a fee to the city clerk at the time of filing the application.
B. All after hours business licenses, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall expire at six o'clock (6:00) A.M., one year from the date of issuance.
C. An applicant who files for renewal less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of any license expiration shall pay a late fee.
D. If the application is denied or if the application is withdrawn before final action is taken by the city clerk, a portion of the application fee shall be retained
by the city clerk for the cost of administration.
E. The license fee, its nonrefundable portion, and the late fee for the after hours business license shall be in the amounts set in the schedule of fees
adopted by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-9: LICENSE RENEWALS:
Every person operating an after hours business shall apply for an after hours business license annually as if for an original license. There shall be no
automatic renewal. Such application shall be filed and the fee paid not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the current license. (Ord. 1899,
12-27-2010)
3-13-10: SCOPE OF LICENSE; SALE, TRANSFER, AND ASSIGNABILITY:
A. An after hours business license shall be a personal privilege and is revocable for cause. It is not property nor is it subject to attachment and execution
nor alienable nor assignable, and it shall cease upon the death of the permittee or licensee, or terminate upon sale.
B. Every permit or license shall be issued in the name of the applicant, and no person holding a permit or license shall allow any other person to use the
permit or license.
C. No after hours business license shall be sold or transferred. The purchaser of any after hours business or of the majority of the stock of any corporation
operating an after hours business shall make application for and obtain a new license before operating such business at the location for which the
license has been issued. The after hours business license shall not be assignable. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-11: EXAMINATION OF PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for a person to refuse, resist, or attempt to prevent any city employee or any authorized city agent from making a reasonable
examination of the business premises. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-12: VIOLATION BY CLERKS, AGENTS, AND EMPLOYEES:
Every clerk, agent, or employee of any after hours business shall be subject to and bound by this chapter and state law and be liable for the same
penalties and to the same extent as his or her employer or principal for any violation of this chapter or state law. Any violation of this chapter or state law
by any clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall be deemed the act of the licensee and shall subject the license of said licensee to civil penalty,
suspension, or revocation. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-13: PROCEDURES FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR CIVIL PENALTY:
A. Whenever the city council finds that the licensee or its employees or agents have furnished any false information required under this chapter, or has
violated or failed to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or state law, the city council may impose a civil penalty not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) upon the licensee and/or suspend or revoke the license.
B. No civil penalty, suspension, or revocation shall issue except upon notice delivered to the licensee by mailing notice via regular mail, addressed to the
licensee at the licensed premises, a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the time, date,
and place of hearing and shall set out briefly the reasons for the hearing.
C. If, after such hearing, the city council makes a finding based on substantial evidence that a violation of this chapter or state law did in fact take place as
alleged, the city council may impose an appropriate civil penalty and/or suspend or revoke the license. The determination of whether to impose a civil
penalty and/or suspend or revoke such license shall be in the discretion of the city council, and shall be dependent upon the circumstances
surrounding the violation and its severity.
D. A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible for another such license for a period of two (2) years after such revocation.
E. Failure to pay a civil penalty imposed within thirty (30) days of the resolution imposing such penalty, if not stayed by appeal, shall result in an automatic
suspension of the after hours business license for thirty (30) consecutive days. The city clerk shall issue a suspension order and the thirty (30) day
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 201/687
suspension shall commence at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. five (5) business days following service of the order via ordinary mail to the last known address of
the licensee or permittee. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-14: ENFORCEMENT ALTERNATIVES:
Any person who fails to perform an act required by this chapter or state law, or who commits an act prohibited by this chapter or state law, may be subject
to a municipal infraction, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 4, "Municipal Infractions", of this code or pursuant to state law, as an alternative to the
penalty procedures of section 3-13-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-15: CAUSES FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR CIVIL PENALTY:
A criminal conviction is not a prerequisite to suspend, revoke, or impose a civil penalty pursuant to this chapter. An after hours business licensee or
permittee may be required to pay a civil penalty and/or have the license suspended for a period not to exceed one year or revoked for violations of this
chapter, following notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
A. Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the after hours business license.
B. Violation of any of the provisions of state or municipal law pertaining to the operation of the after hours business.
C. Any change in the ownership or interest in the business, which was not previously reported to and approved by the city.
D. Any event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving such license or permit when originally issued or renewed.
E. Any sale, hypothecation, or transfer of such license or permit.
F. The failure or refusal on the part of the licensee or permittee to render any report or remit any taxes to the internal revenue service of the state of Iowa
that is required by state law. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-16: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the chief of police or his or her designee may temporarily suspend the after hours business license
and order a temporary closure of the business in a situation involving an immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare.
B. The police department shall give written notice of the temporary suspension and closure order along with a brief statement of the facts and reasons for
the decision to suspend to persons who are required to comply with the order. Such notice shall state that the matter of temporary suspension and
closure will be heard by the city council at the first regularly scheduled council meeting after expiration of five (5) calendar days from the temporary
suspension/closure. The suspension and order of closure is effective when issued and will remain effective until the city council reviews the facts,
circumstances, and reasons for the temporary suspension and closure.
C. A copy of the written notice of suspension and closure shall be sent to the city clerk. Such hearing shall be placed on the city council agenda for the
next regularly scheduled council meeting after expiration of five (5) calendar days from the temporary suspension and closure.
D. The city council may take any action it is authorized to take under section 3-13-13 of this chapter and/or reinstatement of the after hours business
license. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-17: EFFECT OF REVOCATION:
A. Any licensee whose license or permit is revoked shall not thereafter be permitted to hold a license in the city for a period of two (2) years from the date
of such revocation.
B. A spouse or business associate holding ten percent (10%) or more of the capital stock or ownership interest in the business of a person whose license
or permit has been revoked shall not be issued a license and no license shall be issued which covers any business in which such person has a
financial interest for a period of two (2) years from the date of such revocation.
C. If a license is revoked, the premises covered by such license shall not be relicensed as an after hours business for one year. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-18: APPEAL:
A. The right of appeal to the city council shall be afforded an applicant for an after hours business license or for a renewal license whose license has been
denied by the city clerk. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk's office within ten (10) days after notice of denial is sent by ordinary
mail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 202/687
B. Any applicant who feels aggrieved by a decision of the city council penalizing, suspending, revoking, or disapproving issuance of a license may appeal
from such decision within thirty (30) days to the Polk County district court. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
Chapter 14
SALE OF FIREWORKS
3-14-1: CONSUMER FIREWORKS RETAIL FACILITY PERMIT:
A. A consumer fireworks retail facility permit for the retail or wholesale sale or storage of consumer fireworks as defined in Iowa Code section 727.2 may
be issued subject to the provisions of Iowa Code section 100.19, title 4, chapter 3 and title 9 of this Code.
B. The West Des Moines Fire Chief or designee shall promulgate rules and regulations for the purpose of safeguarding life and property from fire or other
hazards arising from the storage and handling of consumer and display fireworks. Such rules and regulations shall be incorporated in and made part of
the consumer fireworks retail facility permit.
C. In addition to the rules and regulations referenced in subsection B of this section, the consumer fireworks retail facility permit shall conform to the
following. (Ord. 2226, 5-30-2017)
3-14-2: CONSUMER FIREWORKS RETAIL SALE PERMIT:
A. A permit application for the retail sale of consumer fireworks must be filed with the City Clerk. No permit application shall be accepted for filing and
processing unless it conforms to the requirements of this title. This includes a complete and true application, all of the required materials and
information prescribed and accompanied by all appropriate fees.
B. A permit application must be submitted not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the proposed start date of the retail sale activities. The City
reserves the right to reject any application that has not been timely submitted to the City. The City Clerk shall have the discretionary right to accept an
application made less than ten (10) days prior to desired start date.
C. Receiving approval of a consumer fireworks retail sale permit from the City shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the applicant's
responsibility to obtain any additional permits, licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, State and Federal regulations. (Ord. 2226, 5-30-2017)
3-14-3: TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES IN TEMPORARY STRUCTURES - REGULATIONS:
A consumer fireworks retail facility permit for temporary structures shall comply with the following:
A. Requirements:
1. Permit fee (non-refundable);
2. Copy of the consumer fireworks annual retail seller license from the State of Iowa;
3. Aerial photo which includes the entire parcel upon which fireworks related activities are to occur. This illustration shall be no larger than 11" x 17".
Names of all other business operations occurring within the site should be indicated. (Aerial photos may be obtained from the respective County
Assessor's website, Google Earth, Bing, etc.);
4. Detailed site layout plan of sales and storage areas with required information as listed later in this chapter;
5. Written approval of the owner of the property upon which sales or storage is occurring;
6. Photocopy of "Certificates of Flame-Resistance" for each tent structure. (Certificates may be obtained from company that rented the commercial
grade tent. Serial number on tent must match certificate.);
7. Copy of Sales Tax Certificate;
8. Certificate of Insurance documenting coverage in accordance with State minimums and naming the City of West Des Moines as an additional
insured.
B. Regulations:
1. Fireworks facilities may only be located within an allowable zoning district as provided in title 9 of this Code.
2. Only one consumer fireworks retail facility may be located on a parcel.
3. All temporary structures for which fireworks are sold or stored must adhere to the Fire Code (2015 IFC with local amendments) as adopted by the
City of West Des Moines, this Code, and any applicable State or Federal law. The more restrictive Code or law will apply when contradictions are
indicated.
4. Only tents provided and erected by a commercial rental company are allowed over and/or adjacent to where fireworks are located, unless otherwise
approved by the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 203/687
5. All storage of fireworks for restocking of sales tents shall be in a container or building that is approved for fireworks storage.
6. Vendors are responsible for compliance with all applicable ADA requirements. City approval of permit should not be viewed as confirmation of
compliance with requirements.
7. Maximum square footage of all temporary establishments within the property, including garden centers, food vendors, fireworks sales and storage
areas, and other retail vendors shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of parking stalls.
8. Posters stating "Fireworks are illegal to discharge in the City of West Des Moines" shall be displayed in a highly visible location at all check-out
locations and within fifteen feet (15') of every entrance as approved by the City inspector.
9. All sales and storage areas shall be appropriately fenced on all sides to prohibit general public access other than where identified and signed.
10. Smoking shall not be allowed within thirty feet (30') of any sales or storage structure. Approved "No Smoking" signs shall be placed every twenty
five feet (25') inside and outside of the facility.
11. All sales and storage areas are to be located on pavement or gravel.
12. All customer parking areas are located on pavement - asphalt or concrete. Grass or gravel parking is not allowed.
13. Ten (10) parking stalls shall be provided for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of retail sales area. Number of ADA stalls shall be provided in
accordance with State Code.
14. Access drives shall be paved or gravel surfaced able to hold seventy five thousand (75,000) pounds GVW.
15. Aisle width in sales facility shall be a minimum of forty eight inches (48") in width. No dead end aisles are allowed.
16. Continuous display of merchandise and/or fireworks shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in length. A flame break aisle at least forty eight inches (48")
wide shall separate continuous displays.
17. Fireworks shall not be displayed greater than six feet (6') from the walking surface.
18. Exits shall be kept clear of any merchandise and/or obstacles.
19. Only electrical lighting per the National Electric Code shall be utilized.
20. All tents shall provide illuminated exit signs and emergency lighting.
21. No person is to inhabit, dwell, or live in a temporary structure that is used as a consumer fireworks retail facility. RVs may be located within the
property for employees and/or security personnel during the duration of fireworks sales operations.
22. Twenty four (24) hour security must be provided if fireworks are left overnight on the premises.
23. Fireworks related business signage collectively shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet (excludes City required emergency signage/postings).
No directional signs within the site or off-premises signs directing people to the fireworks sales operation are allowed. Any off-premises signs found
will be confiscated and destroyed.
24. Set-up of the site subject to this permit may occur beginning June 6th. No sales are allowed until June 13th and compliance to all regulations
contained within this Code is required.
25. All sales and storage structures and components must be removed from the site by twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on July 15th and the site
restored to its pre-retail facility condition and all garbage and debris removed from the site.
C. Site Layout Plan: A site plan or aerial photo of site at a 1" = 20' or 1" = 30' scale must be included with the application. All improvements to the site shall
be drawn to scale and appropriately dimensioned. The site plan or aerial photo shall include all areas in which the activities related to the sales and
storage of fireworks and security elements is to occur and enough of the surrounding area to illustrate compliance with requirements outlined in this
chapter.
1. Site layout drawing shall include:
a. Property address.
b. County parcel identification number(s) (available from County Assessor's website).
c. Legal description (available from County Assessor's website).
d. North arrow.
e. Scale of drawing indicated in text and bar scale (1" = 20' or 1" = 30').
f. Names of roadways adjacent to the property.
g. Location of all sales and storage structures. Structures shall be individually indicated, not just perimeter boundary of each area. All sides of each
structure or area shall be dimensioned to the nearest foot.
h. Indication of location of exits from sales tents/areas.
i. Indication of location of fire extinguishers.
j. Location of transient merchant quarters and security facilities.
k. Delineation of parking to be used by customers. All parking areas must be located on paved surfacing.
l. Indication of the distance between the closest point of any sales or storage area to the property line and/or street right-of-way line(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 204/687
m. Indication of the distance from all existing permanent structures to the closest point of any sales or storage area.
n. Location and type of all generators or other power sources.
o. Location of trash receptacles, portable restrooms, pedestrian seating areas, etc.
p. Note surfacing material of all sales and storage areas.
q. Note surfacing material of all customer parking areas.
2. The site plan or aerial photo shall demonstrate the following:
a. Sales and storage areas are located no closer than three hundred feet (300') to any of the following:
(1) Residentially used structures and areas designated for residential land use on the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Map.
(2) Daycares and any educational facility, including nursery schools.
(3) Senior care facilities (assisted living, memory care, nursing homes, etc.).
(4) Hospitals and medical clinics.
(5) Fuel and propane dispensing stations, including convenience stores.
(6) Any gasoline pump, gasoline bulk station or any building in which liquefied gas, cryogenic material or flammable liquid is sold, used or
distributed.
(7) Underground pipelines.
(8) Electrical transmission lines.
(9) Transformers.
b. Parking areas located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from any sales or storage area.
c. Minimum of thirty feet (30') of separation between trash receptacle(s) and sales tent. Empty boxes and discarded packaging must be kept a
minimum of thirty feet (30') from a sales tent.
d. Minimum of fifty feet (50') of separation between storage facilities.
e. Minimum of fifty feet (50') of separation between sales facilities.
f. Minimum of fifty feet (50') of separation between storage areas and sales tents.
g. Emergency vehicle accesses are located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of all sides of a sales or storage structure.
h. Sales and storage areas shall be located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from any public or private road right-of-way (note, this is not the curb line).
i. Storage and sales areas must be located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any temporary living area/structure of the seller/employees.
j. Minimum separation of sales and storage areas from inhabited buildings, within the site and on adjacent properties, as provided for in the following
table for the gross weight of fireworks in pounds.
Gross Weight Of
Fireworks (Pounds)
Distance From Inhabited
Buildings (Feet)
100 50
200 60
400 70
600 80
800 90
1,000 100
2,000 115
3,000 124
4,000 130
5,000 135
6,000 139
8,000 140
10,000 150
k. Sales and storage areas are located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from generators and other internal power sources and isolated with
appropriate barrier to prevent contact with the public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 205/687
l. Sales and storage areas are located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any combustible liquids, gas and fuels, including stored fuels for generators,
equipment, and vehicles.
m. Any combustible material, including vegetation is located a minimum of thirty feet (30') from sales and storage areas.
n. Exits from each tent shall be provided in the minimum number and width as identified in the following table for the size of the tent, including sales
and non-sales areas, unless otherwise allowed by the City:
EXIT REQUIREMENTS BASED ON OCCUPANT LOAD
Occupant Load Exits
Exit Requirement
(Minimum Exit
Width Of Each Exit)
Up to 199 2 6 feet
200 to 499 3 6 feet
500 to 999 4 8 feet
1,000 to 1,999 5 10 feet
2,000 to 2,999 6 10 feet
Over 3,000 7 10 feet
o. The minimum number of 2A-10BC fire extinguishers as identified in the following table shall be provided in each tent based on the size of the tent:
Square Footage Of Tent Number Of Fire Extinguishers Required
200 - 500 1
501 - 1,000 2
1,001 - 3,000 3
3,001 - 5,000 4
5,001 - 7,000 5
7,001 - 9,000 6
9,001 - 11,000 7
11,001 - 13,000 8
13,001 - 15,000 9
15,001 - 17,000 10
(Ord. 2226, 5-30-2017)
3-14-4: TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES IN PERMANENT STRUCTURES - REGULATIONS:
A consumer fireworks retail facility permit for permanent structures shall comply with the following:
A. Requirements:
1. Consumer fireworks retail facility permit fee (non-refundable). Additional permit application fees will be required if a tenant improvement permit is
required due to interior modifications and/or a minor modification permit is required for exterior site modifications.
2. Copy of the consumer fireworks annual retail seller license from the State of Iowa.
3. Aerial photo which includes the entire parcel upon which fireworks related activities are to occur. This illustration shall be no larger than 11" x 17".
Names of all other business operations occurring within the site should be indicated. (Aerial photos may be obtained from the respective County
Assessor's website, Google Earth, Bing, etc.)
4. Detailed site plan with required information as listed later in this chapter.
5. Detailed interior layout plan with required information as listed later in this chapter.
6. Written approval of the owner of the building and property, if under different ownership in which sales or storage is occurring.
7. Copy of Sales Tax Certificate.
8. Certificate of Insurance documenting coverage in accordance with State minimums and naming the City of West Des Moines as an additional
insured.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 206/687
B. Regulations:
1. Fireworks facilities may only be located within an allowable zoning district as provided in title 9 of this Code.
2. Only one consumer fireworks retail facility may be located on a parcel.
3. Consumer fireworks may not be sold out of buildings that have multiple tenants or uses within a building; are greater than one-story in height; or,
have a basement.
4. Permanent structures must meet the current City of West Des Moines Fire Code with local amendments, this Code, and Building Code. This
includes NFPA 13 - 2010 edition.
5. All storage of fireworks for restocking of sales area shall be in a container or building that is approved for fireworks storage.
6. Vendors are responsible for compliance with all applicable ADA requirements. City approval of permit should not be viewed as confirmation of
compliance with requirements.
7. Posters stating "Fireworks are illegal to discharge in the City of West Des Moines" shall be displayed in a highly visible location at all check-out
locations and within fifteen feet (15') of every entrance as approved by the City inspector.
8. Smoking shall not be allowed within thirty feet (30') of any building used for sales or storage of fireworks. Approved "No Smoking" signs shall be
placed every twenty five feet (25') inside and outside of the building.
9. All customer parking areas are located on pavement - asphalt or concrete. Grass or gravel parking is not allowed.
10. Ten (10) parking stalls shall be provided for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of retail sales area. Number of ADA stalls shall be provided in
accordance with State Code.
11. Access drives shall be paved or gravel surfaced able to hold seventy five thousand (75,000) pounds GVW.
12. Aisle width in the sales facility shall be a minimum of forty eight inches (48") in width. No dead end aisles are allowed.
13. Continuous display of merchandise and/or fireworks shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in length. A flame break aisle at least forty eight inches (48")
wide shall separate continuous displays.
14. Fireworks shall not be displayed greater than six feet (6') from the walking surface.
15. No person is to inhabit, dwell, or live on the premises that is used as a consumer fireworks retail sales facility.
16. Total allowable signage for the building shall be in accordance with the City's Sign Code for the building. This signage shall be for all businesses -
permanent and temporary. No additional signage square footage will be granted for a temporary retail facility within a building that has a different
business the remainder of the year. No directional signs within the site or off-premises signs directing people to the fireworks retail facility are
allowed. Any off-premises signs found will be confiscated and destroyed.
17. Set-up within the building subject to this permit may occur beginning May 23rd for the summer selling season and beginning December 3rd for the
winter selling season as outlined per the State of Iowa's fireworks regulations. No retail sales of fireworks may occur until June 1st for the summer
selling season and December 10th for the winter selling season.
18. All fireworks components must be removed from the site by twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on July 15th for the summer selling season and
January 10th for the winter selling season.
19. Sales and storage areas are located no closer than three hundred feet (300') to any of the following:
a. Residentially used structures and areas designated for residential land use on the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Map.
b. Daycares and any educational facility, including nursery schools.
c. Senior care facilities (assisted living, memory care, nursing homes, etc.).
d. Hospitals and medical clinics.
e. Fuel and propane dispensing stations, including convenience stores.
f. Any gasoline pump, gasoline bulk station or any building in which liquefied gas, cryogenic material or flammable liquid is sold or distributed in
quantities in excess of one gallon.
g. Underground pipelines.
h. Electrical transmission lines.
i. Transformers.
20. A tenant improvement permit application may be required if interior modifications are to be done. Said permit, applicable fees, and improvement
plans shall be submitted to the West Des Moines Building Division.
21. A minor modification permit application may be required if exterior site modifications are to be done. Said permit, applicable fees, and improvement
plans shall be submitted to the West Des Moines Planning Division. (Ord. 2226, 5-30-2017)
3-14-5: WHOLESALE AND STORAGE:
The wholesale sale and storage of consumer and display fireworks shall be regulated as provided in title 4, chapter 3 and title 9 of this Code. (Ord. 2226,
5-30-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 207/687
3-14-6: VIOLATION:
Failure to conform to or comply with any provision of this chapter shall prevent the issuance of a consumer fireworks retail facility permit. Any person, firm,
partnership or corporation undertaking, directing or allowing the sale of consumer fireworks without a validly issued consumer fireworks retail facility permit
as required by this chapter commits a simple misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not less than six hundred twenty five dollars ($625.00) for each
day the violation continues. The West Des Moines Fire Chief or designee shall be authorized to immediately seize all consumer fireworks sold by or
offered for sale by the person, firm, partnership or corporation responsible for the violation. (Ord. 2226, 5-30-2017)
Title 4
HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
4-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A career and volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire
prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other established agency. (Ord. 914, 7-9-1990; amd. 1993 Code)
4-1-2: MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS:
The department shall consist of the fire chief and such other officers and personnel as may be authorized by the city council. In no case shall any person
be recruited, selected or appointed as a member of the department unless such person: (1985 Code §§2.2-1.0102, 2.2-1.0103)
A. Department Member: Unless otherwise required by a collective bargaining agreement, department members shall reside in such proximity to the city as
to provide a safe and adequate response in all situations to meet the requirements of the department. The determination regarding the residence of a
department member shall be made by the fire chief, based upon established criteria. (Ord. 1436, 2-20-2001; amd. Ord. 1490, 9-30-2002)
B. Age: Is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
C. Driver's License: Has a current active Iowa driver's license.
D. Alcohol And Drugs: Is not addicted to the use of drugs or alcohol.
E. Character: Is of good moral character as determined by a thorough investigation.
F. Education: Is a high school graduate with a diploma, or possesses an equivalency certificate acceptable by the state department of public instruction.
G. Health: Prior to appointment has been examined by accredited professionals to determine if free from physical, drugs, emotional or mental condition
which might adversely affect the performance of duties. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0103; amd. 1993 Code)
4-1-3: APPOINTMENT OF FIRE PERSONNEL:
A. Volunteer: The city manager, after receiving the recommendation of the fire chief, may appoint such volunteer firefighters as deemed necessary to act
as firefighters to perform duties auxiliary to and in general support of the fire department. Such volunteer firefighters, once approved, shall give such
assistance to the fire department as shall be determined by the city manager, after receiving the recommendation of the fire chief, and as permitted by
the code of Iowa.
B. Career: The fire chief shall appoint and promote subordinate officers and other members of the department subject to civil service procedures, and
chapter 35C, code of Iowa, when appropriate. In case of absence of the fire chief, an officer designated by the fire chief shall be in charge and have
and exercise all the powers of fire chief. (Ord. 1702, 7-31-2006)
4-1-4: COMPENSATION; OATH OF OFFICE:
A. Compensation: Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the
council. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0106)
B. Oath: The fire chief and career personnel, before entering upon the duties of the position, shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by section 1-7-1 of
this code. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0109; amd. 1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 208/687
4-1-5: TRAINING:
All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the chief. (1985 Code
§2.2-1.0105)
4-1-6: FIRE CHIEF:
A. Appointed: The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager as provided by chapter 400.13, code of Iowa, or as amended thereto. (Ord. 914, 7-9-
1990)
B. Duties: The fire chief or designee shall have the following powers and duties:
1. General: Perform all duties required of the fire chief by law or ordinance.
2. Enforce Laws: Enforce all ordinances and, where enabled, state laws regulating the following:
a. Fire prevention.
b. Maintenance and use of fire escapes.
c. The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
d. The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from halls, theaters, churches, hospitals, asylums, lodging houses, schools, factories and all other
buildings in which the public congregates for any purpose.
e. The installation and maintenance of private fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
3. Command: Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency, discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire department
shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the fire chief.
4. Property: Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the fire
department. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0110)
5. Authority And Investigative Powers:
a. Investigation1: Direct an operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the existence of a
suspected or reported fire, gas leak or other hazardous condition, or take any other action as deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of
the department's duties. In exercising this power, the fire chief may prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching a fire scene and may
remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department.
b. Authority To Barricade2: Place or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right of way or private property near
the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the fire department, to control the
scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
Any person who disobeys an order of the fire chief, other officer of the fire department, or peace officer assisting the fire department which is issued
pursuant to subsection B5a or B5b of this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor3. (1993 Code)
6. Right Of Entry: Have the right, during reasonable hours and upon consent of the occupant, to enter any building or premises within his jurisdiction for
the purpose of making such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance he may consider necessary to be made and is reasonably
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
7. Recommendation: Make such recommendations to owners, occupants, caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
8. Assist State Fire Marshal: At the request of the state fire marshal, and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of his duties by
investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
9. Records: Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel, operating cost and efficiency of each element of firefighting equipment,
depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type
and location of buildings.
10. Reports: Compile and submit to the mayor and city council an annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other
reports as may be requested by the mayor or city council. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0110)
11. Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator: Be designated as the municipal emergency management coordinator and be responsible for the
development, implementation and revision of a municipal emergency management operations plan approved in writing by the city manager. The
municipal emergency management operations plan shall complement and supplement the Polk County multi-hazard emergency operations plan. The
municipal emergency management coordinator shall coordinate all components of the emergency management program in the city of West Des
Moines, including hazard analysis, preparedness, mitigation and response and recovery activities for all natural and technological disaster
emergencies. (Ord. 1436, 2-20-2001)
4-1-7: DEPARTMENTAL RULES:
The fire chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the city code and subject to the approval of the city manager, as may be necessary for the
operation of the department including rules governing the following:
A. Rules Of Conduct: The conduct and activity of members of the department during regular and off-duty hours.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 209/687
B. Communication: The procedures, use and care of the radio and other communication systems.
C. Training: The nature, time and attendance requirements for inservice training of members of the department.
D. Emergencies: Temporary rules for the protection and functioning of the department as may be necessary in the event of an emergency until such rules
may be considered by the city council.
E. Other: Such other rules as may be deemed necessary and advisable in assuring efficient and proper performance of the duties of the department.
F. Penalties: The penalties which may be imposed for violation of established departmental rules by members.
G. Notice: The fire chief shall give written notice to any member charged with a violation of departmental rules specifying the rule violated, the nature of the
violation and the penalty to be imposed.
H. Appeal: A volunteer member of the department charged with a violation of rules may request a hearing before the city manager. The city manager shall
review the facts and affirm, modify or revoke the action of the fire chief. A career member of the department may request a hearing before the civil
service commission in accordance with the civil service laws of the city and the state of Iowa. (Ord. 914, 7-9-1990; amd. 1993 Code)
4-1-8: INSURANCE:
A. Accidental Injury Insurance: The council shall contract to insure the city against liability for workers' compensation and against statutory liability for the
costs of hospitalization, nursing and medical attention for firefighters injured in the performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside
the corporate limits of the city. All firefighters shall be covered by the contract. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0113; amd. 1993 Code)
B. Liability Insurance: The council shall contract to insure against liability of the city or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage
arising out of and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate limits of the city. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0114)
4-1-9: CALLS OUTSIDE THE CITY:
The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the city limits if the fire chief determines that such emergency exists and that
such action will not endanger persons and property within the city limits. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0115)
4-1-10: MUTUAL AID:
Subject to approval by resolution of the council, the department may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments.
Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the clerk. (1985 Code §2,2-1.0116)
4-1-11: EMERGENCIES:
The mayor may take command of a fire scene and govern the city by proclamation when a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within the city limits,
he has all the powers conferred upon the sheriff to suppress disorders. (Ord. 914, 7-9-1990)
4-1-12: INJURY TO FIRE EQUIPMENT:
It shall be unlawful for a person to wilfully destroy or injure any engine, hose, hook and ladder truck or other thing used and kept for extinguishment of
fires. (1985 Code §2.1-1.0505)
Chapter 2
EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE
4-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish fees to be charged users of the City ambulance service, to provide a method for enforcing collection of fees,
determining emergency when ambulance service shall be furnished to user and the City's liability in connection therewith. (1985 Code §3-6.01)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter the following terms are defined:
AMBULANCE: Any vehicle operated by the City in transporting persons who are injured or sick.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 210/687
EMERGENCY: A sudden or unexpected occasion for action or an unforeseen occurrence or condition which appears to require the use of an ambulance
by the user in need of medical attention.
USER: Any person who shall be furnished transportation by ambulance, except "user" shall not be deemed to include those persons who may accompany
such person utilizing the service nor such personnel manning said ambulance. The term "user" shall be only such persons located within the boundaries of
West Des Moines, Iowa, unless otherwise warranted, but then only at the discretion of the City. (1985 Code §3-6.02)
4-2-3: DETERMINATION OF EMERGENCY; LIABILITY OF CITY:
The City shall determine if an emergency exists warranting the dispatching of an ambulance to the user. The City accepts no responsibility or liability for
any act or omission arising out of medical attention needed by the user. (1985 Code §§3-6.04, 3-6.05)
4-2-4: AMBULANCE FEES:
Any user receiving the services or transportation by City ambulance shall pay a fee as set forth by the City Council in resolution form. The City Council
may by resolution, and in addition to the fee, provide special fees for those unforeseen circumstances that are not anticipated by the rate prescribed. (Ord.
862, 11-7-88)
4-2-5: PAYMENT OF FEES:
All ambulance fees and charges are due upon presentation of a statement by the City, and shall be promptly paid by the user, his legal guardian, or in
case of death of user, by his user's estate. After a reasonable time following presentation of the statement by the City, the City may cause a suit to be
brought for the collection of any fees or charges for ambulance services. The City Council, by resolution and at its discretion and under special
circumstances, may waive fees as set forth in this Chapter. (1985 Code §3-6.06)
Chapter 3
FIRE CODE
4-3-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
The International Fire Code (IFC), 2015 edition, recommended by the participating communities of the Central Iowa Code Consortium, is hereby adopted
by the City Council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from
the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials, and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the occupancy of
buildings and premises in the City of West Des Moines; providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous use or operations; that a certain document
known as the International Fire Code, including appendix chapters B, C, D, I, and M (see International Fire Code section 101.2.1, 2015 edition), as
published by the International Fire Code Council, being particularly the 2015 edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter added, deleted, modified, or amended by section 4-3-4 of this chapter, one (1) copy of the local amendments which have been and are now
filed in the Office of the City Clerk and one (1) complete set of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, to include local amendments filed in the Fire
Administrative Offices, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter
shall take effect, the provision thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord. 2196, 2-6-2017)
4-3-2: DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
A. The International Fire Code as adopted and amended herein shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention Bureau of the City, which is hereby established
and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. (Ord. 2196, 2-6-2017)
4-3-3: STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES; DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
A. The establishment of limits and districts referred to and placed upon certain sections of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, are as follows:
1. The limits referred to in section 5504.3.1.1 in which flammable cryogenic fluids storage in stationary containers are prohibited are hereby established
as follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa, except (LI) Light Industrial District and (GI) General Industrial District.
2. The limits that are placed on chapter 57 in which outside above-ground storage of flammable or combustible liquids are restricted are hereby
established as follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa, except (LI) Light Industrial District and (GI) General Industrial District.
Exception:
a. An aggregate amount of one thousand (1,000) gallons or less may be stored above ground on a premises if used exclusively for heating fuel oil. A
permit is required and the proposed installation must be approved by the Code official prior to the issuance of a permit.
b. After July 20, 1992, any new above ground installations of Class I liquids shall have an aggregate total of one thousand one hundred (1,100)
gallons or less; or Class II liquids shall have an aggregate total of five thousand (5,000) gallons or less, more than one thousand one hundred
(1,100) gallons shall be stored in an approved vaulted tank above ground in LI and GI Zoning Districts; or ten thousand (10,000) gallons or less of
Class I and/or Class II liquids on construction sites, per legal lot or contiguous lots under common ownership. A permit is required and the
proposed installation must be approved by the Code official prior to the issuance of a permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 211/687
c. After July 1, 2001, any new outside installation of a generator, the fuel storage shall be limited to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500)
gallons of Type II fuel in an NFPA/UL compliant sub-base tank; quantities greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons but less than five
thousand one (5,001) gallons of a Type II fuel shall be stored in an approved vaulted tank.
Exception: Fuel storage requirements for generator use only, shall not be limited to only LI and L2 Zoning Districts.
3. The limits that are placed on chapter 57 in which new bulk plants and terminals for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited are hereby
established as follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
4. The limits that are placed on section 6104.2 (see section 4-3-4 of this chapter) in which storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted to are
hereby established as follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
5. The limits that are placed on section 5601.1 in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be restricted to are hereby established as
follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
6. The limits that are placed on section 5301.1, exception 2, in which the storage of compressed natural gas is prohibited, are hereby established as
follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa, with the exception of LI and GI Zoning Districts. (Ord. 2196, 2-6-2017)
4-3-4: AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
The International Fire Code is amended and changed in the following respects:
Insert section 101.1: The City of West Des Moines
Add section 103.1.1 Definitions.
A. Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the International Fire Code, it is the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
B. Where the party responsible for the enforcement of the International Fire Code is given a title of "Fire Marshal" and the following definition: "Fire
Marshal is the Code Official of the Fire Prevention Bureau" or a duly authorized representative.
C. Whenever the words "Department of Fire Prevention" are used, they shall be held to mean "Fire Prevention Bureau".
D. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
Amend section 105.6 Required Operational Permits. The Code Official is authorized to issue operational permits for the operations as set forth in
sections 105.6.2, 105.6.10, 105.6.11, 105.6.14, 105.6.15, 105.6.17, 105.6.21, 105.6.23, 105.6.27, 105.6.28, 105.6.32, 105.6.36, 105.6.38, 105.6.42,
105.6.45.
Amend section 105.6.28 LP-gas. An operational permit is required for:
1. Storage and use of LP-gas.
Exception: A permit is not required for permanently installed individual containers with 1,000 gallons or less serving one and two family dwellings
(R-3), for the typical tank used for LP-gas grills and the use of less than 500 gallons per tank or an aggregate total of less than 1,000 gallons for
individual containers for temporary installations.
Delete section 105.6.32 Exception: Recreational fires.
Amend section 105.7 Required construction permits. The Code Official is authorized to issue construction permits for work as set forth in sections
105.7.1, 105.7.6, 105.7.7, 105.7.8, 105.7.10, 105.7.12, 105.7.13, 105.7.17, 105.7.18.
Amend section 108: Refer to section 4-3-5A (Appeals) of the West Des Moines City Code.
Amend section 113 Fees
Add section 113.1 General. A fee for operational permits and construction permits that are required by this Ordinance shall be paid to the City of West
Des Moines at Fire Administration Offices.
Add section 113.2 Issuance. A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Bureau prior to engaging in activities, operations, practices, or functions
set forth in sections 105.6 through 105.7 as amended. Refer to amended sections 105.6 and 105.7.
Add section 113.3 Fees. Each operational permit fee, with the exception of 105.6.15, 105.6.36 and 105.6.45 shall be $50.00; this permit includes one
hour of inspection time; an hourly rate of $30.00 after the first hour may be charged by the code official; first re-inspection is at no charge during normal
business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday).
The construction permit/plan review fee schedule is square footage based and shall be as follows:
0 - 6,000 square feet: $100.00
6,001 - 12,000 square feet: $200.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 212/687
12,001 - 24,000 square feet: $300.00
24,001 - 50,000 square feet: $400.00
50,001 - 100,000 square feet: $500.00
100,001 - 500,000 square feet: $1,000.00
500,001 - 1,000,000 square feet: $1,500.00
1,000,001 and above: $1,500.00 + $100.00 for every 6,000 square feet above 1,000,000
Construction permits include 2 hours of inspection time; an hourly rate of $30.00 after the 2nd hour may be charged by the code official; first reinspection
is at no charge during normal business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday).
-105.6.15 Fee to conduct a firework display is $200.00 which includes an inspection prior to the start of the show.
-105.6.36 Fees are occupant load based (Occupant load shall be determined by the code official) and are as follows:
Occupant load of 49 or less: $50.00
Occupant load of 50 - 499: $100.00
Occupant load of 500 - 999: $150.00
Occupant load greater than 1,000: $200.00
-105.6.45 Fee is $50.00. If the permit application for the tent or inflatable is not received within 5 business days prior to the date of the event, the fee
shall be $100.00.
This permit includes two hours of inspection time; an hourly rate of $30.00 after the first hour may be charged by the code official; first re-inspection
is at no charge during normal business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday).
Any inspection, to include operational and construction permit inspections, performed after normal business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., Monday through Friday), shall have inspection fees of $150.00 per hour per inspector.
Any inspection, to include operational and construction permit inspections shall have a first re-inspection at no charge providing it is
conducted during normal business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.) Additional re-inspections shall be charged
according to the following fee schedule:
Re-inspection Fees:
First re-inspection No Charge
Second re-inspection $100.00
Third re-inspection $300.00
Fourth re-inspection $600.00
Fifth or more re-inspection $1,000.00
All of the above noted fees are base fees and subject to an annual revision, by City Council Resolution, based on a rate equivalent to a
positive September Consumer Price Index (CPI-W), and rounded to the nearest whole dollar, for subsequent fiscal year (July 1st).
Add section 113.4 Mitigation Reimbursement Fees. Reimbursement fees that are actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the mitigation
of specialized emergencies including, but not limited to, hazardous materials, specialized rescue, and crime scenes (including arson) shall be invoiced to
the responsible person, firm, or corporation. An available fee schedule shall be reviewed and posted annually by the Fire Chief's Office. Fees may include,
but not limited to, personnel compensation, apparatus use, equipment use, and specialized contract labor associated with the mitigation of the specialized
emergency.
Add section 114 Life Safety Contractor/Designer Permits. All installations, modifications, maintenance, or servicing of life safety systems are to be
performed by an approved State of Iowa licensed business or person(s). A business or person(s) shall obtain a permit to do work in the City of West Des
Moines from the Fire Administration Office.
Add section 114.1 Life Safety Plans. All life safety plans submitted for review to include, but not limited to, fire sprinkler system plans, fire alarm system
plans, fire pump plans, hood suppression system plans, and clean agent system plans shall be designed and stamped by a person with a minimum of a
NICET III certification, fire protection engineer, qualified engineer with two (2) years demonstrated experience in life safety system design, or equivalency
as determined by the Code Official. Plan approval will be based upon the plans submitted by the equipment supplier utilizing the above requirements. All
NEW fire sprinkler systems, fire alarm system, fire pumps, clean agent systems, kitchen hood suppression systems shall be submitted to West
Des Moines contracted third party engineer for review. A copy of the application and fee schedule can be obtained from the West Des Moines
Fire Department web site or at West Des Moines Fire Administration. The Code Official has the authority to require additions to existing fire
sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems to be sent to the West Des Moines contracted third party engineer for review. If required life safety
plans are not received at the West Des Moines Fire Department prior to 7 days before the final certificate of occupancy inspection is scheduled,
a fee of $200 shall be paid by the submitting company prior to the inspection taking place and the inspection will be re-scheduled for a date as
determined by the Code Official.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 213/687
Add Section 114.1.1 Life Safety Plan Submittal Fee For Internal Fire Department Review.
Life Safety plans submitted for initial review that are not required to go to the West Des Moines contracted third party engineer by the
Code Official shall pay a review fee of $100.00. Plans that are required to be reviewed by the West Des Moines contracted third party
engineer are not subject to this fee.
Note: Persons passing the competency based examination are only allowed to stamp plans for the company through which they are licensed to
work.
The above noted $100 fee is a base fee and subject to an annual revision, by City Council Resolution, based on a rate equivalent to a
positive September Consumer Price Index (CPI-W), and rounded to the nearest whole dollar, for subsequent fiscal year (July 1st).
Add section 114.2 Penalties for Violation of State Licenses/Life Safety Contractor/Designer Permits. Violation of rules and regulations pertaining to
State licensing/Life Safety Contractor/Designer Permits shall result in a fine of $500.00 for the first violation. A second violation within one (1) year of
permit issuance shall result in a fine of $750.00 A third violation within one (1) year of permit issuance shall result in a fine of $1,000.00 and revocation of
the permit for the remainder of the permit issuance period.
Add section 115 Inspection Tags. West Metro tags for inspection of fire suppression systems, fire extinguishers, and fire alarm systems are required to
be purchased from the West Des Moines Fire Prevention Bureau for use in the City of West Des Moines.
Add section 116 Additions to Buildings or Structures
Add section 116.1 General. Additions to buildings or structures shall comply with all of the requirements of section 903.2 of this Code for new buildings or
structures. The entire building or structure, existing and proposed additions, shall comply with all of the requirements of the fire sprinkler section 903.2 of
the Fire Code for new buildings and structures, when the total of all the additions to the building or structure made after November 15, 1973, exceeds
twenty-five (25) percent of the pre-November 15, 1973, gross area of the building or structure.
Add section 117: Multiple Occupancy Requirement.
Add section 117.1 General. When a building is used for more than one occupancy purpose or use, the entire building shall meet the requirements of the
fire sprinkler section 903.2 of the Fire Code based on the requirements for the most restrictive occupancy group as defined in Chapter 2 of the 2015
International Fire Code.
Chapter 2 DEFINITIONS
Amend Section 202 [M] Commercial Cooking Appliances:
[M] Commercial Cooking Appliances. Appliances used in a commercial food service establishment for heating or cooking food and which produce
grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed through a local exhaust ventilations system. Such appliances include
deep fat fryers; upright broilers; griddles; broilers; steam-jacketed kettles; hot-top ranges; under-fired broilers (Charbroilers); ovens; barbecues;
rotisseries; residential stoves/ovens and similar appliances. For the purpose of this definition, a food service establishment shall include any
commercial building or a portion thereof used for the preparation and serving of food including for employee purposes.
Delete section 202 Occupancy Classification [BG] Small buildings and tenant spaces and Exceptions 1 and 2 under [BG] Small assembly
spaces.
Add to section 202 Business is a commercial enterprise or establishment that is not part of a home occupation, for the purposes of this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 Commercial Buildings or Structures are buildings or structures that are used for purposes other than detached dwellings, for the
purposes of this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 Condominium is a building or structure of residential occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling units where
the occupants are primarily permanent in nature, having public space, unless as defined as a townhouse, for the purposes of this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 Dwelling is a detached building on a building site designed for and used exclusively for residential purposes by one or two families
and containing one or two dwelling units, for the purposes of this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 Fire Prevention Bureau is the Fire Department of the jurisdiction.
Add to section 202 Home Occupation is any occupation or profession conducted solely by the resident occupants in their place of abode, involving
primarily service and limited sale of commodities upon the premises, for the purposes of this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 Licensed Day Care is a daycare that is licensed with the State of Iowa.
Add to section 202 Licensed Fire Alarm Monitoring Service is a business that supplies and/or contracts with a UL listed remote station monitoring
service.
Add to section 202 Self-luminous is having the ability to self generate light without the aid of batteries or electrical current.
Add to section 202 Townhouse is a single family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units in which each unit extends from
foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides, for the purpose of this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 WestCom is the dispatch center that is jointly shared by the Cities of Clive, Urbandale, and West Des Moines.
Chapter 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Add section 307.2.1.1 Responsible Agencies for Open Burning. Within the City limits of West Des Moines; in Polk County, approval from Polk County
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 214/687
Water, Air and Waste Management Department, and the Code Official; in Dallas County, Warren County and Madison County, approval from State of Iowa
DNR and the Code Official; future annexed land shall use the County Water, Air and Waste Management Department of record, and/or DNR and the Code
Official.
Add section 307.2.1.2 Business that sell fire pits, chiminea and other outdoor recreational devices. Within the City limits of West Des Moines, any
business that sells fire pits, chiminea and other outdoor recreational fire/ember producing devices are required to have signage installed on the display
devices notifying customers they are not allowed to be used within the City limits of West Des Moines.
Amend section 308.1.4 Open-flame Cooking Devices. No barbeque grills or other devices which produce ashes or embers shall be operated or stored
within 20 feet of multi-story buildings, such as apartment buildings and/or condominiums. Cooking devices and/or propane cylinders shall not be stored
inside the living unit of apartment buildings and/or condominiums.
A maximum of one 20 lb. propane cylinder attached to the cooking device shall be allowed per living unit.
Exception: One and two-family dwellings and townhouses.
Add section 319 Existing Building Life Safety Requirements.
Add section 319.1 Minimum Life Safety Requirements. Each existing building/tenant space shall have exit signs, emergency lighting, fire extinguishers,
and rated protection of the gas appliances, such as furnace and water heater rooms. Specifications for the above noted items are listed in the latest West
Des Moines Fire Code Supplement.
FIRE SERVICE FEATURES
Amend section 503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm),
exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and a unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet
(4268 mm).
Amend section 505.1 Premises Identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building
identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers or addresses shall be black
or white and shall contrast with their background. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in greater dimension or
additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the
public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained.
Address numbers shall be in Arabic numerals or alphabet letters a minimum of 4 inches in height with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch.
Exceptions:
1. Color of numbers may deviate from black or white for just cause when approved by the Code Official.
2. All commercial buildings shall have address numbers in Arabic numerals or alphabet letters a minimum of 5 inches in height with a minimum
stroke width of 1/2 inch. Monument signs shall have the address installed a minimum of 36 inches from the ground. Addresses located 100 to 199
feet from the street shall have be a minimum of 6 inches in height with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch. Addresses located 200 to 299 feet from
the street shall have a minimum of 8 inches in height with a minimum stroke width of 1 inch. For each additional 100 feet from the street, the number
shall increase by an additional 2 inches in height with the stroke increased proportionally. Measurements to determine the minimum number or letter
size shall be measured from the approved address location to the center line of the street for which the premises is addressed. Minimum height and
minimum stroke may be increased by the Code Official.
3. Exterior suite numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch.
4. Interior suite numbers shall be a minimum of 2 inches in height.
5. Exterior address location for commercial buildings shall be determined by the Code Official.
Add section 506.3 Location for Knox Box. The location of the key box, "Knox Box", is to be determined by the Code Official. Height of the key box shall
be 6 feet from the ground to the top of the key box unless otherwise approved by the Code Official.
Delete Code Section 507.5.1.1
Replace with the following language:
507.5.1.1 Hydrant for fire department connections.
Buildings equipped with a fire department connection installed in accordance with Section 912 shall have a fire hydrant located on a fire access road
within 100 feet (30 m) of the fire department connection as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building.
Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 100 feet (30 m) where approved by the fire code official.
Delete Code Section 507.5.5
Replace with the following language:
A 5-foot (1524 mm) horizontal clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants, as measured from the center-point of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 215/687
hydrant, except as otherwise required or approved.
Add section 507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Markers and Identification Color. When required by the Code Official, hydrant locations shall be identified by the
installation of an approved reflective marker. Both public and private hydrants shall be painted to West Des Moines Water Works specifications.
Add section 507.5.8 Fire Hydrant Installation. Fire hydrants installed with the grade mark on the fire hydrant at the level of finished grade. The large
diameter connection shall be installed such that the connection is oriented facing the fire department access road for fire apparatus hook-up.
Add section 507.5.9 Fire Hydrant Maintenance Schedule. Private fire hydrants shall be inspected, tested, and lubricated on a five-year basis or sooner
by the West Des Moines Water Works in conjunction with their regular fire hydrant inspection program per rules established by the West Des Moines
Water Works.
Modify Code Section 508.1
Replace with the following language:
508.1 General. Where required by other sections of this code, Table 508.1 and in all buildings classified as high-rise buildings by the International Building
Code, a fire command center for fire department operations shall be provided and shall comply with sections 508.1.1 through 508.1.6.
Add Table 508.1 Fire Command Center Thresholds.
Group A 1,000 occupants
Group E 100,000 gross square feet
Group F 200,000 gross square feet
Group H 100,000 gross square feet
Group I-2 or I-3 100,000 gross square feet
Group M 100,000 gross square feet
Group R-1 Greater than 200 dwelling units or sleeping rooms
Group S 200,000 gross square feet
Add section 511 Fire and Emergency Vehicle Lanes.
511.1 General. Fire Department fire lanes shall be provided and maintained in accordance with section 511.
511.2 Purpose. The requirement that Fire Lanes be established in certain parking areas and the enforcement of restrictions on parking in such Fire Lanes
established in this Chapter are designed to ensure adequate access to commercial, office, multi-family, and other high density use facilities by fire-fighting
and other emergency vehicles.
511.3 Designation. The Code Official may designate fire lanes on private and public property as deemed necessary for the protection of life and property.
511.4 Obstruction. No person shall stop, stand, park a vehicle, place, or keep any obstruction or thing in a designated fire lane that would prevent such
fire lane from being immediately accessible to the Fire Department, or in any other manner to deter or hinder the Fire Department from gaining immediate
access to the fire lane. A written request to the Code Official for temporary obstruction of a fire lane shall be submitted for approval.
511.5 Signs and Markings. Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the Code Official shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed
identifying such fire lanes. Fire lanes may be painted traffic red in addition to fire lane signage. Fire lane signs shall be permanently mounted and the front
of the sign set at 90 degrees to the street facing the direction of travel, or as otherwise approved by the Code Official. Fire lane signs shall be placed 2 - 4
feet from the edge of the street. The top of fire lane signs shall be approximately 6 feet from the ground. Intermediate fire lane signs shall be set every 100
feet in a continuous fire lane. The BEGINS sign shall mark the beginning of a fire lane and shall be mounted below the first fire lane sign.The ENDS sign
shall mark the ending of a fire lane and shall be mounted below the last fire lane sign. The BEGINS and ENDS signage may be omitted due to the location
of the fire lane by the Code Official. Signs shall be 18 inches tall x 12 inches wide with red letters on a white reflective background to read "Fire Lane-No
Parking Except for Emergency Vehicles, Fine $50", unless otherwise directed and approved by the Code Official, conforming to State law.
511.6 Maintenance. The owner, manager, tenant or person in charge of any property upon which designated fire lanes have been established, shall
provide markings as required above and shall maintain fire lanes at their expense as often as needed to clearly identify the designated area as being a fire
lane.
BUILDING SERVICES AND SYSTEMS
Delete sections 603.8, 603.8.1, 603.8.2, 603.8.3, 603.8.4, and 603.8.5.
Add section 604.8 Shutdown of Emergency and Standby Power Systems. In addition to the requirements of NFPA 10 for a remote manual stop, a
keyed switch to shut down the generator shall be located at the remote annunciator panel or fire panel. The Code Official shall determine its location. If
there is no annunciator or fire alarm panel or the location of these panels is determined to be inadequate for this shut down button, the Code Official shall
determine its location.
Add section 604.9 Emergency Generator Signs. Main electrical disconnects and main breaker panels supplied by the generator shall be provided with
approved signs. Additionally, doors accessing emergency and standby power systems shall be provided with approved signs. When approved switches for
emergency power shut-down are located remote from the fire alarm annunciator, an approved sign shall be provided at the fire alarm annunciator.
Approved signs shall contain the word CAUTION in black letters at least 2 inches (50 mm) high on a yellow background. Such warning signs shall be
placed so as to be readily discernible.
Delete Code Section 606.12.5 item #5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 216/687
Amend section 703.2.3 Door Operation. Swinging fire doors shall close from the full open position and latch automatically. The door closer shall:
1. Exert enough force to close and latch the door from any partially open position.
2. Be UL listed and of hydraulic type, spring type shall not be allowed.
INTERIOR FINISH
Delete section 806.1.1 Restricted Occupancies: Exception 2. "Trees shall be allowed within dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies."
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
Add section 901.4.6.1 Fire Sprinkler Riser Room. A fire sprinkler riser room shall be separated from the electrical room. The riser room shall have no
electrical panels, devices, or apparatus inside the room other than the outlets or support equipment (lighting, air compressor, and heater) required for the
use of the fire sprinkler system and/or the fire alarm panel. The sprinkler riser room shall not be exclusively accessed from the electrical room, but the
electrical room may be accessed from the riser room.
Add section 901.4.6.2 Fire Sprinkler Riser Signage. Signage as determined by the Code Official shall be placed on the main sprinkler riser denoting a
shunt trip has been installed
Amend section 903.2
Where required to read as follows. An approved automatic fire extinguishing system is required if the gross square footage of a building is equal to
or greater than the following:
For the purposes of section 903.2, "fire separations" shall not be permitted to reduce the total gross square footage of a building or area for the
purpose of calculating the fire sprinkler square footage requirements.
For the purposes of section 903.2, "story" shall be defined as any level of a structure, whether above or below grade capable of occupancy.
Fire Sprinkler Exemption for Buildings or Structures. To be exempt from meeting the requirements to have fire sprinklers systems installed, the
buildings or structures per legal lot or contiguous lots under common ownership, must be separated by twenty feet (20') and have 1-hour rated
exterior walls on both buildings or structures so as not to have the combined total of their gross square footage applied to this section of the Code.
Note: The square footage used for calculating total "gross square footage" of a building or structure shall be measured using the outside dimensions
of the total building or structure to include attached or detached buildings or structures/canopies meeting the above requirements.
Open Corridors/Hallways shall be required to have fire sprinklers installed in them when the building they are constructed in is required by this
code to have a fire sprinkler system.
"An approved automatic fire extinguishing system" includes, but is not limited to, a complete automatic fire sprinkler system. The following
sections requiring complete automatic fire sprinkler systems shall install the fire sprinkler system following NFPA 13 standards unless otherwise
noted. Alternative automatic extinguishing systems may be used if in the opinion of the Code Official the same life safety and property conservation
measures are equivalent to the NFPA standard listed in this Code.
Delete sections 903.2.1, 903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4, 903.2.1.5, 903.2.1.7, 903.2.2, 903.2.3, 903.2.4, 903.2.4.1, 903.2.5, 903.2.5.1,
903.2.5.2, 903.2.5.3, 903.2.6, 903.2.7, 903.2.7.1, 903.2.8, 903.2.8.1, 903.2.8.2, 903.2.8.3, 903.2.8.3.1, 903.2.8.3.2, 903.2.8.4, 903.2.9, 903.2.9.1,
903.2.9.2, 903.2.10, 903.2.10.1
Add section 903.2.1 Group A to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as Group A
occupancies as provided in this section.
(suppression type)
(min.
gross
square
footage)
Group A: NFPA 13 A-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an assembly use, usually with fixed seating,
intended for the production and viewing of the performing arts or motion pictures including, but not
limited to: See IFC occupancy classification definition A-1. *
1. Occupant load of 299 or less.
6,000
s.f.
2. Occupant load of 300 or more. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 A-2. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an assembly use intended for food and/or drink
consumption including but not limited to:
See IFC occupancy classification definition A-2. *
1. Occupant load of 50 or more. 0 s.f.
2. Occupant load of 49 or less.
1,500
s.f.
NFPA 13 A-3. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an assembly use intended for worship,
recreation, or amusement and other assembly uses not classified elsewhere in Group A, including,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 217/687
but not limited to: See IFC occupancy classification definition A-3. *
1. Occupant load of 299 or less.
6,000
s.f.
2. Occupant load of 300 or more.
4,500
s.f.
NFPA 13 A-4. Building or structures or portions thereof, having an assembly use intended for viewing of indoor
sporting events and activities with spectator seating, including but not limited to: See IFC occupancy
classification definition A-4 *
1. Occupant load of 299 or less.
6,000
s.f.
2. Occupant load of 300 or more.
4,500
s.f.
NFPA 13 A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-5 occupancies in the following
areas: concession stands, retail areas, press boxes and other accessory areas in excess of 1,000
square feet.
1,000
s.f.
Add section 903.2.2 Group B to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing a Group B occupancy as provided in this section.
Group B: NFPA 13 B. Building or structures or portions thereof, used for office, professional, or service type transactions,
including storage of records and accounts. Business occupancies shall include, but not be limited to:
See IFC occupancy classification definition B.
6,000
s.f.
Add section 903.2.3 Group E to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing a Group E occupancy as provided in this section.
Group E: NFPA 13 E. Building or structures or portions thereof, used by six or more persons at any one time for
educational purposes. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 A licensed day care is any buildings or structures, or portions thereof, used for educational,
supervision, or personal care services for more than five children older than 21/2 years of age shall be
classified as an E occupancy. 0 s.f.
Add section 903.2.4 Group F to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing a Group F occupancy as provided in this section.
Group F: NFPA 13 F-1. Moderate-hazard factory and industrial occupancies including factory and industrial uses not
classified as group F, division 2 occupancies shall include, but not be limited to: See IFC occupancy
classification definition F-1.
6,000
s.f.
NFPA 13 F-1.1. Woodworking operations which generates finely divided combustible waste or uses finely
divided combustible materials.
2,500
s.f.
NFPA 13 F-2. Low-hazard factory and industrial occupancies uses that involve the fabrication or manufacturing
of non-combustible materials which during finishing, packing, or processing do not involve a
significant fire hazard shall include, but not be limited to: See IFC occupancy classification definition
F-2.
15,000
s.f.
Add section 903.2.5 Group H to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing a Group H occupancy as provided in this section.
Group H: NFPA 13 H-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, that pose a detonation hazard in excess of those listed
in table 307.7(1) (see 2015 IBC) shall include, but not limited to: See IFC occupancy classification
definition H-1. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 H-2. Building or structures or portions thereof, which contain materials that pose a deflagration hazard
or a hazard from accelerated burning in excess of those listed in table 5003.1.1(1) (see IFC 2015)
shall include, but not limited to: See IFC occupancy classification definition H-2. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 H-3. Building or structures or portions thereof, which contain materials that readily support
combustion or pose physical hazard in excess of those listed in table 5003.1.1(1) (see IFC 2015) shall
include, but not limited to: See IFC occupancy classification definition H-3. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 H-4. Building or structures or portions thereof, which contain materials that are health hazards in
excess of those listed in table 5003.1.1(1) (see IFC 2015) shall include, but not limited to: See IFC
occupancy classification definition H-4. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 H-5. Semiconductors fabrication facilities and comparable research and development areas in which
hazardous production materials (HPM) are used, and the aggregate quantity of material is in excess
of those listed in table 5003.1.1(1) and table 5003.1.1(2) (see IFC 2015). Such facilities and areas
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with section 415 of the IBC 2015. Design of the
sprinkler system shall not be less than table 903.2.5.2 (IFC 2015). 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 Pyroxylin plastics. Buildings or structures where cellulose nitrate film or pyroxylin plastics are
manufactured, stored, or handled in quantities exceeding 100 pounds. 0 s.f.
Add section 903.2.6 Group I to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing a Group I occupancy as provided in this section.
Group I: NFPA 13D or I-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, housing more than 16 persons, on a 24-hour basis, who
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 218/687
NFPA 13R because of age, mental disability, or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment but
which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency
situation without physical assistance from staff.
A facility such as the above with five or fewer persons shall classified as group R-3. A facility such as
the above with at least six and not more than 16 persons shall be classified as Group R-4. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 I-2. Building or structures or portions thereof, used for medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or
custodial care on a 24-hour basis of more than four persons who are not capable of self-preservation.
A facility such as the above with four or fewer persons shall be classified as Group R-3.
Child care facility is any buildings or structures, or a portion thereof, which provides care on a 24-hour
basis to more than five children 21/2 years of age or less shall be classified as Group I-2. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 I-3. Building or structures or portions thereof, which are inhabited by more than five persons who are
under restraint or security. See IFC occupancy classification definition I-3 for type of condition. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 I-4. Building or structures or portions thereof, which are occupied by persons of any age who receive
custodial care for less than 24 hours by individuals other than parents or guardians, relatives by
blood, marriage, or adoption and in a place other than the home of the person receiving care. A
facility such as the above with five or fewer persons shall be classified as group R-3. Place of worship
during religious functions is not included. 0 s.f.
NFPA 13 Adult care facilities provide accommodations for less than 24 hours for more than five unrelated
adults and provides supervision and personal care services. Child care facilities provide supervision
and personal care on less than a 24 hour basis for more than five children 21/2 years of age or less. 0 s.f.
Add section 903.2.7 Group M to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing a Group M occupancy as provided in this section.
Group M: NFPA 13 Building or structures or portions thereof, for the display and sale of merchandise, and involving
stocks of goods, wares, or merchandise, incidental to such purposes and accessible to the public
shall include, but not be limited to: See IFC occupancy classification definition group M.
6,000
s.f.
For high-piled storage requirements, refer to chapter 32 of the IFC 2015 and the WDM Fire Code.
Buildings or structures or portions thereof used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or
mattresses.
5,000
s.f.
Add section 903.2.8 Group R to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing a Group R occupancy as provided in this section.
Group R: NFPA 13R in 4
stories or less, NFPA 13 in
more than 4 stories, both
systems to include attic
space as NFPA 13.
R-1. Hotels, motels, boarding houses (transient). (Occupy less than 30 days)
0 s.f.
NFPA 13R in 4 stories or
less, NFPA 13 in more
than 4 stories, both
systems to include attic
space as NFPA 13.
R-2. Apartment houses, condominiums, boarding houses (non-transient), convents, dormitories,
fraternities and sororities, monasteries
0 s.f.
NFPA 13R to include attic
space as NFPA 13.
Convents, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, monasteries
0 s.f.
NFPA 13D R-3. Dwellings
8,000
s.f.
NFPA 13D R-3. Townhouse
Townhouses that are not open on at least two sides, are required to install fire sprinkler systems and
maintain fire separation requirements as set forth in the IBC 2015.
NFPA 13D or NFPA 13R R-4. Residential care/assisted living facilities for more than five but not more than 16 occupants,
excluding staff. 0 s.f.
Add section 903.2.9 Group S to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing a Group S occupancy as provided in this section.
Group S: NFPA 13 S-1. Moderate hazard storage occupancies including building or portions of buildings used for storage
of combustible materials not classified as Group S, Division 2, or group H occupancies but not be
limited to: See IFC occupancy classification definition Group S-1.
6,000
s.f.
A group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of commercial trucks or buses.
5,000
s.f.
A group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses.
2,500
s.f.
NFPA 13 Repair garages/service stations
3,500
s.f.
Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles parked in basements. 0 s.f.
Buildings used for the repair of commercial trucks or buses. 5,000
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 219/687
s.f.
NFPA 13 Bulk storage of tires
20,000
cubic
feet
NFPA 13 S-2. Low-hazard storage occupancies, including buildings or portions of buildings used for storage of
noncombustible materials, but not be limited to: See IFC occupancy classification Definition Group S-
2.
15,000
s.f.
Buildings or portions of buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with section
406.6 of the IBC 2015 or where located beneath other groups. Exceptions: (1) Enclosed parking
garages located beneath group R-3 occupancies; (2) Parking garages defined in section 406.6 of the
IBC 2015 as open parking garages. 0 s.f.
Amend section 903.2.11 Group U to read as follows:
Group U: Private garages, carports, sheds, and agricultural buildings. n/a
Amend section 903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Where any portion of a basement is located more than 75 feet from openings required by Section 903.2.11.1,
the basement shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
Amend section 903.3.1.2.1 Group R Balconies and Decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for all exterior balconies, decks, and ground floor
patios of dwelling units where the building is required to have a fire sprinkler system installed. Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect such areas shall
be permitted to be located such that their deflectors are within 1 inch to 6 inches below the structural members and a maximum distance of 14 inches
below the deck of the exterior balconies and decks.
Add section 903.3.1.2.2 Fire Sprinklers for Canopies. A canopy covering a door that is required to be marked as an exit shall be required to have fire
sprinklers installed outside that door if the canopy extends more than 4 feet out from the door and is 12 feet or less in height from the ground regardless of
whether the canopy is combustible or non-combustible. Canopies that have vehicle access under them with door openings shall be required to have fire
sprinklers installed under the total canopy regardless of whether the canopy is combustible or non-combustible.
Exception: If the Code does not require a building to have a fire sprinkler system, section 903.7 does not apply.
Amend section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one and two family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4
congregate living facilities and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D, unless the system demands
cannot be met.
Amend section 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections. The location of fire department connections shall be approved by the fire code official.
Amend section 903.4.2 Alarms. A minimum of 110 candela weather proof strobe light suitable for cold weather use with a minimum of 75 candelas at -30
degrees shall be tied into the building fire alarm system and mounted directly above the fire department connection between 7 feet and 10 feet in height
from the ground or as approved by the fire code official.
ALTERNATIVE AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS
Add section 904.12.2.1 Ventilation Operation. The ventilation system shall shut down the make up air to the hood and continue to exhaust upon
activation of the hood fire extinguishing system. Supply air openings other than part of the hood system shall be a minimum of 6 feet from any part of a
Type 1 Hood. Supply air openings closer than 6 feet must shut down upon activation of the extinguishing system.
STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
Add section 905.3.9 Building Footprint and Access. Where the most remote portion of a floor or story is more than 400 feet from a hose connection or
fire department access road, the fire code official is authorized to require standpipes to be provided in approved locations.
PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
Delete section 906.1 Where required. The Exception only.
Amend table 906.3 (1) Fire Extinguishers for Class A Fire Hazards to read as follows: Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in low and
moderate hazard occupancies shall be a 5lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in
a low or moderate hazard occupancy, a 10lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 75-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher.
Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in high hazard occupancies shall be 10lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire sprinkler
system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a high hazard occupancy, a 20lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 50-foot travel
distance to the fire extinguisher.
Amend table 906.3 (2) Fire Extinguishers for Flammable and Combustible Liquids with Depths of Less Than or Equal to .25 inch to read as
follows: Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in low hazard occupancies shall be a 5lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire
sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a low hazard occupancy, a 10lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 50-
foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher. Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in moderate hazard occupancies shall be 10lb. ABC in buildings
that are covered throughout with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a moderate hazard occupancy, a 20lb. ABC fire extinguisher
shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 50-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher. Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in high hazard
occupancies shall be 20lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a high hazard
occupancy, a 20lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is based on a 50-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher with a fire sprinkler
system, 30-foot travel distance with no fire sprinkler system. Other hazardous occupancies will refer to NFPA 10.
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 220/687
Add section 907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panels. Each building shall have no more than 1 Fire Alarm Control Panel (FACP).
Installation of the fire alarm panel shall not exceed six (6) feet in height measured from the floor to the top of the panel.
Exception 1: Panel height may be altered by the code official.
Exception 2: Suppression system releasing panels are not required to meet the limitation in the number of panels.
Amend section 907.2 Where Required General to read as follows: An approved addressable fire alarm system complying with the provisions of this
Code and NFPA 72 shall be installed when the gross square footage of a building is equal to or greater than the area as specified in sections 903.2.1
through 903.2.11 inclusive, subject to the authority having jurisdiction or by section 907.2, whichever shall be more restrictive.
Exception:
1. Buildings with 8 or less initiating devices may use zoned systems provided only one device is used per zone. Each device shall have a plain
English LCD (liquid crystal display). This alpha/numeric descriptor location is required to be reported to the WestCom dispatch center upon activation
of the fire alarm system.
2. R-3 dwellings are not required to meet section 907.2 of this Code.
3. Townhouses are required to be monitored only if a single fire sprinkler system is used for multiple units.
Add section 907.2 (a). Manual Fire Alarm Pull Boxes. Manual fire alarm pull boxes ("pull stations") shall be required where deemed necessary by the
Code Official.
Add section 907.2 (b). Monitoring. All fire alarm systems shall be monitored by a UL listed monitoring station.
Add section 907.2 (c). Location. Each address point identification shall have an alpha/numeric descriptor location for the fire alarm system. This
alpha/numeric descriptor location is required to be reported to the West Des Moines Fire Department dispatch center upon activation of the fire alarm
system.
Add section 907.2 (d). Where required: Where corridors and/or hallways are designed as the path of egress and are protected by fire sprinkler systems,
they shall also be protected by smoke detection. Smoke detection shall be of the photo electric type or as approved by the Code Official.
Delete sections 907.2.8, 907.2.8.1 (Exceptions), 907.2.9, 907.2.9.1 (Exceptions), 907.2.9.3 (Exceptions), 907.2.10 and 907.2.10.1 (Exceptions).
Add section 907.2.8 Group R General. Group R-1; Group R-2 apartment houses, condominiums and boarding houses (non-transient), convents,
dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and monasteries; and Group R-4 shall have a monitored addressable fire alarm system. Upon adoption of this Fire
Code, Group R-1; Group R-2 apartment houses, condominiums and boarding houses (non-transient), convents, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and
monasteries that have existing automatic fire alarm systems shall comply within 3 years to have that fire alarm system monitored.
Amend section 907.2.11 Single and Multi-station Smoke Alarms. Listed single and multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 shall be
installed in accordance with provisions of this Code and the household fire warning equipment provision of NFPA 72. Smoke alarms in dwelling units shall
be addressable with sounder bases and monitored by the building fire alarm system as a supervisory signal only. Mini horns in dwelling units are not
required if notification from a building fire alarm system is through the smoke alarms with sounder bases.
Note: Section 907.2.11 only applies to R-1, R-2, R-4 and I-1.
Add section 907.6.4.1 (a) Zone and Address Location Labeling. Fire alarm panels shall have all zones and address points plainly and permanently
labeled as to their location on the outside of the panel or on an easily readable map of the building, if no display screen is present.
Amend section 907.6.6 Monitoring General to read as follows: When required by this chapter, or the Code Official, an approved UL listed remote
station in accordance with NFPA 72 shall monitor fire alarm systems to provide for the immediate and automatic notification of the Fire Department.
Exception: Automatic sprinkler and fire alarm systems in 1 and 2-family dwellings.
Amend section 910.2.1 Group F-1 or S-1. Smoke and heat vents installed in accordance with Section 910.3 or a mechanical smoke removal system
installed in accordance with Section 910.4 shall be installed in buildings and portions thereof used as a Group F-1 or S-1 occupancy having more than
30,000 square feet of undivided area. In occupied portions of a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
903.3.1.1, where the upper surface of the story is not a roof assembly, a mechanical smoke removal system in accordance with Section 910.4 shall be
installed.
Exception: Group S-1 aircraft repair hangars.
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS
Add section 912.1.1 Fire Department Connection Height. The fire department connection shall be located not less than 18 inches from the bottom of
the cap(s) and not more than 3 feet from the top of the cap(s) above the level of the adjacent grade or access level. Deviation from this height may be
granted by the Code Official for just cause.
Amend section 912.4 Access. Immediate access to the fire department connection shall be maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences,
bushes, trees, walls, or any other objects within a minimum distance of 5-feet on each side of the connection to include in front of the connection and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 221/687
above the connection.
Delete section 912.4.2
MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION
Amend section 1008.3.1 General
In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces that require two or more means of egress or are 400 square feet or greater, an
emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas as approved by the Code Official:
1. Aisles
2. Corridors
3. Exit access stairways and ramps.
Amend section 1008.3.2 Buildings
In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces that require two or more means of egress or are 400 square feet or greater, an
emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
1. Interior exit access stairways and ramps
2. Interior and exterior exit stairways and ramps
3. Exit passageways
4. Vestibules and areas of the level of exit discharge used for exit discharge in accordance with Section 1028.1.
5. Exterior landings as required by Section 1010.1.6 for exit doorways that lead directly to the exit discharge.
Amend section 1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces Item #5
#5. Restrooms containing more than one water closet/urinal or that are handicap accessible.
Add to section 1009.2 Continuity and Components item #11
#11. Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
Add section 1010.1.6.1 Landings at Doors
For landings required by Section 1010.1.5 to be at the same elevation on each side of the door, exterior landings at doors shall be provided with frost
protection.
Add the following language to section 1010.1.9.1 Hardware
Thumb turn locks shall not be allowed
Amend section 1010.1.9.8 (#3) Sensor release of electrically locked egress doors. The doors shall be arranged to unlock from a manually operated
lighted emergency exit button located 40 inches to 48 inches vertically above the floor and within 5 feet of the secured doors. When operated, the manual
unlocking device (emergency exit button) shall result in direct interruption of power to the lock; independent of the access control system electronics and
the doors shall remain unlocked for a minimum of 30 seconds. Ready access shall be provided to the emergency button and shall be clearly identified by a
sign. All doors controlled by an emergency exit button shall have signage as required in section 1010.1.9.8 (#3a). Only one locking system is allowed per
door. Doors must retain positive latching of door at all times if installed in a required rated corridor system.
Add section 1010.1.9.8 (#3a) Access-controlled Egress Doors to read as follows: Emergency exit sign to read as follows: EMERGENCY DOOR
OPERATION, PUSH BUTTON (need arrow pointing from sign to lighted button) minimum height letters 3/4 inches with contrasting color to the door and
affixed to door between 48 to 60 inches.
Add section 1013.1.1 Additional Exit Signs. Exit signs may be required at the discretion of the Code Official to clarify an exit or exit access.
Amend section 1013.2 Floor-level Exit Signs in Group R-1. Low-level exit signs complying with illumination requirements of section 1013.3 shall be
provided in all interior exit corridors serving guest rooms of hotels/motels in Group R, Division 1 occupancies.
The bottom of the sign fixture shall not be less than 6 inches or more than 8 inches above the floor level. For exit doors, the signs shall be on the
door or adjacent to the door with the closest edge of the sign within 4 inches of the door frame. Fixtures shall be installed at a 90 degree angle to the
corridor wall by the exit door. Mid-way fixtures to be flush mounted with the surface of the corridor walls. The Code Official may require additional exit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 222/687
signs for exiting clarity. Fixtures shall be constructed to withstand abuse from foot traffic and luggage. Metal frame work is preferred, but not required.
Amend section 1013.3 Exit Sign Illumination. Exit signs shall use an LED lighting system and be illuminated internally. Exit signs are required to have
battery backup unless an onsite generator is used. Luminance on the face of an exit sign shall have an intensity of not less than 5.0 foot candles (53.82
lux).
Add section 1013.3.1 Combination Lights. Combination exit sign/emergency light devices shall not be allowed.
Add section 1013.3.2 Separation of Emergency Lighting. Emergency lighting shall be separated from the exit sign by a minimum of 6 feet. This
distance may be reduced by the Fire Code Official for just cause.
Add section 1013.3.3 Self-luminous Exit Signs. Self-luminous exit signs installed after July 1, 2004, are not allowed throughout the entire City of West
Des Moines.
Exceptions:
1. Approved self-luminous exit signs may be allowed in tents by the Code Official.
2. Tactile Exit signs required by Section 1013.4 need not be provided with illumination.
Delete sections 1013.5, 1013.6, 1013.6.1, 1013.6.2 and 1013.6.3
Add section 1030.5.3 Window Well Drainage
All window wells shall be provided with approved drainage.
Chapter 32 High Piled Combustible Storage
Amend and add the following into this chapter.
SECTION 3202
DEFINITIONS
3202.1 Definitions.
The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:
SPECULATIVE BUILDING. A Group S, F or M occupancy having an interior clear height greater than 12 feet (3657 mm) where high-piled storage may
accrue and the client leasing or the occupant owner does not know the commodity that will be stored or the method of storage.
3206.2.1 Speculative building. Group S, F and M speculative buildings that have an interior clear height greater than 12 feet where high piled storage
may accrue shall comply with this chapter.
3206.4.2 Sprinkler design.
3206.4.2.1 General. The design of automatic sprinkler systems for the protection of Group M and S occupancies containing high-piled storage or highchallenge
commodities over an area equal to or greater than 2,500 ft.2 (232 m2) and designed for the protection of hazardous materials stored more than
one pallet high in Group M, S or H occupancies, shall be in accordance with this section. This section does not apply to miscellaneous storage within the
scope of NFPA 13.
3206.4.2.2 Requirements for all plan submittals. See Section 903.1.9. and 3201.3 for plan submittal requirements.
3206.4.2.3 Minimum design requirements for speculative warehouses. The design of the automatic sprinkler system for speculative warehouses shall
be based on storage of a cartoned Class A nonexpanded plastic to the available storage height. The storage height shall be determined by subtracting 48
inches (from the highest point of the roof above each system for ESFR and 30 inches for area density applications.
3206.4.2.4 Minimum requirements for client leased or occupant-owned warehouses. The design of an automatic sprinkler system for client leased or
occupant owned buildings containing high piled storage shall be based on the requirements of NFPA 13. The responsible Fire Protection Contractor shall
perform a survey of the building to determine commodity classification, storage configuration, building height and other information related to the
development of an appropriate sprinkler system design. The Contractor shall also make reasonable efforts to meet with the building owner or operator to
understand seasonal or customer related fluctuations to the stored commodities, storage height, and configuration.
The sprinkler design shall be based on the most demanding requirements determined through the on-site survey and discussions with the building owner
or operator. Technical Report shall clearly define the basis for determining the commodity and sprinkler design selection, along with how the commodities
will be isolated or separated, and the referenced design document(s), including NFPA 13 or the current applicable Factory Mutual Data Sheets. If a
specific fire test is used as the basis of design, a copy of the fire test report shall be provided at the time of plan review.
3206.4.2.5 Required information at plan submittal. All plans, hydraulic calculations and technical reports shall be submitted with the plan submittal form.
The individual submitting the design package shall ensure that all of the required information requested on the plan submittal form is included.
3206.4.2.6 Minimum plan information requirements. In addition to the requirements of NFPA 13, the following information shall be included in the plans
or technical report.
3206.4.2.6.1 Class I-IV and Group A plastic commodities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 223/687
A) An owner's certificate in accordance with NFPA 13. The design criteria, e.g., NFPA 13, Factory Mutual Data Sheet, or a specific fire test report.
B) A Water Supply Flow & Pressure Test Report performed within 90 days of the plan submittal
C) The type of design, e.g., Control Mode Density/Design Area Method; Specific Application Control Mode Method; Suppression Mode Method,
including appropriate code references.
D) A description of the stored commodities and how the commodity classification was determined.
E) A layout of the proposed storage arrangement. If the storage is in racks, a plan and elevation detail illustrating rack heights, flue dimensions and
arrangement. This detail is not required for speculation warehouses.
F) The aisle dimensions between each storage array.
G) If a high challenge commodity is separated using fire-resistive construction, the boundary of the fire-resistive construction shall be illustrated.
H) A data sheet for the backflow preventer. If a data sheet is not available, the design professional shall include a statement addressing the minimum
required pressure loss.
I) A data sheet for each installed automatic sprinkler.
J) A data sheet for each pipe hanger used to hang or support the sprinkler piping.
K) If a fire pump will be installed or used, the manufacturer's factory test curve shall be included in the submittal.
L) A cross-section view illustrating obstructions to the ceiling sprinklers, e.g., lights, structural members, cable trays, electrical bus ducts and HVAC
ductwork.
3206.4.2.6.2 Hazardous materials. In addition to the requirements of this section, the following information shall be included in a hazardous materials
technical report.
A) A hazardous materials inventory statement
B) For flammable & combustible liquids, an analysis of the miscibility of Class I liquids, the size and type of the packaging, the packaging materials of
construction, and if the containers have a pressure relieving mechanism.
C) For Level 2 or 3 aerosols, a statement indicating that the aerosols are cartoned or uncartoned.
3206.4.2.7 Identification of sprinkler system capabilities and limitations. A label shall be permanently installed at or adjacent to each sprinkler riser.
When a building contains more than four risers, the sign shall be located at an approved location inside the building. The minimum sign dimension is 6-
inches (152 mm) high by 4-inches (101 mm) wide. The sign shall specify the capabilities and limitations of the automatic sprinkler system. The sign shall
include the following information:
a) The design base or basis, including the edition used
b) A statement indicating if the sprinkler design is control mode density area method, control mode specific application, suppression mode, or any
combination thereof.
c) When used, all of the storage conditions stipulated NFPA 13 for Special Designs.
d) The maximum storage height
e) The minimum required aisle width
f) If storage is in racks, the maximum rack width and minimum transverse and longitudinal flue widths.
g) Storage Capabilities: Commodities designed to be protected by the automatic sprinkler system
h) Limits on storage heights of idle wood and plastic storage
i) Limits on storage heights of miscellaneous Group A plastic, tire and rolled paper storage
j) Locations where in-rack sprinklers are required
k) Locations where horizontal and/or vertical barriers are required
l) Information explaining the manufacturer, sprinkler identification number, k-factor, and operating temperature of the overhead sprinklers protecting
the high-piled storage.
m) Fire Protection Contractor contact information
The following example illustrates a suggested label or sign:
Automatic Sprinkler System
Capabilities & Limitations
Class I water miscible flammable liquids in 1 & 5 gallon polyethylene containers in fiberboard cartons
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 224/687
Stored Commodity Design
Documents
NFPA 13, 2013 edition & NFPA 30
Design Type Control Mode, Density/Area Method
Max. Storage Height 25 feet
Min. Aisle Width 8 feet
Max. Rack Width 9 feet
Flue Dimensions Longitudinal: Min. 6 inches
Transverse: Min. 3 inches
System Capabilities Class I-IV commodities, stored commodity, solid pile or palletized Group A plastics to 12 feet; rack storage of
Group A plastics to 25 feet.
Idle Pallets 6 feet maximum storage height
Tire Storage 5 feet maximum storage height
Rolled Paper Storage 5 feet maximum storage height
In-rack sprinklers In-rack sprinklers are required at each of 3 rack tiers containing the stored commodity. In-rack sprinklers are
Tyco/Central FS-B, 17/32" orifice, QR 155°F element, SIN TY0041
Horizontal Barriers Required at each rack tier containing the stored commodity.
Ceiling Sprinkler Tyco ELO-231B, 3/4" orifice, SR 286°F element, upright, SIN TY0030
FP Contractor ABC Sprinkler Co. Designer: John Smith
FIRE SAFETY DURING CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
Amend section 3301.2 Purpose. This chapter prescribes minimum safeguards for construction, alteration, and demolition operations to provide
reasonable safety to life and property from fire and emergencies during such operations.
Amend section 3310.1 Required Access. Construction sites shall have approved access roads as noted on the approved site plan to all areas of the
building or structure being constructed prior to actual construction taking place, other than installation of underground utilities and non-combustible
foundations. Access roads to buildings or structures shall be constructed no further away than 50 feet from the building or structure with the middle of the
building or structure no further than 150 feet from the access road. If the middle of the building or structure is more than 150 feet from the access road,
temporary access roads shall be constructed around the building or structure where topography allows. It is highly recommended to install parking lots
prior to the beginning of construction for storage of construction material and easier access to the site. Access road surface material shall be of concrete
aggregate or a base layer of asphalt capable of satisfying load limits as outlined in appendix D, section D102 of this Code for fire apparatus imposed loads
unless otherwise approved by the Code Official.
Chapter 38 Special Events
SECTION 3801
GENERAL
3801.1 Scope. Special events including trade shows and exhibitions, outdoor assembly events, outdoor mazes, special amusement buildings, and special
scaffolding structures shall comply with this chapter and Section 1028. Temporary indoor vehicle displays and vehicle competition or demonstrations shall
comply with this chapter and Section 314.
3801.2 Site plans.
A detailed site plan shall be submitted to the fire code official with each permit application for approval.
1. Outdoor events: The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum of 30 business days prior to the event. Site plans shall
include, but not be limited to:
1. The means of egress.
2. Location and width of exits and aisles.
3. Location of exit signs.
4. Location of fencing or means used to confine attendees.
5. Total square footage of enclosed space.
6. Location and arrangement of all tents, booths or cooking equipment.
7. Locations of fire apparatus access roads.
8. Location of fire protection equipment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 225/687
9. Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
10. Location of temporary staffed water stations and permanent water fountains.
2. Trade shows and exhibitions: The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum of 30 business days prior to the event. Site
plans shall include, but not be limited to:
1. The means of egress.
2. Location and width of exits and aisles.
3. Location of exit signs.
4. Total square footage of space.
5. Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment.
6. Location of all fire protection equipment.
7. Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
8. Location of covered or multi-level exhibits or booths.
3. Mazes. The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum of 30 business days prior to the event. Site plans shall include, but not
be limited to:
1. Means of egress.
2. Location and width of exits and aisles.
3. Location of exit signs.
4. Total square footage of space.
5. Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment.
6. Location of all fire protection equipment.
7. Location of means to confine attendees.
8. Locations of fire apparatus access roads.
9. Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
10. Locations of structures.
At time of permit application, the event coordinator shall submit a letter from the property owner authorizing the use of the site, the address of the
site, dates and hours of operation and names and 24-hour phone numbers of at least two principals.
4. Temporary indoor vehicle displays: The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum of 10 business days prior to the display
of electric, liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles, boats or other motor craft. Floor plans shall include, but not be limited to:
1. The means of egress.
2. Location and width of exits and aisles.
3. Location of exit signs.
4. Total square footage of space.
5. Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment.
6. Location of all fire protection equipment.
7. Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
8. Location and size of exhibits and booths.
9. Location of structures.
Exception: Auto dealerships.
5. Vehicle competition or demonstration. The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum of 10 business days prior to the
competition or demonstration of electric, liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles, boats or other motor craft. A floor plan shall include, but not be limited to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 226/687
1. The means of egress.
2. Location and width of exits and aisles.
3. Location of exit signs.
4. Total square footage of space.
5. Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment.
6. Location of all fire protection equipment.
7. Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
8. Location and size of exhibits and booths.
9. Location of structures.
10. Location of fire apparatus access roads where applicable.
SECTION 3802
DEFINITIONS
3802.1 Definitions. The following words and terms are defined in Chapter 2.
CROSS AISLES.
EXHIBITS.
FLAME EFFECT.
MAIN AISLE.
MAZE.
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY EVENT.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
TRADE SHOWS OR EXHIBITIONS.
3803 General Requirements
3803.1 Access for firefighting and medical services. Approved vehicle access for fire fighting and medical services shall be provided in accordance
with Sections 503 and 512.
3803.2 Combustible storage. Combustible materials stored at special events shall be stored in approved locations and containers.
3803.3 Crowd managers. Crowd managers shall be provided where the fire code official determines that an indoor or outdoor gathering warrants crowd
control. Crowd managers shall be in accordance with Section 403.3.
3803.4 Decorative materials and furnishings. Curtains, drapes and decorations including, but not limited to drapes, signs, banners, acoustical materials,
cotton, hay, fabric, paper, straw, moss, split bamboo, and wood chips shall be flame resistant as demonstrated by testing in accordance with NFPA 701, or
provide documentation of flame retardancy. Field flame test shall be in accordance with Section 320. Materials that cannot be treated for flame retardancy
shall not be used unless approved by the fire code official. This includes but is not limited to oilcloth, tarpaper, nylon, plastic cloth, and other plastic
materials.
3803.5 Fire protection equipment clearance. Clearance around all fire protection equipment shall be in accordance with Section 901.4.6.
3803.6 Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers shall be in accordance with Section 906 and NFPA 10
3803.7 Fire watch. Fire watch shall be in accordance with Section 403.12.1.
3803.8 Fireworks, pyrotechnics. Fireworks and pyrotechnics shall comply with Chapter 56.
3803.9 Housekeeping. The special event area and related areas shall be kept free from combustible debris at all times.
3803.10 LP-gas heaters. Fuel supplies for liquefied-petroleum gas-fired heaters shall comply with Chapter 61 of the International Fire Code.
3803.11 Open flame devices. Open flame devices shall comply with Section 308.
3803.12 Waste disposal. Combustible debris shall not be accumulated at special events. Combustible debris, rubbish and waste material shall be
removed from special events at the end of each shift of work. Combustible debris, rubbish and waste material shall not be disposed of by burning on the
site unless approved.
SECTION 3804
TRADE SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 227/687
3804.1 General. Trade shows and exhibitions conducted within any occupancy shall comply with Chapter 38.
3804.2 Vehicles. Liquid- and gas-fueled and electric vehicles, boats or other motor-craft and equipment used for display, competition or demonstration
within a building shall be in accordance with Section 314.
3804.3 Means of egress. Means of egress shall comply with this section and the requirements of Chapter 10.
3804.3.1 Travel distance. The maximum travel distance from any point in an exhibit to an exit access aisle shall not exceed 50 feet (15240mm).
3804.3.2 Aisles.
3804.3.2.1 Aisle width. Minimum aisle width inside a trade show or exhibition shall comply with the following:
Square Footage of Trade Show or Exhibition Minimum Aisle Width
Greater than 15,000 square feet (1393m2) 10 feet (3048mm)
5,000 square feet (465 square meters) to 15,000 square feet (1393m2) 8 feet (2438mm)
Less than 5,000 square feet (465 m2) 6 feet (1829mm)
3804.3.3 Obstructions. Aisles shall be kept clear of all obstructions, including but not limited to, fixtures and displays of goods for sale, chairs, tables,
product, displays, vehicles, and trailer tongues.
3804.3.4 Exit signs. Exit signs shall be visible from all locations in the occupancy.
3804.4 Exhibit construction and materials. The materials used for an exhibit shall comply with Section 3804.4 and Chapter 8
3804.4.1 Materials. Shall be one of the following:
1. Noncombustible or limited-combustible materials.
2. Wood that is greater than 1/4-inch (6.35mm) nominal thickness
3. Wood 1/4-inch (6.35mm) nominal thickness or less that is pressure-treated fire-retardant wood meeting the requirements of NFPA 703, Standard
for Fire Retardant Impregnated Wood and Fire Retardant Coatings for Building Materials. The product shall be marked or labeled by the
manufacturer. The product shall not be painted or similarly modified until the material has been inspected and the marking or labeling verified, or
provide documentation acceptable to the fire code official.
3804.4.1.1 Flame retardant materials. Materials shall comply with Chapter 8.
3804.4.1.2 Wall and ceiling coverings. Textile wall coverings, such as carpeting and similar products used as wall or ceiling finishes shall comply with
Chapter 8.
3804.4.1.3 Plastics. Plastics shall be limited to those that comply with Chapter 8. Plastics used in trade shows and exhibitions with an occupant load of
300 or more shall be Class A or Class B. Plastics used in trade shows and exhibitions with an occupant load of less than 300, shall be Class A, Class B or
Class C.
3804.5 Combustible materials storage.
3804.5.1 Quantity. Combustible materials shall be limited to a one-day supply
3804.5.2 Location. Storage of combustible materials behind exhibits, booths, or tents is prohibited. Combustible materials, including but not limited to
wood crates, paper and cardboard boxes, shall be stored outside the building in an approved area or in a storeroom having a fire-resistance rating of at
least one hour and protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system
3804.6 Covered exhibits and booths.
3804.6.1 Fire Protection.
3804.6.1.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. An approved sprinkler system shall be provided in covered exhibits and booths exceeding 300 square feet
(2787 m2). Each level of multi-level exhibit booths shall be protected throughout, including the uppermost level where the uppermost level is covered with
a ceiling.
3804.7 Multi-level booths. Construction documents for all multi-level exhibits shall be approved and stamped by a licensed structural engineer or
architect and shall be submitted with the permit application. This includes any exhibit where a live load is proposed above the exhibit area floor level,
regardless of the accessibility of the area to the public. Upper levels of multi-level booths with an occupant load greater than 10 persons shall have at least
2 remote exits.
3804.8 Hazardous Materials. Hazardous materials shall comply with this section and Chapters 50 through 67.
3804.8.1 Specific prohibitions. The following hazardous materials shall not be stored, handled or used in trade shows and exhibitions:
1. Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and 1.5 explosives as classified by the U.S. Department of Transportation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 228/687
2. Detonable, Class I and Class II organic peroxides.
3. Class I-A flammable liquids.
4. Class 4 and Class 3 oxidizers.
5. Class 4 and Class 3 (unstable) reactive materials.
6. Class 3 water-reactive materials.
7. Pyrophoric materials.
8. Highly toxic materials
9. Toxic gases.
10. Fueling or defueling of flammable or combustible that are stored or used as liquids, cryogenics or compressed gases.
3804.9 Demonstration cooking and warming equipment or devices.
3804.9.1 General. Cooking and warming devices for demonstration purposes only shall be in accordance with Section 3804.9.
3804.9.2 Public Isolation. Equipment and devices shall be isolated from the public by not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) or by a noncombustible 3-sided
barrier between the equipment and devices and the public.
3804.9.3 Protection. Single-well cooking equipment using combustible oils or solids shall meet the following:
1. A noncombustible lid shall be immediately available. The lid shall be of sufficient size to cover the cooking well completely.
2. The cooking surface shall not exceed 288 square inches (1858 cm2).
3. The equipment shall be placed on a noncombustible surface.
4. The equipment shall be separated from each other by a horizontal distance of not less than 2 feet (609mm).
3804.9.4 Cooking equipment shall be separated from combustible materials by a horizontal distance of at least 2 feet (609mm).
3804.9.5 Butane. Butane for cooking equipment shall be limited to one 10 oz cylinder and one spare in storage, of the same size, per appliance. Storage
location shall be approved by the fire code official.
3704.9.5.1 Portable butane-fueled appliances. Portable butane-fueled appliances are allowed in restaurants and in attended commercial food catering
operations where fueled by not more than two 10 oz (284gL) LP-gas capacity, nonrefillable butane containers that have a water capacity not exceeding
1.08 lb (0.5 kg) per container. The containers shall be directly connected to the appliance, and manifolding of containers is not permitted. Storage of
cylinders is limited to 24 containers, with an additional 24 permitted where protected by a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated barrier.
SECTION 3805
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY EVENTS
3805.1 General. Outdoor assembly events shall be in accordance with this Section 3805 and Chapter 10.
3805.2 Occupant load. The fire code official shall establish an occupant load for the event site.
3805.3 Exits. Exits shall comply with Chapter 10 and be as remote from each other as practical and shall be provided as follows:
Occupant Load
Minimum Number
of Exits
1 to 500 2
501 to 1,000 3
1,001 to 1,500 4
each additional 500 persons 36 additional inches of exit width
3805.3.1 Width. The aggregate clear width of exits shall be a minimum of 36 inches wide (914mm) for each 500 persons to be accommodated.
3805.3.2 Signs. Exits shall be identified with signs that read "EXIT". The signs shall be weather-resistant with lettering on a contrasting background. The
lettering shall be of sufficient height and brush stroke to be immediately visible from 75 feet (22,860mm). Placement of the exit signs shall be approved by
the fire code official.
3805.4 Concession stands, food booths, and retail booths.
3805.4.1 General. Concession stands, food booths and retail booths shall be in accordance with Section 3805.4.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 229/687
3805.4.1.1 Distances. A minimum of 20 feet (6096mm) shall be provided between every 150 linear feet (45,720mm) of booth space. A minimum of 30 feet
(9144mm) shall be provided between booths used for cooking and the vehicles, generators, or any other internal combustion engines. A minimum of 30
feet (9144 mm) shall be provided between booths used for cooking and amusement rides or devices.
3805.4.2 Cooking appliances or devices.
3805.4.2.1 Public isolation. Cooking appliances or devices shall be isolated from the public by not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) or by a non-combustible 3-
sided barrier between the equipment and devices and the public.
3805.4.2.2 Protection. Single-well cooking equipment using combustible oils or solids shall meet the following:
1. A noncombustible lid shall be immediately available. The lid shall be of sufficient size to cover the cooking well completely.
2. The cooking surface shall not exceed 288 square inches (18,580mm).
3. The equipment shall be placed on a noncombustible surface.
4. The equipment shall be separated from each other by a horizontal distance of not less than 2 feet (609mm).
3805.4.2.3 Liquefied petroleum gas (LP-gas). LP-gas shall be in accordance with Chapter 61 and NFPA 58.
3805.4.2.3.1 Maximum number and quantity. A maximum of a total aggregate water capacity of 50 gallons (95L) of LP-gas is permitted at one
concession stand or booth used for cooking.
3805.4.2.3.2 LP-gas high-pressure cylinder hoses. Hoses shall be designed for a working pressure of 350 PSIG (2413 kPa) with a safety factor of 5 to
1 and shall be continuously marked with LP-GAS, PROPANE, 350 PSI (2413 kPa) WORKING PRESSURE, and the manufacturer's name or trademark.
Hose assemblies, after the application of couplings, shall have a design capability of 700 PSIG (4826 kPa). Hose shall not exceed 12 feet (3638 mm)
unless approved by the fire code official.
3805.4.2.3.3 LP-gas low-pressure cylinder hoses. Hoses with a working pressure of 5 psig shall be allowed when a fix regulator is set a 5 psi and is
connected directly to the LP GAS cylinder. The hose shall not exceed 12 feet (3658 mm) unless approved by the fire code official.
3805.4.3.3 Storage of containers. Containers shall be stored in accordance with Chapter 61.
3805.4.4 Generators/electrical. The generators shall be installed at least 10 feet (3048mm) from combustible materials, and shall be isolated from the
public by physical guard, fence, or enclosure installed at least 3 feet (914mm) away from the internal combustion power source, and be provided with a
compliant portable fire extinguisher per Section 906 and NFPA 10.
3805.4.5 Temporary water stations. When outdoor temperatures are expected to exceed 90°F (35°C), the event sponsor shall provide and maintain a
minimum of one staffed water station for each 1,000-projected attendance. The water station shall include adequate water supply, cups, and a means for
rapid replenishing of exhausted water. Each water station shall be located as far apart as practicable to allow ease of access for event attendees.
SECTION 3806
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES
3806.1 General. Mobile food vehicles which are temporarily or permanently stored on a property where food items are processed or prepared and sold to
the public shall comply with this section.
Exception: Food peddlers operating a retail food establishment from a vehicle designated to be readily movable in which food is; sold or given away
but not composed, compounded, thawed, reheated, cut, cooked, processed or prepared.
3806.2 A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes
that produce grease vapors. Commercial kitchen exhaust hoods shall comply with the requirements of the International Mechanical Code.
3806.2.1 Maintenance. Hoods shall be inspected, tested, and maintained in accordance with this code and the International Mechanical Code.
3806.2.2 Inspections and tests. Kitchen hood extinguishing systems shall be inspected and tested every six months by a state of Iowa licensed fire
protection contractor.
3806.3 Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided within a 30-foot (9144 mm) travel distance of commercial-type cooking
equipment. An approved 2A:20B:C rated dry chemical fire extinguisher shall be provided within 30 feet (9144 mm) of any commercial cooking equipment.
Additionally, cooking equipment involving solid fuels or vegetable or animal oils and fats shall be protected by a Class K rated portable extinguisher in
accordance with Section 904.12.5.1 or 904.12.5.2, as applicable.
3806.4 Liquefied petroleum gas (LP-gas). LP-gas shall be in accordance with Chapter 61 and NFPA 58.
3806.4.1 Maximum number and quantity. A maximum of two LP-gas containers with a total aggregate water capacity of 50 gallons (190 L) is permitted
at one mobile food vehicle.
3806.4.2 LP-gas cylinder hoses. Hoses shall be designed for a working pressure of 350 psig (2413 kPa) with a safety factor of 5 to 1 and shall be
continuously marked with LP-GAS, PROPANE, 350 PSI WORKING PRESSURE, and the manufacturer's name or trademark. Hose assemblies, after the
application of couplings, shall have a design capability of 700 psig (4826 kPa). Hose assemblies shall be leak tested at the time of installation at not less
the operating pressure of the system in which they are installed.
3806.5 Location. Mobile food vehicles shall not be located within 20 feet (6096 mm) of buildings, tents, canopies or membrane structures.
SECTION 3807
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 230/687
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDINGS
3807.1 General. [B] Special amusement buildings shall be in accordance with this section and Section 411 of the International Building Code.
Exception: Amusement buildings or portions thereof, which are without walls or a roof and are constructed to prevent the accumulation of smoke.
3807.2 Use of combustible decorative materials. Use of combustible decorative materials shall be in accordance with Chapter 8.
3807.3 Assistance. Adult monitors with flashlights shall be available to provide assistance in the event someone becomes lost or disoriented. One adult
monitor shall be provided for every 60 persons.
3807.4 Automatic sprinkler system. Special amusement buildings shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Chapter 9.
3807.4.1 Temporary special amusement buildings. Where the special amusement building is temporary, the sprinkler water supply shall be of an
approved temporary means. The sprinkler piping shall be connected to a temporary water supply having sufficient capacity (flow and pressure) to supply
residential or standard quick spray response sprinkler heads at a minimum design density of 0.15 gpm (.57 LPM) per square foot of protected floor area.
The design shall be based on flowing the six most hydraulically remote sprinkler heads. Should the temporary amusement building contain less than six
heads, the design shall assume that all heads are flowing simultaneously.
The temporary water supply may be connected to a domestic water line, a fire line, or temporary on-site storage tank as long as the minimum design
densities are met. An indicating type control valve shall be installed in an accessible location between the sprinkler system and the connection to the
water supply.
SECTION 3808
MAZES
3808.1 General. Mazes including, but not limited to corn stalk or hedge mazes, shall be in accordance with Section 3808.
3808.1.2 Safe refuge areas. Safe refuge areas shall be established outside of the maze or building and structure, and shall not be closer than 50 feet
(15240mm).
3808.1.3 Paths. Paths throughout the maze shall be a minimum of 36 inches (914mm) in width and shall be clear and unobstructed width.
3808.1.4 Separation. A minimum of 20 feet (6096mm) shall be provided between mazes and buildings and structures. The 20-foot (6096mm) clearance
shall be free from vegetation and obstructions.
3808.1.5 Means of egress. Each exit shall be a minimum of 6 feet (1828mm) wide.
3808.1.5.1 Travel distance. The maximum travel distance to reach an exit access shall not exceed 75 feet (22,860mm). The travel distance shall be
determined by using the maze path.
3808.1.5.2 Number. The travel distance required to reach an exit access shall determine the number of exits required. Locking devices shall remain
unlocked on exits when the maze is occupied.
3808.1.5.3 Exit signs. Exit signs shall be provided next to or above each exit. The lettering shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305mm) high with 2-inch
(51mm) brushstroke. The signs shall read EXIT with lettering in a color contrasting to the sign's background.
3808.2 Event plans. The following plans shall be submitted to the fire code official.
3808.2.1 General fire safety plan. The plan shall include, but not be limited to procedures that shall be used to prevent over-drying of vegetation
throughout the site, documentation of decorative materials flame-retardancy, the maximum number of attendees.
3808.2.2 Security plan. The plan shall document who shall provide security (e.g., off-duty police officers, sheriff's posse, employees). All security
personnel shall be provided with a 2-way radio and flashlight.
3808.2.3 Evacuation plans. The plan shall document the responsibilities of all on-site employees. The plan shall also document how attendees will be
evacuated, and where they will be evacuated.
3808.2.4 Maze rules. Maze rules shall be posted at maze entrance.
3808.3 Employee responsibilities. Each employee shall be familiar with the evacuation plan and with fire extinguisher locations. Documentation of
training shall be provided to the fire code official.
3808.3.1 Guides. An employee shall be responsible for guiding a group of not more than 14 attendees through the maze. Each employee shall be
provided with a minimum of one flashlight and two-way radio. The employees shall be responsible for detecting and reporting fire or smoke to a competent
person posted at the maze main entrance and begin evacuation procedures.
3808.3.2 Main entrance employee. Each maze shall be manned by an employee at the entrance. The employee shall be capable of communicating with
the employees and shall be provided with a cellular telephone. When the main entrance employee receives a report of smoke, fire or injury, the employee
shall immediately call 9-1-1.
808.4 Watering. Corn stalk and hedge mazes shall be provided with sufficient water and at a frequency that prevents the vegetation from becoming dry or
brittle. Failure to comply with this provision is an imminent hazard and the fire code official shall issue a stop order.
3808.5 Buildings and structures. When buildings and structures are intended to be occupied by attendees, the building and structure shall comply with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 231/687
Section 3807.
SECTION 3809
COVERED MALL BUILDINGS
3809.1 General. Temporary use of the common pedestrian area within a covered mall building for promotional, Group A, Group E, Group M or similar
activities shall be in accordance with Section 3809.
3809.2 General requirements.
3809.2.1 Main aisle width. Main aisles shall be a minimum of 10 feet (3048mm) in width or the minimum required means of egress width, whichever is
greater, and shall be maintained in accordance with Chapter 10. Main aisles shall not be obstructed.
3809.2.2 Cross aisle width. Cross aisles shall be a minimum of 15 feet (4572mm) in width or the required means of egress width, whichever is greater,
and shall be maintained in accordance with Chapter 10.
3809.2.3 Fueled equipment. Liquid- or gas-fueled, or electric appliances, tools, apparatus, craft or vehicles shall be displayed in a mall in accordance with
Section 314. LP-gas powered floor maintenance machines may be used when in accordance with Chapter 61.
3809.3 Combustible decorative materials. Combustible decorative materials shall be in accordance with Chapter 8.
Insert Code Section: IFC 5601.4 Exception 1 Language:
Exception: Persons in charge of fireworks display or pyrotechnic special effect operations may be less than 21 years of age if they possess a valid
PGI display fireworks operator certification or equivalent certification approved by the fire code official.
Delete Code Section: IFC Section 6104.2
Replace with the following language:
6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the
protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the installation of liquefied petroleum gas shall be prohibited unless specifically approved by
the fire code official, and in that case the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 1,000 gallons (3785 L)
(see Section 3 of the Sample Legislation for Adoption of the International Fire Code on page xxi).
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Add section 5003.13 Hazardous Substances, Notification and Cleanup.
(a) Scope. This section shall apply to the release of hazardous substances and the notification, cleanup, and recovery of costs associated with the
mitigation of hazardous conditions.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, these words have the following meaning:
1. "Cleanup" means the removal of the hazardous substances to a place where the waste will not cause any danger to persons or the
environment, in accordance with applicable statutes, rules, and regulations, or the treatment of the material as defined herein to eliminate the
hazardous condition, including the restoration of the area to a general good appearance without noticeable odor as much as practicable. "Cleanup"
includes all actions necessary to contain, collect, identify, analyze, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous substance and to restore the
sites from which such hazardous substance was cleaned up.
2. "Hazardous condition" means any situation involving the actual, imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance.
(i) Within the City or onto City property located outside the City which, because of the quantity, strength, and toxicity of the hazardous substance,
its mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the public health or safety; or
(ii) Onto land, into the waters within the State of Iowa or into the atmosphere, but outside the City, which, because of the quantity, strength, and
toxicity of the hazardous substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the public
health or safety of persons or property within the City.
Hazardous conditions include any accident involving hazardous materials required to be reported under section 321.266(4) of the Code of Iowa.
3. "Hazardous substance" means any substance or mixture of substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety or environment and
includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that, in confinement, generates pressure
through decomposition, heat, or other means. The following are examples of substances which, in sufficient quantity, may be hazardous: acids;
alkalis; explosives; fertilizers; heavy metals such as chromium, arsenic, mercury, lead, and cadmium; industrial chemicals; paint thinners; paints;
pesticides; petroleum products; poisons; radioactive materials; sludges; and organic solvents. "Hazardous substance" includes any hazardous
waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act of 1976, as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated under section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous materials designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act, or any hazardous substance listed under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act of 1980.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 232/687
4. "Person" is a natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns, or any other similar legal entity or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
5. "Responsible person" means the person, whether the owner, agent, lessor, or tenant, in charge of the hazardous substance being stored,
processed, or handled, or the owner or company transporting hazardous wastes or substances whether on public ways or grounds or on private
property where the spill would cause danger to the public or to any persons or to the environment.
6. "Treatment" means a method, technique, or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological character
or composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the substance non-hazardous, safer for transport, amenable for
recovery, amenable for storage, or to reduce it in volume.
Treatment includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous substance to render it
non-hazardous.
(c) Notifications. When a hazardous condition is created, the responsible person shall notify WestCom and the West Des Moines Fire Department
immediately upon discovery of the condition, but in no instance later than thirty (30) minutes after the discovery of the hazardous condition.
(d) Cleanup Required. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous
substance, so that the hazardous substance, or a constituent of the hazardous substance, may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the Fire Chief or the Chief's designee may remove or provide for removal and the disposal of
the hazardous substance at any time, unless the Fire Chief or the Chief's designee determines such removal will be properly and promptly
accomplished by the responsible person. If the responsible party does not initiate and complete cleanup within the time designated by the Fire
Department, the City may proceed to remedy the hazardous condition by performing the necessary cleanup services.
(e) Loss, Burden or Costs. A responsible person shall be liable to the City for all mitigation costs incurred by the City or other contract agencies,
including but not limited to, chemical damage, contamination of equipment, and the use of consumable materials. If charges for such cleanup costs
are not paid within thirty (30) days after invoice, the City shall proceed to obtain payment by all legal means.
EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
Amend section 5601.1 Scope. It shall be unlawful without a permit for any person to possess, store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or
explode any explosives, explosive materials, and fireworks within the corporate limits of the City of West Des Moines.
Exceptions:
1. The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard, or National Guard.
2. Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia.
3. The possession, storage, and use of small ammunition when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging requirements.
4. The possession, storage, and use of not more than 1 pound (0.454 kg) of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (9 kg) of
smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal consumption.
5. The use of explosive materials by federal, state, and local regulatory, law enforcement and fire agencies acting in their official capacities.
6. Special industrial explosive devices which in the aggregate contain less than 50 pounds (23 kg) of explosive materials.
7. The possession, storage, and use of blank industrial power load cartridges when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging regulations.
8. Transportation in accordance with DOT 49 CFR Parts 100-178.
9. Items preempted by federal regulations.
Amend section 5601.2.4 Financial Responsibility to read as follows. The applicant shall, at the time he or she makes his or her application for a
permit, attach thereto a bond or certificate of insurance naming the applicant and the City as insured, in the sum of not less than $1,000,000.00, provided
that the Code Official or the City Council may at their discretion require a greater amount. Said bond and insurance shall inure to the use and benefit of the
City and/or any person who suffers damage either to person or property by reason of said display of fireworks.
Amend section 5601.4 Qualifications. Persons in charge of magazines, blasting, fireworks display, or pyrotechnic special effect operations shall not be
under the influence of alcohol or drugs which impair sensory or motor skills, shall be at least 21 years of age, and shall demonstrate knowledge of all
safety precautions related to the storage, handling, or use of explosives, explosive materials, or fireworks.
Exception: Persons in charge of firework displays, or pyrotechnic special effect operations, shall possess a valid PGI Display Fireworks Operator
Certification or equivalent certification approved by the Code Official.
Amend section 5601.7 Seizure. The Code Official is authorized to seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed or disposed of in an approved manner, at
the expense of the owner, explosives, explosive materials, and all stocks of illegal fireworks (not State approved), offered or exposed for sale, possess,
stored, and held in violation of this section.
Amend section 5605.1 Manufacture, Assembly, and Testing of Explosives, Explosive Materials, and Fireworks
General: It shall be unlawful to manufacture, assemble, and test explosives, explosive materials, and fireworks within the corporate limits of the City of
West Des Moines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 233/687
Exceptions:
1. The hand loading of small arms ammunition prepared for personal use and not offered for sale.
2. The mixing and loading of blasting agents at blasting sites in accordance with NFPA 495.
3. The use of binary explosives or plosophoric materials in blasting or pyrotechnic special effects applications in accordance with NFPA 495 or NFPA
1126.
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
Add section 5704.2.9.7.10 Alternative Containment and Protection. All tanks that have a secondary tank of steel, concrete, or approved materials shall
be capable of holding 110% of the product stored. A non-combustible roof and roof framework shall cover all open top secondary tanks exposed to
weather.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
Amend section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by law in the adopting ordinance restricting the
storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not
exceed a water capacity of 1,000 gallons. Within the limits established by law in the adopting ordinance restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas
for the protection of LI light industrial districts and GI general industrial districts, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water
capacity of 5,000 gallons.
Add section 6104.3.3
LP Gas shall not be stored or used inside of a building.
REFERENCED STANDARDS
NFPA 10 2010
NFPA 13 2010
NFPA 13D 2010
NFPA 13R 2010
NFPA 20 2010
NFPA 30 2010
NFPA 30A 2010
NFPA 70 2010
NFPA 72 2010
NFPA 96 2010
NFPA 101 2010
NFPA 2001 2010
APPENDIX D
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS
Amend D101.1 Scope. Fire apparatus access roads shall be in accordance with this appendix and all other applicable requirements of the International
Fire Code. Public streets are regulated using the State Wide Urban Design and Specifications for public improvements as amended by the City of West
Des Moines. Private streets are also regulated using the State Wide Urban Design and Specifications for public improvements as amended by the City of
West Des Moines.
Amend D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed State Wide Urban Design and Specifications for public improvements or as
approved by City Engineer.
Amend D103.3 Turning Radius. The minimum turning radii shall be determined by the Code Official.
Amend D103.4 Dead Ends. For residential properties, the maximum dead-end length for a public or private street is 750 feet constructed with a 37.5 foot
radius cul-de-sac bulb, or a temporary turnaround for temporary construction or phasing approved by the City of West Des Moines Fire Marshal. The
maximum dead-end length for a public or private street may be extended to 1,000 feet if each residential property located beyond 750 feet includes an
approved fire sprinkler system. For commercial and industrial properties, the maximum dead-end length is 750 feet constructed with a 50 foot radius culde-
sac bulb, or a temporary turnaround for temporary construction or phasing approved by the City of West Des Moines Fire Marshal.
Amend D103.5 Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates. Gates securing fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria:
1. The minimum gate width shall accommodate a 14-foot clear drive lane width.
2. Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 234/687
3. Construction of the gate shall be of materials that allow for manual operation by one person.
4. Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective.
5. Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening
devices shall be approved by the Code Official.
6. Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools.
7. Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by the Code Official.
Amend D103.6 Signs. Where required by the Code Official, fire apparatus access roads shall conform to section 511.4. Signs shall be posted on one or
both sides of the fire apparatus road as required by section D103.6.1 or D103.6.2.
Amend D103.6.1 Roads 20 to 26 feet in Width. Fire apparatus access roads 20 to 26 feet wide shall be posted on both sides as a fire lane when
required by the Code Official.
Amend D103.6.2 Roads more than 26 feet in Width. Fire apparatus access roads more than 26 feet wide shall be posted on one side of the road as a
fire lane when required by the Code Official.
Section D104 Commercial and Industrial Developments.
Delete sections D104.1 and D104.2 and Replace with the following wording.
D104.1 Access. All buildings shall have a minimum of two fire apparatus accesses as approved by the Code Official. Based on the building occupancy
hazard, the Code Official may require more than two fire apparatus accesses. The Code Official may reduce this requirement for just cause as long as
safety to the buildings/occupants is not jeopardized.
Amend D104.3 Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half the length of the
maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses. The Code Official may reduce
the separation distance between accesses for just cause as long as safety to the buildings/occupants is not jeopardized.
(Ord. 2196, 2-6-2017)
4-3-5: APPEALS:
A. Appeals Process: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Code official may appeal the decision to the Municipal Code Hearing Officer as set out in
section 4-4-9 of this title. The appeal shall be completed by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days from the date of
issue of the written decision by the building official. For appeal purposes, the date of issue shall be the date the Code official signs, dates, and mails
the written decision. Failure to file a timely notice of appeal as required herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and the decision of the
Code official shall be final.
The notice of appeal shall clearly set forth with specificity each and every ground that serves as the basis for the appeal, and it shall be accompanied
by copies of plans, specifications, or any pertinent information, which may be required to adequately evaluate the appeal. Any matter not specifically
raised in the notice of appeal shall be deemed to be final and shall not be reviewed by the Municipal Code Hearing Officer.
The notice of appeal shall also be accompanied by a one hundred dollar ($100.00) filing fee for administrative and publication costs.
Upon receipt of a timely filed notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall schedule the appeal for hearing before the Municipal Code Hearing Officer. Written
notification of the time, place, and nature of the hearing shall be given to the petitioner within five (5) working days after the written petition is filed with
the City Clerk.
The hearing shall be scheduled no later than twenty (20) working days after the date on which the written petition was filed and may be extended for a
reasonable period at the Municipal Code Hearing Officer's discretion, or upon written request from the petitioner or the Code official, for good cause
shown.
In the event that an ambiguity arises as to an interpretation of the Code, the Municipal Code Hearing Officer may interpret the Code as applied to the
specific instance presented. Such decisions shall be on a case-by-case basis and shall not be binding in future cases.
The Municipal Code Hearing Officer shall not waive any requirements of the Code unless the Municipal Code Hearing Officer concludes that the
provision(s) is unduly burdensome or impracticable under the circumstances. Such decisions will also be as a case-by-case basis and shall not be
binding in future cases.
B. Hearing Procedure: The procedures provided in subsection 4-4-9E of this title shall apply to hearings held under this chapter. (Ord. 2196, 2-6-2017)
4-3-6: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS:
The building official and the Code official of the Fire Department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now enumerated in said Code.
The Code official shall post such list in a conspicuous place at the Administrative Offices of the Fire Department and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons. (Ord. 2196, 2-6-2017)
4-3-7: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 235/687
A. This Code is enacted only for the purpose of securing to individuals the enjoyment of rights and privileges to which they are entitled as members of the
public, rather than for the purpose of protecting any individual from harm.
B. The City, its officers, employees, or agents make no representations or warranties of any kind whatsoever, expressed or implied, with respect to the
completeness or thoroughness of the inspections and examinations performed under this Code, but said inspections are made solely to assist the
owner of the building, structure, equipment, and premises to meet certain minimum requirements of this Code and to compel, if necessary, the owner to
meet the minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare, and safety of persons and property. Nothing herein contained in this Code
shall alleviate the owner of any building, structure, equipment, and premises from making an independent inspection in order to fulfill the requirements
of this Code, nor shall this Code be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any building,
structure, equipment, or premises regulated herein from any damages to any person or property caused by defects or Code violations. The City, its
officers, employees, or agents shall not be held as assuming any liability for damages to any person or property by reason of any inspections
authorized by this Code or investigations, or any approvals issued herein, or for any act or failure to act in the enforcement of this Code. (Ord. 2196, 2-
6-2017)
4-3-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter are simple misdemeanors and are punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. Pursuant to Iowa Code section 100.41, the officials of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the authority to
issue citations for violations of this chapter. Violations of this chapter are also declared to be Municipal infractions and may be punished as provided in title
1, chapter 4 of this Code. Officials of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the discretion to enforce this chapter either as a Municipal infraction or a
simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 2196, 2-6-2017)
4-3-9: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING STANDARDS:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Fire Code hereby adopted, are found to be in conflict with any provision of Iowa Code or
regulations of the State Fire Marshal, or any provision of any Zoning, Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical, Safety, or Health ordinance or Code
of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety of persons and property shall prevail. (Ord.
2196, 2-6-2017)
4-3-10: VALIDITY:
The City hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence, or word of this chapter or of the Code hereby adopted be declared for any reason
to be invalid, it is the intent of the City Council that it would have passed all other portions of this chapter independent of the elimination herefrom of any
such portion as may be declared invalid. (Ord. 2196, 2-6-2017)
4-3-11: WHEN EFFECTIVE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, adoption, and publication as required by law. (Ord. 2196, 2-6-2017)
Chapter 4
NUISANCES
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED BUILDING: Any building or portion of a building which has stood with an incomplete exterior shell for longer than one year or any building or
portion thereof which has stood unoccupied for longer than six (6) months and which meets one or more of the following criteria:
Unsecured.
Having Housing Code or Building Code violations.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The City Manager or any Enforcement Officer designated by the City Manager of the City of West Des Moines to
enforce this chapter.
INOPERABLE/OBSOLETE VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street,
excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall include, without limitation, motor vehicle,
automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon or any combination thereof, and which is not licensed for the current year as required by law
and/or which exhibits any one of the following characteristics:
A. Broken Glass: Any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a broken windshield, or any other broken glass.
B. Broken Or Loose Parts: Any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door, bumper, hood, wheel, steering wheel, trunk top or
tailpipe.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 236/687
C. Missing Engine Or Wheels: Any vehicle which is lacking an engine or one or more wheels or other structural parts which renders such vehicle totally
inoperable.
D. Habitat For Animals Or Insects: Any vehicle or part of a vehicle which has become a habitat for rats, mice or snakes or any other vermin or insects.
E. Defective Or Obsolete Condition: Any vehicle or part of a vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, constitutes a threat to the
public health and safety.
F. Inoperable Condition: Any vehicle that is not capable of moving in both forward and reverse gears.
JUNK OR SALVAGE MATERIAL: Any discarded or salvaged building material or fixture; any obsolete or inoperable machinery or parts thereof; scrap or
iron or steel.
OVERLAND FLOWAGE EASEMENT OR STORMWATER FLOWAGE EASEMENTS: Those easements as shown on an official plat of record intended to
convey stormwater and surface water or by separate recorded easement document approved by the City in conjunction with the development of a parcel
of land within the City.
OWNER: The person or persons who are the record owners of real property according to the records of the County Recorder's Office.
REFUSE: Any putrescible and nonputrescible and combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, garbage, material resulting from the handling,
processing, storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food, vegetable or animal matter, offal, rubbish, plant waste such as tree trimmings or grass
cuttings, ashes, incinerator residue, street cleanings, construction debris, and solid industrial and market wastes.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person having possession or control of real or personal property including, without limitation, any one or more of the
following:
Agent.
Assignee or collector of rents.
Holder of a contract or deed.
Lessee.
Mortgagee or vendee in possession.
Owner.
Receiver or executor or trustee.
Other person, firm or corporation exercising apparent control over a property.
VEGETATION: Any plant life upon private property that is not a part of a conservation easement or that was planted for erosion control purposes and is not
an agricultural crop such as gardens and typical cropland production.
WEATHER RESISTANT SURFACE: Existing gravel or rock surfaces, concrete and asphalt. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1992)
4-4-2: NUISANCES DECLARED:
Whatever is injurious to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property, is a nuisance. Nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, those activities and items hereafter set forth in this section:
A. Weeds: Weeds or vegetation allowed to grow to a height greater than ten inches (10") on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass,
brush, or trees on any occupied or unoccupied lot or land. Exceptions include:
1. Trees And Shrubs: The use of trees and shrubs for landscaping purposes;
2. Erosion Control: Areas planted to offset and control any soil loss problems, both occurring or predicted, including areas along waterways and edges
of lakes, ponds, and stormwater retention/detention facilities;
3. Wooded Areas: All areas that are predominately wooded and over one acre in size;
4. Educational Programs: Any areas designated for educational studies;
5. Gardens: Areas dedicated to growing fruits or vegetables for personal consumption or to growing flowers, native plants, ornamental grasses, ground
covers, shrubs, and similar plants which are cultivated and/or mulched to remain free of weeds, grassy weeds, or volunteer plants. Vegetation in
gardens shall not be allowed to grow onto adjacent property. Fruit and vegetable gardens are prohibited within the public right of way. Landscaping
with flowers, plants, and grasses may be allowed within the public right of way, but shall be limited to the immediate area surrounding a mailbox,
shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in size, and shall not interfere with the vision triangle as provided in this code. There shall be no compensation
by the city to the property owner for any damage to or removal of such items placed within the public right of way;
6. Streetscapes: Plantings within the public right of way that are part of a planned city streetscape or a landscape plan submitted and approved as part
of a development permit;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 237/687
7. Parks And Open Space: Any and all public parks and open space lands whether under the jurisdiction of federal, state, county, or local agencies,
including private conservation/preservation organizations; and
8. Native Planting Areas: Areas of native plant species on any parcel, with the exception of individual single-family lots, that are part of a landscape
plan submitted and approved as part of a development permit.
All vegetation, other than trees and shrubs, must be cut at least once annually to a height no greater than ten inches (10"). As an alternative to
cutting, native planting areas (see exceptions at subsections A7 and A8 of this section) on both private and public property may be maintained by
controlled burning with an approved permit from the city's fire department. Natural areas in public parks and greenways shall be exempt from annual
maintenance requirements.
No exceptions will be granted that violate the Iowa noxious weeds and the Iowa weed law chapter 317, code of Iowa, 2009.
B. Rubbish, Trash: Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, and other salvage materials, such as metals and lumber, that are allowed to accumulate to
the prejudice of others or any material having lost its value for the original purpose for which it was created or manufactured.
C. Debris On Right Of Way: Mud, dirt, gravel, snow, leaves, or other debris, substances, or objects deposited upon the public right of way, including, but
not limited to, debris, substances, or objects that unnecessarily restrict the movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic along the public streets and
sidewalks.
D. Dilapidated Buildings: Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an
unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or any building or structure defined as a dangerous
building in the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1988 edition, as adopted by the city.
E. Abandoned Buildings: Abandoned buildings or other structures.
F. Inoperable/Obsolete Vehicles: The storage, parking, leaving, or permitting the storage, parking, or leaving of an inoperable/obsolete vehicle upon private
property within the city. This subsection shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection
with a junkyard, or auto and truck oriented use operated in the appropriate zone, pursuant to the zoning laws.
G. Vehicles Parked On Unpaved Surfaces: Vehicles parked on private property with residential zoning on an unpaved surface or a surface that does not
comply with subsections 9-15-4B and 9-15-6G of this code.
H. Fences: Fences that are not in a structurally sound condition.
I. Vermin Harborage: Conditions which are conducive to the harborage or breeding of vermin.
J. Sanitary Sewer Facilities: Facilities for the storage or processing of sewage, such as privies, vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks, cesspools and
drainfields, which have failed or do not function properly or which are overflowing, leaking or emanating odors. Septic tanks, cisterns, and cesspools
which are abandoned or no longer in use unless they are emptied and filled with clean fill. Any vault, cesspool, or septic tank which does not comply
with the Polk County or Dallas County department of health regulations.
K. Overland Flowage Easements And Stormwater Flowage Easements: No alteration or modification shall be made nor any obstructions placed in the
overland flowage easement or storm flowage easement which prevents, obstructs, or impedes the overland water flow or surface water flow from
adjacent lands entering or draining into and through the easement without first obtaining the expressed written consent of the city.
L. Other Nuisances: Any nuisance described as such by chapter 657 of the Iowa Code.
M. Waste Disposal: The placing in a compost pile, yard, or garden, the burying or the burning of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, used construction materials,
or unprocessed animal waste, or any other inappropriate items which are generally offensive to the senses of the general public.
N. Discharge Of Waters: Any discharge of waters which collect upon private real estate from subsurface or surface drainage to a point upon or adjacent to
a public sidewalk, street, or property line as to permit the waters discharged to drain upon a public sidewalk, street, or onto adjoining real estate. The
Public Works Director or designee may require that any such discharge be connected to the public storm sewer system, if available, or be directed to a
discharge point which eliminates or lessens the nuisance.
O. Dilapidated/Inoperable Mechanical Equipment: The storage, leaving, or permitting the storage or leaving, of dilapidated/inoperable mechanical
equipment upon private property within the City including, but not limited to: heating, ventilating and cooling equipment, pumps, generators and solar or
wind generated energy systems. (Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
P. Building Exteriors: Any exterior surface to any building or other structure which has not been maintained in good condition, is not of standard quality and
appearance, or does not have an acceptable permanent finish. Exterior surfaces include, but are not limited to, doors, door and window frames,
cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks, siding, masonry joints, and roofing. Substantial peeling, flaking, and chipped paint on any exterior surface
shall also constitute a nuisance. Any construction or renovation project undertaken to correct any such deficiencies shall be completed within six (6)
months of commencement of the project, unless the City has approved of a construction or renovation schedule of specific longer duration in writing
prior to the expiration of this time period. All construction or renovation project materials and equipment shall be placed within an enclosed structure or
removed from the property when not in active use. (Ord. 2280, 2-20-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 238/687
4-4-3: NUISANCES PROHIBITED; AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
A. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is unlawful and prohibited and shall constitute a Municipal infraction except as set forth under subsection 4-
4-2L of this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to abate nuisances in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Nuisances may be abated
by either the administrative abatement process or the Municipal infraction process, as hereinafter provided.
C. The creation, maintenance or keeping of a "nuisance" as defined in this chapter by a responsible party is a simple misdemeanor. Police officers, Code
Enforcement Officers, and the Police Chief's designees shall have the authority to issue criminal citations for violations of this chapter, and shall have
the discretion to enforce this chapter as a simple misdemeanor, a Municipal infraction, or as an administrative abatement. Each day a nuisance
continues constitutes a separate offense and is subject to a separate criminal offense and penalty. Said penalty shall be a scheduled fine of fifty dollars
($50.00) upon the first offense by a person within a twelve (12) month period, a scheduled fine of seventy five dollars ($75.00) upon a second offense
within a twelve (12) month period, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a third or subsequent offense by a person within a twelve (12) month period
calculated by the date of the offenses. A "responsible party" as defined in this chapter may be shown to be maintaining or keeping a nuisance on a
property for the purpose of this section if the responsible party knows or a reasonable person in the responsible party's position would reasonably know
that the condition constituting a nuisance exists on the property. Failure of a responsible party to correct a nuisance within twenty four (24) hours after
receipt of a verbal or written notice of the existence of a nuisance by a peace officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall be deemed as knowledge of the
existence of the nuisance, but is not required to show knowledge. (Ord. 1822, 12-1-2008)
4-4-4: NOTICE TO ABATE; SERVICE:
A. The City Manager, or any Code Enforcement Officer, is hereby authorized to serve upon the owner or responsible party of the property upon which the
nuisance is being maintained, or upon the person or persons causing or maintaining the nuisance, a written notice to abate as prescribed below.
B. When service of a notice to abate is required, the following methods of service shall be deemed adequate:
1. Personal service upon the owner and/or responsible party of the property upon which the nuisance exists.
2. In lieu of personal service, any two (2) of the following three (3) methods of service shall be considered adequate:
a. Sending the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail to the last known address of the owner and/or responsible party
of the property. If the owner and/or responsible party of the property does not claim the certified mail notice, but the notice sent by regular mail has
not been returned to the sender as undeliverable, then the notice sent by regular mail shall be deemed one of the two (2) acceptable methods of
service for purposes of this section.
b. Publishing the notice once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
c. Posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the property or building upon which the nuisance exists.
3. Personal service, notice by certified mail, and notice by publication are not required for violations of subsection 4-4-2A, "Weeds", of this chapter.
Service of a notice to abate for violations of subsection 4-4-2A of this chapter shall be accomplished by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on
the property or building where the violation has occurred and sending the notice by regular mail to the owner and/or responsible party of the property.
If there is no building on the property, a sign shall be posted on the property providing notice. The owner and/or responsible party must comply with
the notice and abate the violation within seventy two (72) hours from the date of posting and mailing. (Ord. 1977, 3-4-2013)
4-4-5: ABATEMENT BY ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS:
A. Content Of Notice: In the event the Enforcement Officer decides to abate a nuisance administratively, the notice to abate shall include the following
information:
1. Description of what constitutes a nuisance, citing the appropriate Code section.
2. Description of the action necessary to abate the nuisance.
3. The order to abate within a specified time period.
4. The notice shall advise that, upon failure to comply with the order to abate, the City shall undertake such abatement and that the cost of abatement
may be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as Property Taxes.
5. The notice shall also advise as to the opportunity for an administrative hearing and that failure to request such a hearing within the time specified in
the notice shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and that said notice shall thereafter become a final determination and order to abate.
6. Fees for the administrative hearing shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1992)
B. Administrative Hearing: The hearing shall be held before the Municipal code hearing officer, and shall be in accordance with the procedures of section
4-4-9 of this chapter, except as herein otherwise provided. The determination and order shall be appealable to the city council or the county district
court by writ of certiorari. The order shall not be carried out until the time for filing the writ of certiorari has expired. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord.
1542, 9-2-2003)
4-4-6: ABATEMENT BY MUNICIPAL INFRACTION PROCEEDINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 239/687
A. Content Of Notice: In the event the enforcement officer decides to abate a nuisance through the municipal infraction process, the notice to abate shall
include the following information:
1. Description of what constitutes a nuisance, citing the appropriate code section.
2. Description of the action necessary to abate the nuisance.
3. The order to abate within a specified time period.
4. Explanation that failure to abate the nuisance within the time specified will result in the issuance of a civil citation charging the owner or responsible
party with a municipal infraction.
5. Explanation that each day that a nuisance is permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense.
6. Explanation that upon being found guilty of a municipal infraction, the court is authorized to order abatement, assess the costs of abatement against
the property and/or enter them as a judgment against the defendant, and assess a civil penalty against the defendant.
B. Issuance Of Civil Citation: In the event that the nuisance is not abated as ordered and within the time specified in the notice to abate, the enforcement
officer may issue a civil citation to the property owner or responsible party, charging that person with a municipal infraction. The enforcement officer
may, but shall not be required to, give notice to abate prior to issuance of a civil citation for a repeat offense involving the same property and occurring
within one year of a prior violation. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1992)
4-4-7: ABATEMENT REMEDIES; PENALTIES:
A. Abatement may include, but shall not be limited to, repair, removal, cleaning, extermination, cutting, mowing, grading, sewer repairs, draining, securing,
repairing a building or structure, boarding unoccupied buildings, barricading or fencing, removing dangerous portions of buildings or structures and
demolition of dangerous structures or abandoned buildings.
B. The cost of abatement may be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as property taxes. Abatement costs shall include the
cost of removing or eliminating the nuisance, the cost of investigation, such as title searches, inspection and testing; the cost of notification; filing costs;
and other related administrative costs. Inoperable and/or obsolete vehicles which have been impounded may be sold in accordance with state law. If an
inoperable and/or obsolete vehicle is not sold or if the proceeds of such sale or redemption are not sufficient for payment of the cost of abatement,
storage and sale of said inoperable and/or obsolete vehicle, such cost or the balance of such cost may be assessed against the property for collection
in the same manner as a property tax.
C. In a municipal infraction proceeding for the abatement of a nuisance, the court may order any one or more of the following:
1. Place a judgment against the person and/or property of the defendant for the costs of abatement.
2. Levy a civil penalty (fine) against the defendant as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
3. Order abatement of the nuisance in any manner as provided in this chapter.
4. Assess costs of abatement against the property for collection in the same manner as property taxes. (Ord. 1734, 3-12-2007)
4-4-8: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
When the enforcement officer determines that a nuisance exists on a property and the nuisance constitutes an imminent clear and compelling danger to
health, safety or welfare of persons or property, the enforcement officer is authorized to abate or have abated the nuisance without prior notice and
opportunity of hearing. The costs of such action may be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as property tax. However, prior to
such assessment, the city shall give a property owner notice by certified mail and the opportunity for an administrative hearing in accordance with the
procedures of section 4-4-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1992)
4-4-9: MUNICIPAL CODE HEARING OFFICER:
A. Purpose: A hearing officer, designated by the mayor and subject to city council approval, shall hold administrative hearings concerning abatement of
nuisances in the administrative process.
B. Procedures: All proceedings shall be in accordance with the requirements of this section.
C. Hearing On Actions, Interpretations, Notices And Orders:
1. Any person affected by any action, interpretation, notice or order which has been issued by a code enforcement officer in connection with the
enforcement of this chapter, through the administrative abatement process, may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the
municipal code hearing officer; provided, that, such a request for a hearing must be in a form of a written petition and must be filed with the city clerk
within the following time periods: a) where a notice or order was served or mailed pursuant to this chapter, written petition must be filed with the city
clerk within seven (7) calendar days; b) where notice or order was published as provided in this chapter, written petition must be filed with the city
clerk within seven (7) calendar days after date of last publication; c) where a notice or order was served by posting in a conspicuous place on the
property or building deemed a nuisance, a written petition must be filed with the clerk within seven (7) calendar days of the posting of the notice. Any
petition so filed shall state the particular section of the ordinance involved and a brief statement of grounds upon which such appeal is taken. Failure
to request a hearing and filing a timely petition as prescribed herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing, and the notice or order shall
become a final determination and order.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 240/687
2. Upon receipt of a timely filed petition, the hearing officer shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give written notification thereof.
Notification shall be given either through personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall include a statement of the
time, place and nature of the hearing.
3. If the petitioner fails to appear at such hearing, the hearing officer may proceed with the hearing and make a decision in the absence of the party.
D. Time For Commencement Of Hearing: The hearing shall be commenced not later than twenty (20) days after the date on which the petition was filed;
however, this time may be extended for a reasonable period by the presiding officer.
E. Hearing Procedure:
1. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded either by mechanical means or by manual means. Opportunity shall be afforded all
parties to respond and present evidence and argument on all issues involved. Parties may represent themselves or may be represented by legal
counsel.
2. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. A finding shall be based upon the kind of evidence on which reasonably
prudent persons are accustomed to rely for the conduct of their serious affairs, and may be based upon such evidence even if it would be
inadmissible in a court of law. The hearing officer shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. Objections to evidentiary offers may be
made and shall be noted in the record. Subject to these requirements, when a hearing will be expedited and the interests of the parties will not be
prejudiced substantially, any part of the evidence may be required to be submitted in verified written form.
3. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given
an opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
4. Witnesses at the hearing, or available persons whose testimony has been submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross examination by any
party as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
5. The hearing officer's experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge may be utilized in the evaluation of the evidence.
6. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and have power to administer oaths. The hearing officer may cause subpoenas to be issued for such a
witnesses and the production of such books and papers as either party may designate. The subpoenas may be signed by the hearing officer.
7. An appeal pursuant to this chapter shall not stay the effect of a notice or order under the emergency provisions of this chapter unless so ordered by
the hearing officer.
F. Decision Of Hearing Officer After Hearing: Upon submission of all evidence and at the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a
decision based upon the record. This decision may be made immediately after the conclusion of the hearing or within a reasonable time thereafter. The
hearing officer may affirm, modify or reverse any action, interpretation, notice or order which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of an
ordinance. A decision shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law separately stated. Following the decision of the hearing officer, all parties
shall be notified of the decision by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any party to the hearing, including the city, may seek
judicial review by filing a petition in the county district court within twenty (20) days after the issuance of the decision by the hearing officer. Before filing
a petition for judicial review in the district court, the affected party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city council. This appeal shall be
filed within forty eight (48) hours of the decision being rendered and notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk. The city council shall review
the proceedings based upon the record made before the hearing officer and may, with city council's consent, grant to each affected party an
opportunity to appear and present arguments to the city council on the relief sought. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the hearing officer's
decision. Judicial review by the county district court shall be filed within twenty (20) days from the date of the city council decision.
G. Emergency Orders: Notwithstanding any provision stated in this chapter, whenever in the judgment of the municipal officer, agent or employee, an
emergency exists creating a dangerous and imminent health or safety hazard to persons, property or the general public which requires immediate
action, he/she shall order such action as may be necessary to meet the emergency. Any orders issued pursuant to this section shall be effective
immediately or in the time and manner prescribed in the order itself.
H. Authority Of City To Perform Work Upon Failure Of Property Owner: Should any property owner affected by any notice or order issued pursuant to this
chapter fail to perform an action required by said notice or order, the city, where otherwise allowed by law, may perform the required action and assess
the costs against the property involved. (Ord. 1542, 9-2-2003)
4-4-10: SPECIFIED CRIME PROPERTY; DECLARATION AND ABATEMENT:
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOOTLEGGING: The illegal sale or service of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in violation of Iowa Code (2005), chapter 123.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The person who has the responsibility to supervise and direct the police department or his or her designee.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug, substance or immediate precursor as defined by Iowa Code (2005) chapter 124.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT: Two (2) or more separate incidents on separate dates within a twelve (12) month period which involved an act defined as
disorderly conduct under Iowa Code (2005) section 723.4(1), (2) or (3).
GAMBLING: Games of skill or chance as defined by Iowa Code (2005) chapter 99B and prohibited by Iowa Code (2005) section 725.
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm, corporation, association, or a partnership,including a mortgagee in possession, in whom is vested all or part of the
legal title to property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to present use and enjoyment of the premises.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity capable of owning or using property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 241/687
PROSTITUTION, PIMPING, AND PANDERING: Those acts or activities as defined by Iowa Code (2005) chapter 725.
SPECIFIED CRIME PROPERTY: Any structure, including the real property upon which it is situated, in which activity involving the unauthorized
delivery, possession or manufacture of a controlled substance, illegal gambling, bootlegging, prostitution, pimping or pandering, or disorderly conduct is
occurring.
STRUCTURE: Any building or structure, including, but not limited to, edifice, units, or any portion thereof, and the real property upon which such
building or structure is situated.
B. No person shall use or allow to be used any structure as specified crime property. When the structure and the property upon which it is situated are
owned by different persons, each person shall not use or allow to be used such structure and property as specified crime property.
C. Any person who fails to perform an act required by this section or who commits an act prohibited by this section shall be guilty of a municipal infraction
punishable by a civil penalty as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code.
D. When the chief of police or his or her designee has a reasonable belief that a structure is being used or maintained in violation of this section, the chief
of police may notify the owner of record in writing that the structure has been declared to be a specified crime property.
A reasonable belief that a structure is being used as specified crime property may be found from, but is not limited to, evidence of drug paraphernalia in
or around the structure; an increase in vehicular or pedestrian traffic in or around the structure; observations of the exchange of money; verified citizen
complaints of bootlegging; unauthorized delivery or manufacture of a controlled substance; illegal gambling, bootlegging, prostitution, pimping or
pandering, disorderly conduct; and any other activity which leads a police officer to reasonably believe violations exist.
E. The notice required in subsection D of this section shall notify the owner of record in writing that a structure owned by him or her has been declared to
be a specified crime property, and such notice shall contain the following information:
1. The street address and a description sufficient for identification of the premises on which the structure is located; and
2. A statement that the chief of police has found the structure to be in violation of this section, with an explanation as to why the structure has been
declared a specified crime property.
F. A copy of the notice given pursuant to this section shall be served on the owner or an agent at least twenty (20) days prior to the commencement of any
judicial action by the city. Service shall be made either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice to the owner or owner's registered agent of the
notice by registered or certified mail. In the event that notice is impossible to be served as set out above, a copy of the notice may be posted at the
property if ten (10) days have elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the owner and no response or reply has been received by the city
from the owner during that period of time.
The failure of any owner to receive actual notice of the determination of the chief of police shall not preclude future proceedings under this section.
G. Upon receipt of a notice of specified crime property as set out herein the owner of record may challenge such notice by filing a request for an
administrative hearing. Such request shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk or his or her designee within ten (10) days of the service of the
notice of specified crime property.
1. Failure to request a hearing within such time period or to attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such a hearing.
2. Upon filing of a request for an administrative hearing, further judicial action pursuant to this section shall be stayed pending the outcome of the
administrative hearing.
H. The hearing held pursuant to this section shall be conducted before the municipal code hearing officer as provided in section 4-4-9 of this chapter within
a reasonable period of time. Such hearing may be continued for good cause. A notice of hearing, including the time, date and location of the hearing,
shall be made by mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the owner of record or his or her registered agent.
I. The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether there exists a reasonable belief that the structure was being used as specified crime property
when the declaration of specified crime property was made pursuant to this section. The hearing officer shall decide only that either: 1) there is a
reasonable belief that the structure was used as specified crime property and that the provisions of this section shall apply, or 2) there is not a sufficient
reasonable belief that the structure was being used as specified crime property and that the procedures of this section shall be permanently stayed. A
finding of no reasonable belief however shall not preclude a future independent complaint, investigation and notice of specified crime property. The
hearing officer shall issue a written finding which shall be mailed to the owner or his or her registered agent.
J. Subsequent to the declaration and notice that there exists a specified crime property, an owner shall have the opportunity to abate the illegal activity
within ten (10) days. If a landlord/tenant relationship exists on the specified crime property, the owner/landlord may be deemed to have abated the
activity upon demonstration that he or she has taken legal action as allowed by Iowa Code chapter 562A to terminate the rental agreement and
continues in good faith to follow abatement procedures and provides the chief of police with copies of all notices served in accordance with Iowa Code
chapter 562A.
K. If after twenty (20) days the chief of police determines that a specified crime property has not been abated, a notice of fine and an order of abatement
shall be filed in compliance with Iowa Code section 364.22, and the chief of police shall notify the chief building official of the failure to abate.
L. In addition to the provisions of subsection K of this section, the chief building official may revoke, refuse to renew or deny a pending application for a
rental certificate for a specified crime property that has not been abated within twenty (20) days by written notice to the owner or owner's agent by
regular mail sent to the owner's or owner's agent's address as provided on the rental certificate application. Said revocation shall take effect twenty (20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 242/687
days after the date the notice is mailed. The owner may appeal the revocation to the municipal code hearing officer as provided by subsections 4-4-9E,
F and G of this chapter by filing a written request for hearing with the city clerk prior to the date the revocation takes effect. The burden to prove that
abatement has occurred shall be on the property owner by a preponderance of the evidence. If no such appeal is taken, or if the municipal hearing
officer finds during said appeal that the specified crime property has not been abated, then the rental permit shall be revoked and reapplication shall
not be considered until such property is abated. The hearing officer may provide in the appeal corrective action that must occur before the property
shall be abated. (Ord. 1634, 5-23-2005)
Chapter 5
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a sanitary method for the collection and disposal of all solid waste and to safeguard the citizens from hazards to
their health, safety and welfare, that result from the uncontrolled collection and disposal of solid waste. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The City Manager, or his delegated representative, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms are defined:
AGENCY: The Metro Waste Authority.
BANNED SUBSTANCE OR HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any waste prohibited by the Iowa Code, Metro Waste Authority and/or applicable Federal regulations
from being disposed in sanitary landfills, including yard waste, lead acid batteries, waste oil, explosive material, medical waste, drugs, poisons, soil
dressings, highly combustible material and hazardous substance.
BULKY ITEM: Any solid waste item that does not fit in a City approved cart.
CITY APPROVED CART: A container approved by the City for the collection of solid waste.
CITY APPROVED YARD WASTE BAG: A "yard waste bag", as defined herein, which is approved by the City for the purpose of a yard waste collection
program.
CITY APPROVED YARD WASTE STICKER: A self-adhesive sticker cost controlled by the City for the purpose of affixing to an approved yard waste bag,
and affixing to bundles of tree or brush debris for regular collection and disposal.
COMPOSTING: A controlled microbiologic degradation of organic waste to produce a relatively nuisance free product of potential value as a soil
conditioner.
DISPOSAL SITE: A sanitary landfill, transfer station, compost site or other facility for receiving or disposing of solid waste, yard waste or tree debris of any
size.
LAWN REFUSE: Grass clippings, leaves, garden wastes, prunings and weeds.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES: Those batteries falling within the definition of "hazardous substance" as defined by the Iowa Code.
MEDICAL WASTE: That waste defined as "medical waste" by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
METRO WASTE AUTHORITY YARD WASTE BAG: A "yard waste bag", as defined herein, which is manufactured for, distributed for, and cost controlled
by the Metro Waste Authority for the purpose of a regional yard waste collection program.
METRO WASTE AUTHORITY YARD WASTE STICKER: A self-adhesive sticker manufactured for, distributed for, and cost controlled by the Metro Waste
Authority for the purpose of affixing to an approved yard waste bag, other than the Metro Waste Authority yard waste bag, and affixing to bundles of tree or
brush debris for regular collection and disposal.
OWNER: Whenever used in this chapter, the word "owner" shall, in addition to the record titleholder, include any person residing in, renting, leasing or
occupying residential premises or operating or transacting business in any premises, and as between such parties with duties, responsibilities, liabilities
and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
PERSON: Means and includes an individual or group or association of individuals; a firm or any member thereof; a corporation, or any executive officer,
manager, person in charge, or employee thereof; and the use of a pronoun specifying the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter gender.
REGULAR COLLECTION: Regular collection is conducted once weekly on the same day as regular solid waste collection day.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: Means and includes detached single-family dwellings and any multiple-family attached dwellings up to and including four (4)
separate family quarters.
RUBBLE: Dirt, stone, brick or similar inorganic material or street sweepings.
SOLID WASTE: The waste generated by normal residential activity, excluding yard waste, bulky waste and all specialized collections. Solid waste does not
include dirt, sod, stone, brick, construction materials, or hazardous waste as defined in section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa, or source, special nuclear,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 243/687
or byproduct material as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
SPECIAL COLLECTION: Special collection is offered by special arrangement with the City approved contractor.
TREE DEBRIS: Organic debris such as tree branches, limbs and trunks of six inches (6") or less in diameter. Tree debris shall not include tree branches,
limbs or trunks greater than six inches (6") in diameter nor tree stumps of any size.
WASTE OIL: Any petroleum based or synthetic oil which, through its use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose due to the
presence of chemical or physical impurities.
YARD WASTE: Organic debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden wastes, prunings, weeds, brush and tree branches produced as a part of the yard
and garden development and maintenance. "Yard waste" does not include tree stumps or branches greater than ten inches (10") in diameter.
YARD WASTE BAG: 2-ply, fifty (50) pound wet strength kraft type paper bags which are degradable or biodegradable, with a maximum capacity of thirty
(30) gallons, manufactured for the purpose of containing yard waste for regular collection and disposal and which display a printed statement designating
that the bag is intended to hold yard waste.
YARD WASTE COLLECTION HAULER: Any person who comes into the possession or control of yard waste by reason of the operation of a disposition
service of collection, hauling and/or disposal. (Ord. 1369, 6-14-1999, eff. 7-5-1999; amd. Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000; Ord. 1973, 1-21-2013)
4-5-4: COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE:
The owner or occupant of each premises in the City shall regularly remove or arrange for the regular removal of solid waste from premises under their
direct or indirect control for safe disposal in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. Any yard waste to be removed from the site on which it
has developed for disposal on another site shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises. Any
banned substances shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises. No person shall deposit in a
solid waste container or otherwise offer any banned substances for collection with other solid waste in any manner which may result in improper disposal
of a banned substance.
The City will provide to each residential premises solid waste collection service as defined in this chapter for the removal and disposal of yard waste and
other solid waste; provided, however, that the owner or occupant of each such premises shall separately remove or arrange for the removal and proper
disposal of banned substances and of vehicles and any other solid waste limited or excluded from the service provided by the City. The residential
premises collection service of the City is subject to the following conditions:
A. Frequency: Such collections shall be made on a weekly basis except at times during emergency periods or during a specific holiday in accordance with
schedules to be developed by the City Manager.
B. Schedule Adjusted: The City Manager is authorized and empowered to change or amend such schedules from time to time as he, in his discretion, shall
deem necessary. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
C. Street Collection: Collection of solid waste shall only be made from a public street; alley collection is prohibited. An exception may be granted by the
City Council to permit collection on a private street or private drive if the owner(s) of the private street(s) and/or private drive(s) provide an agreement to
indemnify and hold harmless the City, the Metro Waste Authority, and the waste hauler(s) for any and all liability, damages, claims, costs, expenses,
interest, and reasonable attorney fees for any damage that may occur to their private streets and drives relating to or arising out of the collection of
solid waste. The City Council may further grant an exception to collect solid waste for any horizontally attached multiple-family dwellings comprising
more than four (4) separate family quarters provided that each dwelling have a separate driveway to each unit and each unit is either on its own
separate lot or is part of a residential horizontal property regime. This exception does not include stacked multi-family dwellings. (Ord. 1973, 1-21-2013)
D. Placement Of Carts:
1. Streets: Whenever solid waste is collected adjoining the street curb or street right-of-way, residents desiring to have solid waste collected by the City
in accordance with this chapter shall place their carts upon the driveway, parking or right-of-way in front of their premises, adjacent to, and within
eighteen inches (18") of the near edge of the roadway curb or adjacent to and within eighteen inches (18") from the edge of the traveled portion of
the right-of-way. Placement of carts shall not obstruct sidewalks, and shall not be placed closer than six feet (6') of any fixed structure. Exceptions to
cart placement may be granted by the City Contract Administrator based upon rules adopted by the City. The City approved contractor may calculate
regular fees and any special fee required for other than curbside collection, subject to the approval of the City Contract Administrator. (Ord. 1428, 11-
27-2000)
2. Obstruction To Trafficways: No solid waste or solid waste carts shall be deposited by any person upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, roadway or upon
any alley right-of-way, so as to obstruct or block pedestrian movement or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991; amd. Ord. 1428, 11-
27-2000)
E. Number Of Carts And Type At Curb: The total number of carts excluding lawn refuse bags to be collected by the City from residential premises per
week shall not exceed the number of City approved carts made available by the City to each residence. Solid waste shall be placed in the City
approved cart in disposable bags, boxes or tied or taped together so individual items will not blow or scatter when the cart is emptied. Bulky items
and/or additional solid waste bags shall be placed outside the City approved cart and shall require a City approved sticker for collection.
F. Carts, Bundles, Recycling Bins, Pieces Of Yard Waste And Other Items Offered For Collection: Carts, bundles, recycling bins, pieces of tree debris and
yard waste and other items offered for residential collection shall be placed at the curb or back of the traveled portion of the right-of-way and shall be
separated by a distance of three feet (3'), but not more than six feet (6'). (Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
G. Residential Yard Waste And Tree Debris:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 244/687
1. The amount of residential yard waste in approved yard waste bags and bundles of tree debris placed for regular residential collection by the City or a
contracted hauler shall not be limited.
2. Tree debris, branches, trunks and stumps resulting from the removal of trees by a tree service contractor shall not be placed for collection by the
City, but shall be removed by a licensed hauler at the expense of the owner or tree service.
3. All yard waste and tree debris shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste at the time of regular collection and disposal.
(Ord. 1369, 6-14-1999, eff. 7-5-1999)
4. All yard waste must be in an approved yard waste bag with a City approved yard waste sticker affixed to the yard waste bag.
5. Tree debris and brush under six inches (6") in diameter, prepared for regular collection and disposal by the City approved contractor, shall be
securely tied in bundles not larger than forty eight inches (48") long and eighteen inches (18") in diameter, and the bundle shall have a City approved
waste sticker affixed to it. If there is insufficient quantity to securely bundle, all tree debris and brush shall be cut down and placed in an approved
yard waste bag with an affixed City approved yard waste sticker. No loose tree debris will be picked up. Pieces of tree branches greater than six
inches (6") in diameter shall not be included in a bundle but shall be disposed by special collection arrangements with a private hauler.
6. No bag of yard waste, bundle of tree debris or piece of tree branch greater than six inches (6") in diameter offered for regular or yard waste collection
shall weigh more than fifty (50) pounds.
H. Time Of Placing Carts, Bundles, Recycling Bins, Pieces Of Yard Waste, Lawn Refuse Bags And Other Items At Curb: On street pick-up routes no solid
waste in any form or in any type of container or any other item offered for collection shall be placed at the curb or behind the traveled portion of the
right-of-way for collection before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of the day preceding the day such waste is scheduled by the City to be collected, and all carts
and items not collected shall be removed from the curb or from behind the traveled portion of the right-of-way within twenty four (24) hours of collection.
(Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
I. Failure To Comply: Any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve the City of obligation to collect such solid waste therefrom which
is not in compliance therewith as to type, preparation, volume or place of storage, but in all cases such solid waste from such premises as meets the
requirements of such sections shall be collected as herein provided.
J. Prohibition Of The Collection Of Banned Materials:
1. All Municipal waste picked up within the corporate limits of the City shall not contain banned substances. All banned substances shall be separated
by the owner or occupant from all other Municipal solid waste accumulated on the premises.
2. Any individual, corporation or licensed hauler for the transport of waste to the landfill shall not haul banned substances to the landfill. All banned
substances must be separated by the hauler from all other normal solid waste before transportation of waste to the landfill. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990,
eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-5: LICENSE TO HAUL SOLID WASTE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
4-5-6: DISPOSAL SITE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permitted Disposal Sites: No person shall haul or cause to be hauled any solid waste material, other than those resulting from construction or
demolition activities, to any disposal place or site or area other than the following:
1. Agency Site: A sanitary disposal site operated by or under contract to the Des Moines Metropolitan Area Solid Waste Agency; or
2. Transfer Station: A solid waste transfer station licensed and operating pursuant to the provisions of article B of this chapter.
B. Solid Waste Disposal Sites: No person shall operate or permit the operation on his property, of a disposal site in the City for the disposal of solid waste
of any kind, and rubble from any source other than construction or demolition activities. (Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
4-5-7: TREATMENT PENDING COLLECTION:
All solid waste consisting of dry animal waste and vegetable matter, which may attract flies, dogs, rodents, or other animals or insects, shall be drained of
all excess liquid, wrapped in paper or disposable containers and placed or stored, until collected, in covered suitable containers as described in section 4-
5-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991; amd. Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
4-5-8: ACCUMULATIONS OF SOLID WASTE:
A. Accumulations Hazardous To Health: No person shall permit accumulations on any premises, improved or vacant, or in any public place, quantities of
solid waste, either in containers or not, that shall constitute a health or sanitation hazard.
B. Accumulations Hazardous To Property: No person shall permit to accumulate quantities of solid waste, within or close to any building, unless the same
is stored in containers in such a manner as not to create a health or fire hazard. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-9: CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 245/687
A. Carts: Unless otherwise noted, disposal of solid waste for collection by the City approved contractor shall only be made in City approved carts.
B. Disposal Bags: Disposable bags manufactured for solid waste disposal shall be acceptable for bulky items. Disposable bags and contents shall not
exceed fifty (50) pounds. (Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
C. Composting Lawn Refuse:
1. The owner or occupant is encouraged to compost lawn refuse on the premises where it is developed; provided, that the material accumulated for
such purpose is restricted to the rear yard of the property and is properly contained and processed without creating offensive odors, litter, fire or
vector problems. Such composting shall be deemed to be an acceptable alternative disposal of lawn refuse which satisfies requirements in this
chapter to separate lawn refuse for collection and disposal. Material accumulated or used for composting on such premises shall not include any
kitchen or food wastes.
2. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent the owner from transporting yard waste accumulating on premises of the owner, provided such yard
waste is disposed of at City approved composting stations in accordance with policies established by the composting station. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990,
eff. 1-1-1991; amd. Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
D. Nonconforming Containers: Baskets, boxes and noncomplying solid waste containers shall be considered disposable refuse and shall be removed by
the collection crews if they are the proper size and otherwise acceptable for collection with a City approved sticker; or shall be left uncollected if they
are larger than the allowable size or unacceptable for collection. (Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
4-5-10: COLLECTION AND HAULING OF WASTE:
A. Protection Of Hauling Vehicles: No person shall haul any solid waste or yard waste or banned substances upon the streets, alleys or public places of
the City in any manner except in a vehicle or container so equipped as to prevent the blowing or leakage or dropping off of any of the contents on the
public streets or ways of the City or private property therein.
B. Loading Collection Vehicles Or Containers: Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and
moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where
spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area
properly cleaned. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-11: LITTERING:
Resident owner shall be responsible for complying with all provisions herein to prevent littering. (Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
4-5-12: DISPOSITION OF WASTE TO CONTROLLED SITE; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
4-5-13: MATERIALS EXCLUDED FROM AGENCY DEPOSIT SITES:
At the discretion of the agency, certain materials may be excluded from those solid wastes which may be deposited at an agency landfill site. These
excluded materials may include junk automobile bodies and similar bulky objects, which may require special processing prior to disposal, trees and tree
limbs, unless they have been cut into pieces not exceeding four feet (4') in length, burning materials or materials containing hot or live coals, hazardous
materials, banned materials, and other materials which the agency deems necessary to exclude. However, hazardous materials or banned materials may
be deposited upon the receipt of written permission of a responsible official or attendant of the agency and subject to any special instructions issued with
said permission. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991; amd. Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
4-5-14: BANNED SUBSTANCES:
No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for City collection any banned substance. Banned substance shall be transported by
the owner, responsible person or his agent, to a place of safe deposit or disposal as prescribed by the City Manager or his authorized representative,
which place of deposit or disposal may in exceptional cases be a place other than an agency operated site or may be otherwise subjected to special
conditions or limitations. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-15: AGENCY DISPOSITION:
Pursuant to the terms of an agreement to be entered into between the City and the agency, the disposal sites now and hereafter operated by the agency
will be made available as public disposal sites for all solid wastes collected within the corporate limits of the City upon the conditions specified in the
agreement. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-16: DISPOSITION OF INERT MATERIALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 246/687
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to the placing of inert wastes, not potentially injurious to health or the public welfare, where
permission to place such materials has been obtained from the owner or responsible agent; nor to the filling in or grading of property with earth, mud,
ashes or similar materials; providing such actions are in compliance with all other applicable local and State laws. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-17: CONDITIONS SUBJECT TO ABATEMENT:
If any private disposal operation within the corporate limits of the City is found to be conducted in a way detrimental to the health and welfare of the public,
or contrary to provisions of this chapter, the City shall notify the owner of the land upon which such operation is being carried on and the operator thereof,
in writing, of the objectionable conditions and give them a reasonable time, not less than ten (10) days, to correct said condition. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990,
eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-18: FAILURE TO ABATE NUISANCE:
In the event of the failure of such owner or operator or both to correct such conditions within such time, the City Manager is authorized to seek abatement
of such conditions as a public nuisance and to abate such nuisance in such manner as any court of competent jurisdiction may direct. The same shall be
considered of benefit to the owner of the land and the cost of such corrective action shall be chargeable to the owner, and if not paid, shall constitute a lien
upon the premises and shall be assessed in the manner of a special assessment and collected in the same manner as general taxes as is provided by
law. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-19: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. It is prohibited and will be deemed a violation hereof for any owner, lessee or occupant of any residential, commercial or institutional property in the City,
or any hauler providing service within the City, to put into or cause to be put into the solid waste collection system any yard waste or tree debris of any
size except as separated yard waste or tree debris of any size as provided herein or any banned substances. If any person violates any provisions of
this chapter, such person shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. In addition to the provisions set out in this chapter, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person for violation of any section or subsection of
this chapter. (Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
ARTICLE A. CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION ACTIVITIES
4-5A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to provide regulations pertaining to the disposal of construction or demolition material. (1985 Code §3-4.0201)
4-5A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall, after September 1, 1976, operate or permit the operation on his property of a disposal site in the City for the disposal of solid waste from
construction or demolition activities unless such person shall have first applied for and received a license to do so from the City. Such a license may be
issued by the City Council upon application by such person filed with the Building Inspector of the City; must be accompanied by a special use permit
issued by the City Board of Adjustment, and a State permit issued by the appropriate State agency to conduct a construction or demolition materials
disposal operation on the site in question; must demonstrate full present and contemplated compliance with the specific provisions of this Section and the
operational details and physical site proposals contained in plans accompanying the application, as well as the ability to do so; and shall be subject to
annual renewal by the City Council as hereinafter set forth. In reviewing the demolition landfill site application, the City Council must weigh the need for
such landfills to economically dispose of demolition and construction rubble against the inherent hazard, evaluated on the aforesaid information and
criteria and with professional advice as required. Such need must likewise be weighed against the potential for site pollution or danger to persons or
property who might predictably have direct or indirect contact with the site. To merit approval for licensing, such proposed operation must be demonstrated
by the application to be operationally feasible and to be substantially free of negative environmental effect as it is proposed to be operated upon the site
proposed. The application for a license to operate a disposal site for the disposal of solid waste from construction or demolition activities shall be
accompanied by the documentation described hereinafter. Plans for construction and demolition landfills shall be prepared under the direct supervision of
a registered engineer in conformity with chapter 114 of the Code of Iowa. Such requirement shall not preclude the inclusion in the application of reports of
geologists, architects, landscape architects, or such other disciplines as may be necessary or desirable to substantiate proposals contained in the
application. The plans shall show conformance to the following requirements. (1985 Code §3-4.0202)
4-5A-3: LOCATION OF SITE:
Sites for the disposal of demolition and construction materials shall be located in conformity with the following:
A. Flood Plain: The site shall be located outside of flood plain or riverfront land unless such requirement is waived by the appropriate State agency or
agencies.
B. Street or Highway: If the site is within one thousand feet (1,000') of a Federal or State highway or major City thoroughfare, the site must be satisfactorily
screened by natural objects, planting, fences or other.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 247/687
C. Water Supply: The site shall be at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any existing well that draws water for human or livestock consumption unless
hydrologic conditions are shown to be such that a greater or lesser distance is proper. (1985 Code §3-4.0203)
4-5A-4: ZONING AND LAND USE:
The application will be accompanied by a copy of the special use permit issued for such operation on the site by the City Board of Adjustment.
A. Present and Proposed Zoning: The plan submitted with the application shall be accompanied by a map showing all zoning within one thousand feet
(1,000') surrounding the site. The plan shall also indicate the land use proposed for the site after the filling is completed, although such indication shall
not be binding upon the City.
B. Comprehensive Plan Land Use: The plan submitted with the application shall indicate the land use shown for the site area in the future in the
comprehensive plan for the City. (1985 Code §3-4.0204)
4-5A-5: SITE PLAN:
The following particulars shall be included in maps of the site plan, as herein set forth, and shall accompany the application:
A. Scale: A map of the disposal site and immediate surroundings, on which a north arrow and scale of drawing are indicated. Generally, a scale of less
than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') will not be approved.
B. Boundaries and Markers: The boundaries of the disposal site shall be shown thereon with sufficient data, including legal description, that a land
surveyor can easily locate the boundary. Natural and manmade monuments indicating the boundary shall be noted. Where the site is located in an
undeveloped area, four inch (4") boundary markers at least six feet (6') high and painted a bright color shall be used to identify the boundary so that
field inspection teams can easily identify the site.
C. Present Contour: Two foot (2') contours of the existing terrain shall be shown thereon.
D. Utilities: All existing utilities, including storm and sanitary sewers, which lead up to or cross the site shall be shown thereon.
E. Drainage: Existing and future drainage shall be shown thereon along with any proposed storm sewers.
F. Drill Holes: The location of the drill holes required by subsection 4-5A-8A shall be shown thereon.
G. Final Contours: Two foot (2') contours of the final proposed terrain shall be shown on a separate drawing. (1985 Code §3-4.0205)
4-5A-6: VICINITY MAP:
A map showing the area in the vicinity of the site, which shall be known as the vicinity map, shall be submitted, of a scale of one inch to six hundred feet
(1"= 600') or less; the area covered by the vicinity map shall be sufficient to contain the following:
A. Test Holes: Location of test holes for the monitoring of water quality and the findings from each.
B. Streets: Streets and street names, as well as all existing public right of way on and adjacent to the site.
C. Fire Hydrants: The nearest fire hydrants. Generally, if there is not a fire hydrant adjacent to the entrance drive and within three hundred feet (300') of the
active portion of the landfill site, a fire hydrant shall be so installed and connected with an appropriate extension of the water main. If covering and
compacting is performed daily, or if other equivalent means of providing fire protection are available, this requirement may be waived by the Council.
(See subsection 4-5A-9D.)
D. Haul Routes: The haul routes from the nearest City truck route.
E. Screening: Proposed screening of the site from highways, streets, parks, and residences and other amenities, as well as the schedule of installation of
such; such screening shall meet the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and shall have been demonstrated to and approved by the Board of
Adjustment.
F. Private Wells: All private wells within one thousand feet (1,000') of the site shall be located and identified thereon.
G. Occupied Structures: All occupied homes and buildings on the site or within one thousand feet (1,000') of the boundaries thereof shall be shown, with
their addresses and uses indicated, by color coding or otherwise. (1985 Code §3-4.0206)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 248/687
4-5A-7: TRAFFIC:
The haul routes shown in the plan shall be reviewed by the Department of Public Works and City Engineer, or his representative, who shall make
recommendations thereon to the Council. Such haul routes shall be chosen to avoid undue hardships to residents living adjacent to them and to minimize
the likelihood of premature deterioration of City streets so chosen. (1985 Code §3-4.0207)
4-5A-8: SOILS AND GEOLOGY:
Information as to soil and geological conditions shall be provided as follows:
A. Geological Cross-Section: The plans shall contain a description of the drill holes shown on the site plan, which shall be sufficient in number to prepare
geological cross sections of the site, to facilitate a determination of the acceptability of the site location.
B. Water Table and Bed Rock: The water table depth and bed rock depth shall be indicated. If bed rock is excessively deep, it may be estimated.
C. Soil Report: A soil report shall be provided which indicates the acceptability of the soil on the site for cover material and the stability of the slopes after
the fill is complete. The vulnerability of the soil classification to erosion shall also be indicated. (1985 Code §3-4.0208)
4-5A-9: OPERATING SITE:
Plans for site operation, including the following, shall be provided.
A. Estimated Active Life and Volume: The estimated active life of the site and the total cubic dimensions of the area to be filled shall be indicated.
B. Annual and Peak Volume: The volume of construction and demolition material expected annually and on the peak days shall be indicated.
C. Cells: The number, size and shape of cells of demolition material shall be indicated.
D. Cover: The approximate depth and type of cover material shall be indicated. The volume of cover material needed for the entire site shall be indicated
as well as the source and soil classification of the cover material and frequency of covering. Once a week compacting of demolition material and
covering with dirt will be acceptable, provided a bulldozer with a blade, operator on call, and a stockpile of cover materials are available at all times on
the site in the event of fire. More frequent covering and compacting may be required by the city if it is deemed necessary to abate a nuisance and shall
be mandatory if the requirements of subsection 4-5A-6C, "Fire Hydrants", of this article are not met.
E. Gates And Fencing: The times at which the gates will be open as well as provisions for maintaining the fence at locations required herein shall be
indicated.
F. Vector Control: The intended continuing vector control, principally rat abatement and mosquito abatement, shall be indicated.
G. Personnel And Equipment: The personnel and equipment planned to operate the site, and the hours and days of the week when they will be on the
site, shall be indicated. (1985 Code §3-4.0209)
4-5A-10: SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS:
Expected environmental impact problems, with specific treatment or controls intended to eliminate or mitigate negative effects of each, shall be listed.
(1985 Code §3-4.0210)
4-5A-11: INSURANCE:
The applicant shall file a certificate of insurance evidencing the issuance to the applicant of liability insurance which shall protect the public and any and all
persons from injury which may be sustained by reason of the operation or condition of the landfill, and that the applicant carries insurance which meets the
requirements of the Iowa workmen's compensation law. Proof of such insurance shall show a minimum cancellation time of ten (10) days and shall
embody a requirement that the city shall have a right to such notice before such cancellation can become effective. The proof shall specify evidence of the
following forms of insurance protection.
A. Operation Liability: Liability insurance covering all operations performed by the licensed applicant and all persons in the licensed applicant's direct
employment.
B. Subcontractor: Public liability insurance covering all operations performed by any subcontractor or independent contractor to whom a portion of the
operations may have been assigned or which in the future may be assigned, or by any person or legal entity action for or on behalf of the licensed
applicant at or on the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 249/687
C. Vehicles: Motor vehicle bodily injury insurance and property damage liability insurance on motor vehicles employed on the site, whether or not owned
by the licensed applicant or by either the subcontractors or independent contractors under contract to the licensee, or by any other person or legal
entity acting for or on behalf of the licensed applicant at or on the site.
D. Amount: The main protection shall be insurance coverage with a minimum liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any
one person and subject to the same limit per person, a minimum liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any number of
persons in one accident, and a minimum liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for damage to property of others, but excluding property of the
insured. The insurance certificate shall provide that notice shall be given to the city clerk thirty (30) days prior to any cancellation or termination of
insurance. The cancellation or termination of the insurance shall automatically revoke the permit.
E. Additional Insured: The city shall be named as an additional insured under all liability policies without expense to it. (1985 Code §3-4.0211; amd. 1993
Code)
4-5A-12: LICENSE FEE:
An annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable to the finance director of the city shall accompany the initial application for license and
each application for renewal of the license. (1985 Code §3-4.0212; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
4-5A-13: RENEWAL REQUIREMENTS:
Applications for renewal need comply with the documentation requirements of sections 4-5A-2 through 4-5A-11 of this article only in the event there has
been a substantial change in the conditions or circumstances on or off the site which significantly affect the proposed operation or its effects during the
proposed renewal period, except that a showing must be made in such application that required insurance is in force and has continued in force during the
current license year. The application for such renewal must specifically negate or affirm the existence of any such circumstances or conditions and be
documented accordingly. The application for renewal must also be accompanied by a showing of a current permit, issued by the appropriate state agency,
for the operation of the construction or demolition materials landfill site. The building inspector, upon receipt of such application for renewal, shall process
the same as though it were an initial application for license, and shall report his findings and recommendations thereon, which shall be reviewed by the
council before issuance of the renewal. (1985 Code §3-4.0213)
4-5A-14: SITE ACCESSIBILITY:
The location of the fence and gates, which shall be provided to exclude people from the active fill site, shall be shown. They shall be located to prevent
illegal dumping, children from playing on the site, and debris from being blown off the site. The fence shall be at least six feet (6') high and composed of a
metal fabric and it shall comply with all street intersection setback requirements. The fence shall be constructed before landfill operations begin. For
purposes of this requirement, "active fill site" shall mean that portion of the land covered by the license which is in fact regularly receiving waste whether or
not at the instance of the applicant. The applicant shall maintain any unfenced area free of solid waste, and in the event of accumulation of waste upon or
abutting the site, the Building Inspector may require the applicant to install such further fencing as can assure that the then-active remainder of the site
shall remain free of unauthorized or improper accumulation of solid waste. (1985 Code §3-4.0214)
4-5A-15: SIGNING:
A prominent legible sign shall be provided at all site entrances indicating the name of the site owner and operator and emergency telephone numbers.
(1985 Code §3-4.0215)
4-5A-16: PUBLIC AGENCIES:
Neither the City or any other public agency shall be required to obtain the license required by this Article, but each such public body shall file with the
Council, before beginning operation and annually thereafter, evidence of substantial compliance with all provisions of this Article except the requirements
of Section 4-5A-4 of this Article. It is, however, specifically provided that such exemption from licensing shall not operate to exempt the City or other public
agencies from any other specific requirements of law relating to or regulating such operation to which such operation would otherwise be subject. (1985
Code §3-4.0216)
4-5A-17: PLAN CONTENT MANDATORY:
The operational details and physical site proposals contained in the plans filed with an application which has been approved by the City Council shall be
obligatory and binding upon the licensee, who shall conform to each such detail and proposal unless specifically relieved of such conformance by the
Council. (1985 Code §3-4.0217)
4-5A-18: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE RENEWAL:
In the event a licensee violates any section of this Article, as well as those made obligatory and binding upon the licensee by reason of their inclusion in
the application and approval by the Council, or other City ordinances, then the City Manager shall report the same to the Council, which shall set a public
hearing thereon and direct that the notice of the time, date and place of said public hearing and of the City Manager's report be given to the licensee. Such
hearing shall occur not less than ten (10) days after such notice has been mailed to the licensee at the address shown in the application or such other
address as has been provided by the licensee during the period of license. If, upon said hearing, the Council determines noncompliance by the licensee,
the Council may revoke or suspend the license or, if such determination be made while an application for renewal is pending, may deny renewal of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 250/687
license. Notice of such revocation or denial following such hearing may be either by formal notice to the licensee at the appropriate address or by so
advising representatives of the licensee personally present at such hearing, or by any other means reasonably calculated to apprise the licensee of such
revocation or such denial. No person or other legal entity whose license shall have been revoked, or the renewal thereof denied, pursuant to this Section,
and no successors or assigns or other legal entities in which such person or other legal entity shall have a substantial interest may obtain a license
pursuant to this Article within the City for a period of two (2) years from date of cessation of activities at such landfill site pursuant to such revocation or
denial. The operation of a disposal site without having a presently valid license to do so shall be and is hereby prohibited. (1985 Code §3-4.0218)
ARTICLE B. TRANSFER STATIONS
4-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to regulate the location and operation of solid waste transfer stations. (1985 Code §3-4.0301)
4-5B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or permit the operation on its property, of a transfer station in the City unless such person shall have first applied for and received
a license to do so from the City. A license to operate a transfer station shall be issued by the Council upon application filed with the Building Inspector of
the City and accompanied by a special use permit issued by the City Board of Adjustment, and a State permit issued by the appropriate State agency, to
conduct a transfer station operation on the site in question. The applicant must show proof that he can demonstrate full present and contemplated
compliance with the specific provisions of this Article and the operational details and physical site proposals contained in plans accompanying the
application, as well as the ability to do so; and shall be subject to annual renewal by the Council as hereinafter set forth. In reviewing such application, the
Council must weigh the need for the transfer station against the potential for site pollution, danger to persons or property likely to have direct or indirect
contact with the site, the feasibility of the operation, the likelihood of freedom from negative environmental effect of such operation, and such other factors
as shall reflect the public interest in balance against the interests of the applicant to operate such a facility on the site in question. (1985 Code §3-4.0302)
4-5B-3: APPLICATION:
The application for a license to operate a transfer station shall be accompanied by plans prepared under the direct supervision of a registered engineer in
conformity with chapter 114 of the Code of Iowa. The site as shown on the plans shall physically conform to the following requirements, and the application
shall contain either sufficient written information to show such conformity or it shall be shown by depiction of physical detail on the plan, as applicable.
(1985 Code §3-4.0303)
A. Site: The site shall be located outside flood plain or riverfront land unless such requirement is waived by the appropriate governmental agency or
agencies. The boundaries of the site shall be shown on the plan with sufficient data, including legal description, that a land surveyor can easily locate
the boundaries. Two foot (2') contours of the existing terrain shall likewise be shown on the plan. Proposed screening of the site from highways, streets,
parks, residences and other amenities, as well as the schedule of installation of such, shall be shown; such screening shall meet the requirements of
the zoning ordinance and shall have been demonstrated to and approved by the City Board of Adjustment. The site shall be enclosed with a chain link
fence not less than six feet (6') in height, which fence shall completely surround all portions of the site intended to be used in connection with the
operation of the transfer station. The location of such fence shall be shown on the plan.
B. Permits: The application will be accompanied by a copy of the special use permit issued for such operation by the City Board of Adjustment and by a
copy of the permit issued by the applicable State agency, each approving the operation of a transfer station on the site.
C. Vehicular Travel: The plan shall show the areas on the site over which haul vehicles and transfer equipment will travel. Such areas shall be
hardsurfaced, and the thickness and composition of such surfaces shall be shown on the plans. Barricades of a semi-permanent nature, affixed to the
ground, shall be placed to prevent vehicular travel on unsurfaced areas on the site; the location of such barricades shall be shown on the plan. The
haul road routes from the nearest City truck route shall be shown and identified on the plan. Such routes shall be reviewed by the Engineering
Department, who shall make recommendations thereon to the Council. Such haul roads shall be chosen to avoid undue hardship to residents living
adjacent to them and to minimize the likelihood of premature deterioration of City streets so chosen.
D. Unloading Area: All unloading, compacting and transfer activities shall be conducted within a fully enclosed structure or structures. Each such structure
shall be clearly depicted on the plan, with dimensions, in such fashion as to clearly show the type and location of equipment, the proposed routing of
unloading and transfer vehicles, all vehicle entrance and exit facilities to and from such structure or structures, and the waiting area for unloading
vehicles, which shall be sufficient to accommodate expected traffic. Such structures and waiting area shall be of sufficient size and appropriate design
as will assure that the volume of vehicles expected on site at any one time can be accommodated without spill-over on surrounding streets.
E. Drainage and Sewers: Floor surfaces in each unloading, compacting and transfer structure shall be so constructed that they can be cleaned by flushing,
and that they will permit the drainage of liquids without ponding; all such floor surfaces shall be equipped with floor drains or sump pump and with a
trap or other mechanical device which shall prevent the passage of solids, which system shall be connected to a sanitary sewer. A storm drainage
system for the site shall provide adequate storm drainage with minimum ponding and shall connect to a storm sewer. All interior drainage lines from the
unloading, compacting and transfer areas as well as other drainage lines within the site shall be adequate to handle the volumes of water and liquids
which may be expected. All drainage and sewerage systems, floor drains, floor surfaces construction and locations of connections to sewers shall be
clearly identified in the plan, showing dimensions and composition where appropriate.
F. Sanitation and Environmental Control: All solid waste shall be confined to unloading, compacting and transfer structures, and all solid waste remaining
at the transfer station at the end of each day shall be stored in leakproof, flyproof, and rodentproof containers. Vector control, principally rat abatement
and mosquito abatement, shall be the responsibility of the operator. The transfer station site shall be kept in a suitable clean and sanitary condition at
all times. The application shall list the provisions at the site and the schedule for cleaning vehicles, structures and grounds, as well as the intended
continuing vector control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 251/687
G. Fire Prevention: Burning of solid waste, either open or controlled, is prohibited at the transfer station site. If a fire hydrant is not located adjacent to the
property and within three hundred feet (300') of the unloading, compacting and transfer structure or structures, then a fire hydrant shall be so installed
and connected to an appropriate extension of the water main. The location of the nearest fire hydrants to the transfer station shall be shown on the
plan, as shall such installations and extensions, where applicable.
H. Equipment: The transfer station shall be so designed and maintained that the operational failure of one component part will not result in a total
shutdown of the operation. An inventory of the equipment to be used in connection with the unloading, compacting and transfer operation shall be
contained in the application, as well as a list of backup equipment available or, failing direct availability, the sources from which such equipment shall
be obtained in the event of need.
I. Prohibited Materials: Sewage solids or liquids and hazardous wastes shall not be unloaded or accepted at the transfer station. Solid waste material of
such bulk as cannot be accommodated by direct transfer shall likewise be excluded from the transfer station.
J. Recycling: If the operation of the transfer station includes isolation, segregation and gathering of materials of a like or similar kind for salvage and
reutilization by recycling, the equipment, methods, and proposed operation in connection therewith shall be fully depicted and described in the
application. Solid waste which is received at the transfer station site and which is not thereat separated for recycling may only be disposed of by
hauling to a sanitary disposal project which has been approved by the appropriate governmental agency or agencies and is legally operating.
Scavenging at the transfer station site shall be prohibited, and all materials so separated and gathered for salvage and reutilization by recycling shall
be retained in suitable containers as heretofore described until removed by appropriate vehicles to off-site destinations,
K. Personnel and Hours: The personnel planned to operate the site, the times during which the gates will be open, and the hours and days of the week
during which the site will be open to receive solid waste shall be indicated in the application. Appropriate signs meeting the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance for the district in which located shall be located at all entrance gates, shall be lighted if appropriate, shall identify such hours, shall list
prohibited materials, and shall contain such further information as will assure conformance of visitors to the site to the requirements of this Article. An
attendant shall be on duty at the site at all times when it is open for public use. (1985 Code §3-4.0303)
4-5B-4: INSURANCE:
The applicant shall file a certificate of insurance evidencing the issuance to the applicant of liability insurance which shall protect the public and any and all
persons from injury which may be sustained by reason of the operation or condition of the transfer station, and that the applicant carries insurance which
meets the requirements of the Iowa workmen's compensation law. Proof of such insurance shall show a minimum cancellation time of ten (10) days and
shall embody a requirement that the City shall have a right to such notice before such cancellation can become effective. The proof shall specify evidence
of the following forms of insurance protection:
A. Operations Liability: Liability insurance covering all operations performed by the licensed applicant and all persons in the licensed applicant's direct
employment.
B. Subcontractor Liability: Public liability insurance covering all operations performed by any subcontractor or independent contractor to whom a portion of
the operations may have been assigned or which in the future may be assigned, or by any person or legal entity acting for or on behalf of the licensed
applicant at or on the site.
C. Vehicle: Motor vehicle bodily injury insurance and property damage liability insurance on motor vehicles employed on the site, whether or not owned by
the licensed applicant or by either the subcontractors or independent contractors under contract to the licensee, or by any other person or legal entity
acting for or on behalf of the licensed applicant at or on the site.
D. Amounts: The main protection shall be insurance coverage with a minimum liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any
one person and subject to the same limit per person, a minimum liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any number of
persons in one accident, and a minimum liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for damage to property of others, but excluding property of the
insured. The insurance certificate shall provide that notice shall be given to the city clerk thirty (30) days prior to any cancellation or termination of
insurance. The cancellation or termination of the insurance shall automatically revoke the permit.
E. Additional Insured: The city shall be named as an additional insured under all liability policies without expense to it. (1985 Code §3-4.0304; amd. 1993
Code)
4-5B-5: LICENSING:
A. License Fee; Renewal: An annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable to the finance director shall accompany the initial application for
license and each application for renewal of the license. The provisions of article A of this chapter for renewal of license for construction or demolition
materials disposal sites shall likewise apply to the annual renewal of a transfer station license. (1985 Code §3-4.0305; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-
23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
B. Public Agencies: Neither the city nor any other public agency shall be required to obtain the license required by this article, but each such public body
shall file with the council, before beginning operation and annually thereafter, evidence of substantial compliance with all provisions of this article
except the requirements of sections 4-5B-2 and 4-5B-4 of this article and subsections A and C of this section. It is, however, specifically provided that
such exemption from licensing shall not operate to exempt the city or other public agencies from any other specific requirements of law relating to or
regulating such operation to which such operation would be otherwise subject. (1985 Code §3-4.0307)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 252/687
C. Revocation Or Denial: The provisions of article A of this chapter for revocation or denial of renewal of a license for construction or demolition materials
disposal sites shall apply to the license of a transfer station. (1985 Code §3-4.0307)
4-5B-6: DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE:
All persons operating a transfer station licensed under the provisions of this article shall deliver or cause to be delivered all solid waste coming within its
control to the Des Moines metropolitan area solid waste agency disposal site or sites. (1985 Code §3-4.0308)
ARTICLE C. FEES AND CHARGES
4-5C-1: FEES ESTABLISHED:
The member municipality will fix, establish and maintain and revise the same from time to time whenever necessary such rates, fees, rentals or other
charges for the use and services of the disposal facilities operated by the agency, as more fully described in the solid waste disposal service contract, as
will always provide in each year revenues sufficient to pay the proportionate share of such member municipality for: a) operation and maintenance
expenses for said disposal facilities; b) collection, recycling, billing and spring cleanup fees; c) administrative fees; d) the principal and interest on the solid
waste disposal revenue bonds; and e) all reserves, renewal and replacement funds and other funds provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance
of such solid waste disposal revenue bonds. (Ord. 1425, 10-30-2000, eff. 12-4-2000)
4-5C-2: WHEN FEES IMPOSED:
An initial schedule of such rates, fees, tolls and other charges to be levied and collected from the residents of the member municipality for the use and
services of said disposal facilities shall be established and put into effect whenever necessary in order for said member municipality to comply with the
provisions of its solid waste disposal service contract; provided, however, the member municipality may in its discretion apply such other lawfully available
monies it has on hand for such purpose. (1985 Code §3-4.0403)
4-5C-3: MONTHLY CHARGES:
There is herewith imposed a solid waste collection and disposal fee as follows applicable to each residential unit for solid waste collected by the City
approved contractor:
48 gallon cart - $11.50 per month
96 gallon cart - 12.00 per month
Charges for collection of additional carts shall be as follows:
48 gallon cart - $7.50 per month
96 gallon cart - 8.00 per month
These charges shall be made on all bills mailed by West Des Moines Water Works on and after the effective date hereof. Additional charges may also be
imposed for changing cart size. The collection agent for the City shall be the West Des Moines Water Works which shall provide for solid waste charges to
be listed upon its regular billing statement and collected in the same manner as water and sanitary sewer fees. Billing for the change in container size shall
be made in the billing cycle following the change. All charges imposed herein shall be due and payable upon receipt of the billing. (Ord. 2323, 8-6-2018,
eff. 9-1-2018)
4-5C-4: PRORATION OF CHARGES:
The service availability charge shall be prorated according to the ratio of the number of days for which solid waste collection service was available to a
customer at a premises and the total number of days in the month. (Ord. 2323, 8-6-2018, eff. 9-1-2018)
4-5C-5: EXEMPTION FROM FEES; SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
In special conditions including, but not limited to, the instances noted below, the City Manager may, upon a written request for an exemption of fees filed
with West Des Moines Water Works, grant fee payment and collection variances after determining that granting the variance would be in the City's best
interest, will improve efficiency, safety and is practical. Upon the granting of any variance, the City Manager shall file notice with the City Council giving
reason(s) for the variance.
A. If an individual receives water service from West Des Moines Water Works and, for whatever reason which results in the building being vacant or
unoccupied, desires and pays West Des Moines Water Works for shutting off said service for a period of not less than two (2) weeks.
B. If a building serves a mixed use (i.e., residential and commercial), the City will classify the entire building commercial with the property owner then
required to contract with a private solid waste hauler who shall guarantee collection on a frequency at least equal to collections by the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 253/687
C. Unoccupied unit(s) within a building which is either uninhabitable and/or if no certificate of occupancy or rental has been granted by the City; provided,
that the unit(s) is vacant for a period of not less than two (2) weeks.
D. Housing units of a condominium or townhouse nature, where private drives, streets or common areas exist making it impractical for all residents of a
development to place solid waste at the public street curb, and where the City, pursuant to other sections of this article, would normally be responsible
for collection and disposal of waste may contract for private solid waste service; provided, that the private solid waste hauler guarantees collection from
all housing units within that development on a frequency at least equal to collections by the City. (Ord. 966, 8-19-1991)
E. The City Manager, in his sole discretion, may authorize solid waste service charge credits in unique situations, on a case by case basis. (Ord. 1525, 4-
28-2003, eff. 7-1-2003)
4-5C-6: PERIODIC REVIEW OF CHARGES; ANNUAL REPORT:
On an annual basis the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a report summarizing all solid waste activities occurring during the previous period,
and listing all revenues and costs associated therewith. The City Council shall then review said report with respect to service charges imposed herein, and
goals and objectives to be accomplished as part of the general City operations. (1985 Code §3-4.0407)
4-5C-7: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES; TRANSMITTAL OF RECEIPTS:
The West Des Moines Water Works may, before transmitting to the City Finance Director receipts from solid waste collections, subtract an administrative
and accounting fee not to exceed thirty cents ($0.30) per customer billing applicable to charges for solid waste collection. All funds received pursuant to
this article, minus administrative charges shall be paid by the Water Works to the Finance Director not later than seventy five (75) days following the
applicable billing due date. (1985 Code §3-4.0408; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1425, 10-30-2000, eff. 12-4-2000; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
4-5C-8: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
Each delinquent account which is transmitted to the Finance Department by the West Des Moines Water Works shall thereafter be processed for
imposition of a lien upon the contributor's property as provided by section 384.84 of the Iowa Code, in the amount of the delinquent account, plus a County
administrative fee for each lien certified as provided in section 384.84 of the Iowa Code, plus a City delinquency fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00)
to recoup the City's administrative processing costs and lost investment on the unpaid amount. The lien here provided shall apply only to that property or
those properties for which the contributor's account is delinquent. (Ord. 1084, 3-28-1994, eff. 7-1-1994; amd. Ord. 1425, 10-30-2000, eff. 12-4-2000; Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
Chapter 6
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING
4-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote recycling by requiring property owners to provide facilities for the source separation of recyclable materials at
certain locations. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this
section:
CITY: The City of West Des Moines.
COLLECTION: The transportation of the Municipal waste from the place it is generated and includes all activities up to the time the waste is delivered to a
recycling facility or solid waste disposal site.
COLLECTOR: A person authorized by the City to collect, transport and dispose of Municipal waste or recyclable materials.
COMMINGLED: Source separated, nonputrescible recyclable materials that have been mixed at the source of generation (i.e., placed in the same
container).
CONDOMINIUM: An apartment building or housing area in which the dwelling units are owned individually.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Newspapers, corrugated containers, magazines, catalogs, junk mail, kraft bags, bi-metal and ferrous cans,
aluminum cans, clear glass containers, high density polyethylene (HDPE) (excluding motor oil bottles), and polyethylene terephthalate (PETE), whether
alone or in combination.
DWELLING UNIT: A group of rooms located within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating for the exclusive use of the occupants thereof.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: Any building under one roof which contains two (2) or more complete dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL WASTE: Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste, and other material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 254/687
material resulting from the operation of multi-family dwellings.
NEARBY: Adjoining, adjacent, or contiguous.
NONRECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Any material not defined as recyclable material.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprises, or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as being subject to such rights and duties.
PREMISES: Real property on which any multi-family dwelling unit or combination of units sharing common driveways are located.
RECYCLING: The separation, collection, processing, recovering and sale or reuse of materials which would otherwise be disposed of as Municipal waste.
RECYCLING FACILITY: Any facility employing a technology that is a process that separates or recovers reusable materials that can be sold or reused by
a manufacturer as substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw materials.
SOURCE SEPARATION: The separation of recyclable materials from the Municipal waste stream at the point of waste generation. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF RECYCLING PROGRAM:
A. There is hereby established a recycling program for the source separation, separate collection and recycling of designated recyclable materials
generated within the City from all multi-family dwellings and dwelling units not presently served by existing residential recycling collection programs.
B. Collection of designated recyclable materials pursuant to this section shall be made at least twice per month, or more often as necessary, as
determined by the Director of Public Works or other designee of the City Manager, and the storage of said designated recyclable materials shall not
result in the creation of a public nuisance.
C. All multi-family dwellings which are not presently part of existing residential recycling collection programs shall be required to provide the facilities for
the source separation of all designated recyclable materials generated on the premises and shall arrange for the collection of said materials to be
transported to a recycling facility.
D. Program development, implementation and operation shall be the responsibility of the same entity which contracts for the private collection and disposal
of solid waste on the premises.
E. The specific "designated recyclable materials" are those materials set out in section 4-6-2 of this chapter.
F. The City reserves the right to amend the list of "designated recyclable materials" as defined in section 4-6-2 of this chapter at any time. (Ord. 1128, 4-
24-1995)
4-6-4: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be the responsibility of all commercial waste haulers collecting solid waste or designated recyclable materials generated in the City to submit a
recycling report to the City on an annual basis. Said report shall identify individual establishments being served and the total weight of recyclable materials
collected as well as identification of the processor of each recovered recyclable material. All such reports of the previous year shall be submitted, on forms
provided by the City, to the Director of Public Works or other designee of the City Manager by January 31. The City reserves the right to require any
additional information deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works or other designee of the City Manager. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-5: AUTHORIZATION OF COLLECTORS:
All commercial solid waste haulers or haulers of designated recyclable materials who as a commercial enterprise provide the service of collection of said
designated recyclable materials or waste to owners/operators of multi-family dwelling units shall be duly authorized by the Department of Public Works
through the issuance of a license. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-6: LICENSE APPLICATION, TERM, REVOCATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2324, 8-6-2018)
4-6-7: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:
Any person or persons engaged in the collection, processing and marketing of designated recyclable materials within the City or who collects solid waste
within the City, and all householders, firms, corporations, co-partnerships and any and all persons who may or do produce solid waste and/or designated
recyclable materials shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-8: COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 255/687
A. Transportation: Any person transporting designated recyclable materials within the City shall prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers
used in the transport of such designated recyclable materials. Such vehicles or containers shall not be overfilled and shall be cleansed at sufficiently
frequent intervals to prevent obnoxious odors or unhealthful conditions. Such vehicles shall also be so constructed, loaded and driven so as to prevent
any portion of the load from falling out upon the streets or highways.
B. Removal By Collectors: Collectors shall return the recycling receptacles to the premises from which they have been removed in a manner so as not to
create a public nuisance. Collectors shall also collect and remove all recyclable materials for which they are responsible to collect from the premises.
(Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-9: STORAGE OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
A. General: It shall be the duty of every owner or entity which contracts for the private collection and disposal of solid waste from the premises to provide
and keep at all times, a sufficient number of containers to hold all designated recyclable materials which may accumulate during the intervals between
collection of such materials by the authorized collector. Containers may be located on-site or on nearby premises with the permission of the affected
property owner or otherwise in accordance with the provision of this section. Owners of multi-family dwelling units shall insure that each dwelling unit
has access to the containers and that said containers are sufficient to hold all designated recyclable materials accumulated by the occupants of the
dwelling unit during the intervals between collections.
B. Storage: All designated recyclable materials accumulated by owners and/or occupants of multi-family dwelling units shall be placed in containers which
are durable, watertight and made of metal or plastic and marked with the recycling symbol or other acceptable markings. The containers shall remain
on the premises at all times and shall be kept in a clean condition. The type of bulk container to be furnished by the collector shall be acceptable to the
Director of Public Works or other designee of the City Manager. Containers shall have lids if necessary to avert a public nuisance or protect the
marketing quality of designated recyclable materials. Such lids must remain closed except when designated recyclable materials are being placed in or
removed from the container. The container shall be clearly marked with both the recycling symbol and with the type of material(s) to be deposited in the
container. The container shall be kept clean and in good repair. The number of such containers shall be sufficient to handle the volume of recyclables
which accumulate between collection intervals.
C. Location Of Containers: Bulk storage containers for collection at multi-family dwellings using private collection shall be located on such premises at a
place agreed upon by such owner or occupant of the property and the authorized collector. Such location shall not interfere with private or public
sidewalks, walkways, driveways, roads, streets, highways or entrances and exits of private or public buildings and shall be in compliance with all
applicable laws. Bulk storage containers which are on wheels to facilitate their movement shall remain blocked at all times while unattended to prevent
unintentional movement. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-10: PREPARATION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS AND PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION:
Designated recyclable materials shall be separated and prepared in a manner consistent with recycling market requirements and placed at a designated
area separate from Municipal waste for collection at such time and dates as may be agreed upon between the collector and the establishment. (Ord. 1128,
4-24-1995)
A. No person shall place, drop, commingle or deposit in recyclable material any solid waste or banned substance, as defined in section 4-5-3 of this title,
into any designated recyclable material container, bin or dumpster located on any premises.
Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1158, 11-8-1995)
4-6-11: COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person(s) unauthorized by the City to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any recyclable
materials or solid waste. Each such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to the following
civil penalties:
1. One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense;
2. Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense; and
3. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense.
B. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, any person having ownership of the same may sell or donate recyclable materials for the purpose of
recycling to any person, partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-12: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administration: The City's Department of Community Development is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce this chapter. At
apartment complexes, Community Development Department personnel will tie recycling compliance into their biannual multi-family inspections and
include it on the inspector's checklist. Enforcement relative to multi-family recycling may also be handled by more frequent inspections or on a
complaint basis. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
B. Violation And Penalty: Except as set forth in subsection 4-6-10A of this chapter, any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any terms or
provisions of this chapter or any regulation or requirement pursuant thereto and authorized thereby, shall be subject to a civil penalty of one dollar
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 256/687
($1.00) per month for each dwelling unit on the premises in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1158, 11-8-1995)
Chapter 7
NOISE CONTROL
4-7-1: TITLE:
A. These regulations shall be officially known, cited, and referred to as the NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES,
IOWA (hereinafter "these regulations"). (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-2: POLICY:
A. Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and the quality of life in a close urban society.
B. A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive noise can be substantially abated without serious inconvenience to the public.
C. Certain noise producing equipment in this community is essential to the quality of life herein and should be allowed to continue at reasonable levels with
moderate regulation.
D. Each person has the right to an environment reasonably free from noise which jeopardizes health, welfare, or which unduly interferes with a property
owner's right to the use or enjoyment of their property.
E. It is recognized that residential land uses are more noise sensitive than commercial and industrial land uses, and that commercial land uses are more
noise sensitive than industrial land uses.
F. It is the declared policy of this city to promote an environment free from excessive noise, otherwise properly called "noise pollution", which unreasonably
jeopardizes the health and welfare and degrades the quality of the lives of the residents of this community, without unduly prohibiting, limiting, or
otherwise regulating the function of certain noise producing equipment and events which is not amenable to such controls and yet is essential to the
economy and quality of life of the community. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-3: PURPOSE:
A. These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1. To address concerns expressed by citizens and businesses of this community.
2. To establish standards for the control of noise pollution in the city by setting maximum permissible sound levels for various land uses.
3. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city.
4. This chapter shall apply to the control of noise originating within the limits of the city. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
A. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted filter network.
ADVERSE IMPACT: A state of facts as would lead a reasonable person of normal sensitivity acting prudently to conclude that the economic,
entertainment, and philanthropic benefits to the community do not reasonably outweigh the quiet use and enjoyment of the affected property.
AMBIENT LEVEL: All encompassing sound at a given place, usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and far.
AMPLIFIED SOUND: The production or reproduction of sound from amplification equipment.
BACKGROUND LEVEL: Ambient level sound less the noise disturbance.
C-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the C-weighted filter network.
CONSTRUCTION: Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights of way,
structures, utilities, or similar property.
dBA: Decibels measured using an A-weighted sound level.
dBC: Decibels measured using a C-weighted sound level.
DECIBEL (dB): A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 257/687
DEMOLITION: Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right of way surfaces, or similar property.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which
demands immediate action.
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work performed for the purpose of alleviating or resolving an emergency.
L5A: The A-weighted sound level exceeded five percent (5%) of the ten (10) minute sound meter reading, or more than thirty (30) seconds in total.
L5C: The C-weighted sound level exceeded five percent (5%) of the ten (10) minute sound meter reading, or more than thirty (30) seconds in total.
NOISE: Any sound which disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound which endangers or injures the welfare, safety, or health of a human being, or disturbs a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities, or devalues or injures personal or real property.
NOISE SENSITIVE LAND USE: Those specific land uses which have associated indoor and/or outdoor human activities that may be subject to stress
and/or significant interference from noise produced by community sound sources. Such human activity typically occurs daily for continuous periods of
twenty four (24) hours or is in such a nature that noise is significantly disruptive to activities that occur for short periods. Specifically, noise sensitive
land uses include: hospitals, rest homes, convalescent care facilities, places of worship, and schools.
PERSON: A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any noise or sound for which the information content of the noise or sound is transferred to the listener such as, but not limited to,
understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or lowered, or comprehension of musical rhythms.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental
entity.
PUBLIC SPACE: Any real property, including any structure thereon, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
RECEIVING LAND USE: The use or occupancy of the property which receives the transmission of "sound" as hereinafter defined.
SOUND: An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity, and
frequency.
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound.
SOUND EQUIPMENT: Any radio, record player, stereo, television, compact disc player, tape deck or player, loudspeakers, amplifier, sound truck, or
other device for producing, reproducing, or amplifying sounds.
SOUND LEVEL (NOISE LEVEL): The weighted sound pressure level obtained by use of a sound level meter having a standard frequency filter for
attenuating part of the sound spectrum.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement
and determination of noise and sound levels. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-5: MEASUREMENT OF NOISE AND SOUND:
The measurement of noise or sound shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards
Institute. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-6: TEST MEASUREMENT AND REQUIREMENTS FOR DETERMINATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF SOUND:
A. For the purposes of determining and classifying any sound as excessive or unusually loud, the following test measurement and requirements are to be
applied:
1. The sound must be measured at or within the property boundary of the receiving land use.
2. Unamplified sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard design and quality operated in "A" slow response weighing scale.
3. Amplified sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard design and quality operated in "C" slow response weighing scale.
4. A sound measured or registered in excess of the maximum permitted levels is prohibited.
5. A ten (10) minute L5A or L5C ambient level measurement must be taken to determine whether the sound disturbance exceeds the maximum
permissible level allowed for a receiving land use. A one minute L5A or L5C background level measurement should also be taken when the sound
disturbance is inactive. The ambient level measurement must be a minimum of ten (10) dB above the background level measurement to attribute the
noise to the sound disturbance. The one minute L5A or L5C background level measurement shall be deemed to be the background level
measurement that existed at the time of the ambient level measurement. The person responsible for the sound disturbance must render the noise
inactive for the purposes of a one minute background level measurement within thirty (30) minutes of a request to do so by a police officer or other
city official authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If the person responsible fails to timely render the noise inactive for the one minute
background level measurement, that person thereby waives the ten (10) dB difference requirement and the result of the ten (10) minute ambient
level measurement shall be deemed to be the noise attributed to the sound disturbance. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 258/687
4-7-7: MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE:
A. With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized or allowed in this chapter, the following are maximum permissible sound levels
allowed at or within the property boundary of a receiving land use for unamplified sound:
Receiving Land Use
Maximum L5A Level Permitted
7 A.M. - 7 P.M. 7 P.M. - 10 P.M. 10 P.M. - 7 A.M.
Residential 65 dBA 60 dBA 55 dBA
Commercial 65 dBA 65 dBA 65 dBA
Industrial 80 dBA 80 dBA 80 dBA
Noise sensitive 65 dBA 60 dBA 55 dBA
B. With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized or allowed in this chapter, the following are maximum permissible sound levels
allowed at or within the property boundary of a receiving land use for amplified sound:
Receiving Land Use
Maximum L5C Level Permitted
7 A.M. - 7 P.M. 7 P.M. - 10 P.M. 10 P.M. - 7 A.M.
Residential 76 dBC 74 dBC 72 dBC
Commercial 82 dBC 80 dBC 78 dBC
Industrial 85 dBC 85 dBC 85 dBC
Noise sensitive 76 dBC 74 dBC 72 dBC
C. If the volume of sound exceeds the maximum permissible sound level by a measurement of L5A or L5C, at any time during a ten (10) minute meter
reading, the sound is prohibited and is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-8: EXCEPTIONS TO THIS CHAPTER:
A. The maximum permissible sound levels of this chapter shall not apply to:
1. The emission of sound made by safety signals, warning devices, and sound resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an
emergency call or acting in time of an emergency. An authorized emergency vehicle shall include local, state, and federal law enforcement vehicles,
emergency medical vehicles, and fire department vehicles.
2. Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space, or public right of way, during the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
3. The emission of sound through the unamplified human voice.
4. Agricultural activities associated with the raising and harvesting of crops, exclusive of those involving the ownership or possession of animals or
birds.
5. Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation vehicles.
6. The emission of sound in the performance of military operations, exclusive of travel by individuals to or from military duty.
7. The emission of sound from activities in the discharge of weapons, fireworks, displays, parades, concerts, or other events expressly permitted or
authorized by the city council. This exception includes outdoor Historic Valley Junction Foundation events as long as such events conclude by eight
thirty o'clock (8:30) P.M. The outdoor Historic Valley Junction Foundation events may be permitted to extend past eight thirty o'clock (8:30) P.M., but
are subject to city approval and the maximum permissible sound levels prescribed within this chapter.
8. The emission of sound from activities where a state or federal agency has adopted a different standard or rules than that prescribed within this
chapter.
9. The emission of sound during nonprofessional athletic and school events or practices.
10. The emission of sound during demolition work, construction work for which a building permit, grading permit, or demolition permit is required, or a
development plan approved. In cases where the sound originates within three hundred feet (300') of a residential land use or noise sensitive land
use, the exemption shall only apply between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
11. The emission of sound from the use of lawn and garden equipment and chain saws. In cases where the sound originates within three hundred feet
(300') of a residential land use or noise sensitive land use, the exemption shall only apply between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.
12. The emission of sound from the use of snow removal equipment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 259/687
13. The emission of sound from on site stationary trash compactors. In cases where the sound originates within three hundred feet (300') of a
residential land use or noise sensitive land use, the exemption shall only apply between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M.
14. The emission of sound from municipal or municipally contracted compactor trucks loading or unloading of yard waste, recyclable material, trash,
and garbage.
15. The operation of private compactor trucks in the loading and unloading of yard waste, recyclable material, trash, and garbage on private property.
In cases where the sound originates within three hundred feet (300') of a residential land use or noise sensitive land use, the exemption shall only
apply between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
16. The emission of sound during the operation, maintenance, repair, and cleaning of public streets and facilities.
17. The emission of sound during public and private parking lot maintenance and repair. In cases where the sound originates within three hundred feet
(300') of a residential land use or noise sensitive land use, the exemption shall only apply between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.
18. Work performed by or for public utilities.
19. Live radio broadcasts as long as such broadcasts utilize fifty (50) watts or less of electrical power as provided in subsection 4-7-11J of this chapter.
B. Although exempt from the maximum permissible sound levels of this chapter, a sound equipment permit is required in all cases where sound equipment
and sound amplifying equipment will be used unless explicitly exempted within this chapter. (Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-9: VEHICLE NOISE LIMITS:
No person shall operate or control a motor vehicle, which is moving or stationary, standing or parked, whether or not persons are seated in the motor
vehicle, from which any amplified sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the vehicle between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., or is plainly audible at a distance of twenty five feet (25') from the vehicle between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-10: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
A. No person shall engage or participate in activities which result in noise levels which exceed the maximum permitted noise levels outlined in section 4-7-
7 of this chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of the owner to prevent such premises or vehicles from being the site of such activities producing sound levels in excess of what is
permitted under this chapter. Failure or refusal to perform such duty shall constitute a violation of this section. The owner may include one or more of
the following: fee title owner, lessee, and other persons granted a legal right to exercise use of the property.
C. It shall be the duty of persons in positions of leadership or responsibility with respect to unincorporated associations, groups, gatherings, or
assemblages of people to prevent such from causing or making sound levels in excess of what is permitted under this chapter. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-11: REGULATION OF SOUND EQUIPMENT AND SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT:
A. No person shall use or cause to be used any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier, or any other machine or device which produces,
reproduces, or amplifies sound outside of buildings or other enclosed structures for the purpose of amplifying a live performance or prerecorded music
without first obtaining a permit to do so.
B. A permit may be obtained by making application to the city clerk or designee.
C. Application requests shall be filed with the city clerk. No application request shall be accepted for filing and processing unless it conforms to the
requirements of this chapter, contains in a full, true, and correct form the required materials and information prescribed by the forms supplied by the city
clerk and is accompanied by the appropriate fees.
D. All permits are subject to approval by the city clerk or designee. The city clerk shall have the discretion to refer any sound permit request to the city
council for their review and action. The city council must approve any sound permit request that extends past ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Before the city
decides to approve a sound permit request, the city may require the applicant to provide notice, in a form and manner approved by the city clerk, of the
proposed event to all neighboring residential property owners located within three hundred seventy feet (370') of the subject property.
E. The permit requires separate payment for each type of activity and permits shall be nontransferable. A permit for a single event or a series of events at
the same location may be issued. The city council, the city clerk, or designee retains the ability to revoke or modify any issued permits for any alleged
violations of this chapter, including those based upon sound meter readings taken by the city. The chief of police or designee may also terminate the
permit activity if the activity continues to exceed the maximum permitted sound level after the permit holder or the holder's employee or agent has been
advised that the activity has exceeded the maximum permitted sound level.
F. The permit shall be displayed on or immediately adjacent to the sound equipment.
G. Each application request shall be accompanied by the fee specified by city council resolution before it is accepted for filing and processing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 260/687
H. If the property is a rental property, the applicant needs to have written permission from the landlord. If the property is under common ownership, the
applicant needs to have written permission from the landlord or association.
I. The use of any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier, or any other similar machine or device which is permitted pursuant to this section is
subject to the following regulations:
1. The only sound permitted shall be either music or human speech, or both.
2. The volume of the sound amplified pursuant to this section shall not exceed the maximum permissive sound levels measured from the receiving land
use, as outlined in this chapter.
J. Any radio, record player, stereo, television, compact disc player, tape deck or player, including any associated speakers, that is rated for fifty (50) watts
or less of electrical power does not require a sound permit application. (Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-12: CONDITIONS OF SOUND PERMIT APPROVAL:
A. The city clerk or designee may regulate the issuance of a sound permit as is necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter and protect the public
health, safety, and welfare of adjacent uses. Conditions which may be regulated may include, but are not limited to:
1. Setbacks.
2. Fences, walls, or other screening necessary to mitigate noise.
3. Control of noise, vibration, or other nuisances.
4. Hours of operation. (Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-13: PRIOR DETERMINATION FOR SOUND PERMIT APPROVAL:
A. The following shall be considered in determination for approval of an application for a sound permit:
1. Adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of person or property in the surrounding area.
2. Prior violations of this chapter by the applicant requesting a sound permit. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-14: APPEALS:
Wherein the applicant, the adjacent property owner, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city is affected by any decision or order made by
the city clerk or designee regarding the approval or denial of a sound permit, such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) calendar days from the decision or
order made by the city clerk or designee, by filing a written petition with the city clerk requesting a hearing on the matter and specifying the grounds
thereof. A hearing before the municipal code hearing officer will be held as provided by subsections 4-4-9E, F, and G of this title. An appeal pursuant to
this chapter shall not stay the effect of the decision or order made by the city clerk or designee unless so ordered by the municipal code hearing officer.
(Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-15: ENFORCEMENT:
The city clerk, the chief of police, or their designees are hereby designated and ordered to enforce this chapter. The city clerk, the chief of police, or their
designees shall have primary but not exclusive enforcement responsibility for this chapter. (Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-16: PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter are simple misdemeanors and are punishable by a fine and/or a term of imprisonment as provided in section 903.1 of the code of
Iowa (2009). Violations of this chapter may also be punishable as municipal infractions pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Violations of section 4-7-7
of this chapter shall only be punishable as municipal infractions. The chief of police or designees may issue criminal citations for violations. Any
individual(s) responsible for such violations, including property owners, lessees, or any other person(s) occupying, maintaining, or managing the property,
may receive a criminal citation or be subject to a municipal infraction. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. A two hundred
fifty dollar ($250.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a first municipal infraction on the property at issue. A seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) civil
penalty shall be imposed for a second municipal infraction within a twelve (12) month period on the property at issue. A one thousand dollar ($1,000.00)
civil penalty shall be imposed for a third or subsequent municipal infraction within a twelve (12) month period on the property at issue. Multiple violations of
this chapter occurring on the property at issue may be considered by the city for purposes of approving licenses or for any other requirements that are
subject to approval by the city. The city may also seek to suspend or prohibit any sound related events or activities on the property at issue once there
have been three (3) or more violations within a twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
Chapter 8
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A. SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 261/687
4-8A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish a storm water utility which shall be responsible for storm water management within the corporate boundaries of
the city of West Des Moines and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of storm water management
systems and facilities. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
4-8A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined for use in this article, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise:
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL: Any developed land whereon multiple-family dwellings, commercial retail and office, industrial and manufacturing buildings,
storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, public and private school buildings, churches, hospitals and
convalescent centers have been constructed.
CUSTOMERS OF THE STORM WATER UTILITY: Include all persons, properties and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition,
management, maintenance, extension and improvement of the public storm water management systems and facilities.
DEVELOPED LAND: Land that has been altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than five hundred (500) square feet of
"impervious surface area" as defined herein.
DUPLEX DWELLING: A building containing only two (2) dwelling units and designed for and occupied exclusively by not more than two (2) families with
separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. In the application of storm water management fees, duplex dwelling properties shall be treated as
two (2) single-family dwellings.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The ERU shall be used as the basis for determining storm water management fees. Less than or equal to four
thousand (4,000) square feet of impervious surface area shall be one ERU. Every additional increment of one square foot to two thousand (2,000) square
feet of impervious surface area shall be one-half (0.5) ERU.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA: Those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of storm water into the soil as it enters in natural conditions prior to
development. Common impervious surface areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking lots, storage areas,
compacted gravel surfaces and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of storm water runoff which existed prior to development.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building or portion thereof containing more than three (3) dwelling units designed for or occupied by more than three (3)
families with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. In the application of storm water management fees, multiple-family dwelling properties
shall be treated as commercial/industrial.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, so that
the same may cause or contribute to pollution; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform bacteria
and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; waste and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing only one dwelling unit and designed for and occupied exclusively for residence purposes by only one
family.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEES: The periodic rate, fee or charge applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the
service provided by the city of West Des Moines storm water utility. Storm water management fees are based on measurable parameters which influence
the storm water utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious surface area on each parcel
of developed property. The storm water management fees shall be determined by ordinance of the city council.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES: Storm water management systems and facilities address the issue of drainage
management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes and ponds through
improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of plants, structures and property used in the collection, retention, detention and treatment of storm
water or surface water drainage.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION: The construction has been completed and the city of West Des Moines has acknowledged that the construction has been
completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications through the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy or permanent certificate
of occupancy.
TOWNHOME DWELLING: A dwelling unit which is detached or attached horizontally, and not vertically, to one or more other dwelling units, wherein the
land or lot beneath each dwelling may be individually owned in common by a townhome association. In the application of storm water management fees,
each townhome dwelling shall be treated as one single-family dwelling.
UNDEVELOPED LAND: Land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response
comparable to land in an unaltered state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have less than five hundred (500) square feet of
pavement, asphalt or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface area that would prevent infiltration of storm water or
cause storm water to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur when the land was in an unaltered natural
state. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
4-8A-3: SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE STORM WATER UTILITY:
A. The city of West Des Moines storm water utility consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches, swales,
storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, dams, head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the corporate boundaries of the
city of West Des Moines which control and/or convey storm water through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and
properties. The city of West Des Moines owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement to those segments of this
system which: 1) are located within public streets, rights of way and easements; 2) are subject to easement or other permanent provisions for adequate
access for operation, maintenance and improvement of systems or facilities; or 3) are located on public lands to which the city of West Des Moines has
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 262/687
adequate access for operation, maintenance and improvement of systems or facilities. Operation, maintenance and improvement of storm water
systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the city of West Des Moines and for which there has been
no public dedication of such systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, or its occupant. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-
2006)
4-8A-4: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The director or public works has the following powers and duties related to the city of West Des Moines storm water utility:
A. Operations And Maintenance: Operation and maintenance of the storm water management systems and facilities.
B. Inspection And Tests: Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. Records: Maintain a complete and accurate record of all storm water management systems and facilities.
D. Policies: Recommend to the city council policies to be adopted and enforced to implement the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
4-8A-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
A. Damage Storm Water Management Systems And Facilities: Maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, pipe, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the storm water management systems or facilities.
B. Illicit Discharges: No person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge or cause to throw, drain, run or allow to seep or otherwise be discharged into the
city of West Des Moines storm water management systems and facilities, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants,
other than storm water.
C. Manholes: Open or enter any manhole, structure or intake of the storm water system, except by authority of the director of public works.
D. Connection: Connection of any private storm water system to the city's storm water management systems and facilities, except by authority of the
director of public works. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
4-8A-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The director of public works and other authorized employees of the city of West Des Moines bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing all private storm water discharges
directly or indirectly entering into any public storm water management system or facility in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-
2006)
4-8A-7: PENALTIES:
The following penalty provisions shall apply to violations of this chapter.
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall be served by the city of West Des Moines with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently remedy all violations.
B. Continuing Violations: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section, shall be subject to
a civil penalty as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day which said violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Liability Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city of West Des Moines for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned the city of West Des Moines by reason of such violation. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
ARTICLE B. FEES
4-8B-1: REQUIRED:
Every customer whose premises is served by a connection with the stormwater management systems and facilities of the City of West Des Moines, either
directly or indirectly, shall pay to the City of West Des Moines stormwater management fees hereinafter established and specified for the purpose of
contributing towards the costs of construction, maintenance and operation of the stormwater management systems and facilities. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 263/687
4-8B-2: EFFECTIVE DATE OF FEES:
Stormwater management fees shall accrue beginning June 1, 2006, and shall be billed monthly thereafter to all customers. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-3: ENUMERATED:
Except as hereinafter noted, each customer whose property lies within the corporate limits of the City of West Des Moines shall pay to the City of West
Des Moines, through its collection agent, the West Des Moines Water Works, the following stormwater management fees based on equivalent residential
unit (ERU) associated with the customer's property:
A. Undeveloped: A flat fee at the rate of $0.00 per month.
B. Residential: A monthly fee based on the following schedule:
Effective July 1, 2018 $4.85/ERU
Effective July 1, 2019 5.45/ERU
Effective July 1, 2020 6.05/ERU
Effective July 1, 2021 6.65/ERU
Effective July 1, 2022 6.90/ERU
Effective July 1, 2023 7.15/ERU
Effective July 1, 2024 7.40/ERU
C. Commercial: A monthly fee based on the following schedule:
Effective July 1, 2018 $4.85/ERU
Effective July 1, 2019 5.45/ERU
Effective July 1, 2020 6.05/ERU
Effective July 1, 2021 6.65/ERU
Effective July 1, 2022 6.90/ERU
Effective July 1, 2023 7.15/ERU
Effective July 1, 2024 7.40/ERU
(Ord. 2272, 1-22-2018)
4-8B-4: CALCULATIONS:
Stormwater management fee calculations shall be in accordance with the following:
A. The number of equivalent residential units (ERUs) of each property shall be calculated using the most recent aerial photography available to the City of
West Des Moines and/or impervious surface data from an approved site plan for the property.
B. Any occupancy occurring before the fifteenth of any month shall be treated as an entire month for the purpose of fees levied herein. Any occupancy
occurring on or after the fifteenth of any month, up to and including the last day of any calendar month, shall be prorated and charged as one-half (1/2)
month for purposes of this article. Any termination of service occurring before the fifteenth of any month shall be prorated and charged as one-half (1/2)
month for purposes of this article. Any termination of service occurring on or after the fifteenth of any calendar month shall be treated as an entire
month for the purpose of fees levied herein. No fees shall be prorated in any increment of less than one-half (1/2) month. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-5: APPEALS:
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner:
A. An appeal must be filed in writing with the City Manager of the City of West Des Moines. In the case of fee appeals, the appeal shall include a survey
prepared by a registered Iowa land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area
and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 264/687
B. Using the information provided by the appellant, the City Manager shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the
appeal in writing within thirty (30) days. All decisions of the City Manager are final.
C. In response to an appeal, the City Manager may adjust the stormwater fees applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent
of this article. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-6: EXEMPTION FROM FEES; SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
In special conditions including, but not limited to, the instances noted below, the City Manager of the City of West Des Moines may, upon a written request
for an exemption of fees filed with West Des Moines Water Works, grant fee payment and collection variances after determining that granting the variance
would be in the City's best interest, will improve efficiency, safety and is practical. Upon the granting of any variance, the City Manager shall file notice with
the City Council giving reason(s) for the variance.
A. If an individual receives water service from West Des Moines Water Works and, for whatever reason that results in the building being vacant or
unoccupied, desires and pays West Des Moines Water Works for shutting off said service for a period of not less than two (2) weeks.
B. The City Manager of the City of West Des Moines may authorize stormwater management fee credits in unique situations, on a case by case basis.
(Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-7: BILLINGS:
Billing and payment for stormwater management fees shall be in accordance with the following:
A. Stormwater management fees shall be included on all bills calculated by West Des Moines Water Works on or after the effective date hereof.
B. All stormwater management fees shall be due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of water service from the West
Des Moines Water Works, except the provision of section 4-8B-10 of this article shall be used to enforce collection of delinquent stormwater
management fees.
C. Questions concerning stormwater management fees shall, to the extent possible, be handled administratively by staff members of West Des Moines
Water Works and the City who have oversight responsibility for such charges. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-8: PERIODIC REVIEW:
The City will review the stormwater management fees at least yearly and revise the stormwater management fees as necessary to ensure that such
charges as herein established and specified generate adequate revenues to pay the costs of maintenance and operation (including replacement and debt
service) of stormwater management systems and facilities and that the stormwater management fees continue to provide for the proportional distribution of
maintenance and operation costs (including replacement costs and debt service) for stormwater management systems and facilities among the users and
user classes. The liability of a stormwater service user to pay for charges as provided in this article shall not be contingent, however, upon any such review
or revision. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-9: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES; TRANSMITTAL OF RECEIPTS:
The West Des Moines Water Works may, before transmitting to the City Finance Director receipts from stormwater management fees, subtract an
administrative and accounting fee not to exceed thirty cents ($0.30) per customer billing applicable to charges for stormwater management fees. All funds
received pursuant to this article, minus administrative charges shall be paid by the West Des Moines Water Works to the City Finance Director not later
than seventy five (75) days following the applicable billing due date. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
4-8B-10: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
Each delinquent account which is transmitted to the Finance Department by the West Des Moines Water Works shall thereafter be processed for
imposition of a lien upon the contributor's property as provided by section 384.84 of the Iowa Code, in the amount of the delinquent account, plus a County
administrative fee for each lien certified as provided in section 384.84 of the Iowa Code, plus a City delinquency fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00)
to recoup the City's administrative processing costs and lost investment on the unpaid amount. The lien herein provided shall apply only to that property or
those properties for which the contributor's account is delinquent. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
Chapter 9
SOCIAL HOST
4-9-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public interest, welfare, health, and safety within the city of West Des Moines by prohibiting the services to and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 265/687
consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of twenty one (21) at premises located in the city. The city council finds that the occurrence
of social gatherings at premises where alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21) is harmful to such
persons themselves and a threat to public welfare, health, and safety. The city council further finds that persons under the age of twenty one (21) often
obtain alcoholic beverages at such gatherings and that persons who are in control of such premises know or have reason to know of such service and/or
consumption and will be more likely to ensure that alcoholic beverages are neither served or consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21) at
these gatherings. Based on these findings, the city council has deemed it necessary to enact the following regulations in the city of West Des Moines.
(Ord. 1788, 12-3-2007)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume including alcoholic liquor, wine, and beer.
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS: Firefighters, law enforcement officers, emergency medical service personnel, and other personnel having emergency
response duties.
ENFORCEMENT SERVICES: The salaries and benefits of emergency responders for the amount of time actually spent responding to or remaining at an
event, gathering, or party and administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual costs for medical treatment for any injured emergency responder,
and the costs of repairing any damage to equipment or vehicles.
EVENT, GATHERING, OR PARTY: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other
activity where an underage person has consumed or possessed an alcoholic beverage.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile: a) as natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent; b) as a legal guardian; or c) as a person to
whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, or any association of one or more individuals.
PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any
other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party
or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
SOCIAL HOST: Any person who aids, conducts, allows, entertains, organizes, supervises, controls, or permits an event, gathering, or party. This includes,
but is not limited to: a) The person(s) who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has control of the premises where the event, gathering, or party takes place; b)
the person(s) in charge of the premises; or c) the person(s) who organized the event. If the social host is a juvenile, then the parent(s) of that juvenile will
be jointly and severally liable for any violation of this chapter.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under the age of twenty one (21). (Ord. 1788, 12-3-2007)
4-9-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is unlawful for any social host to host an event, gathering, or party on premises when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage
person has consumed an alcoholic beverage, or possessed an alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it, and the person fails to take reasonable
steps to prevent the possession or consumption by the underage person. A social host who hosts such an event, gathering, or party does not have to be
present at the time the prohibited act occurs. (Ord. 1788, 12-3-2007)
4-9-4: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while present in the parents' household, to legally
protected religious observances, and to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcoholic beverages during the course and scope
of employment. (Ord. 1788, 12-3-2007)
4-9-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by officers of the police department. The police department shall have primary but not exclusive
enforcement responsibility for this chapter. (Ord. 1788, 12-3-2007)
4-9-6: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter are declared to be municipal infractions pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. A five hundred dollar ($500.00) civil penalty
shall be imposed for a social host's first offense. A seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a social host's second offense. A
one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a social host's third or subsequent offense. In addition, the city may seek reimbursement
for enforcement services provided by emergency responders related to the event, gathering, or party. Multiple violations of this chapter may be considered
by the city for purposes of approving licenses applied for by the social host, or for any other requirements that are subject to approval by the city. (Ord.
1788, 12-3-2007)
Chapter 10
MAINTENANCE OF FORECLOSING PROPERTIES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 266/687
4-10-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and preserve the public health, safety, security, and enjoyment of the use of property located within the city of
West Des Moines by residents, visitors, and businesses by: a) requiring all residential and commercial property owners or titleholders, including lenders
and trustees, to have their vacant, foreclosed properties registered with the city of West Des Moines, if the property registration information has not already
been made available to the city of West Des Moines through other means; and b) regulating the security and maintenance of residential and commercial
vacant, foreclosed properties to prevent blighted and unsecure residences and buildings. The city council finds that the occurrence of foreclosures may
lead to buildings and structures becoming targets for criminal activity. The city council also finds that foreclosed buildings and structures that remain
unoccupied for months or even years are more likely to experience multiple violations of the building, fire, housing, and nuisance municipal codes. The city
council further finds that vacant and foreclosed properties are likely to negatively impact surrounding neighborhoods and business districts. Based on
these findings, the city council has deemed it necessary to enact the following regulations in the city of West Des Moines. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY: A property that is accessible through a compromised, breached, or broken gate, fence, or other entry point.
ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE: A structure that is unsecured or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
BENEFICIARY: A lender, lender's designee, nominee, or servicer under a note secured by a deed of trust or mortgage.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING: A building used for the barter, exchange, sale, service, or trade of goods, materials, or services, either tangible or intangible for
financial, material, or monetary gain.
DAYS: Consecutive calendar days.
DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE OR SALE: A recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust
upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.
DEED OF TRUST: An instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition includes
any subsequent deeds of trust.
DEFAULT: The failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or conditional.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: The city manager, the building official, the fire chief, the chief of police, and/or any of the city department officials, including
code enforcement officers, who are responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY: Any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the
property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail,
past due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk, or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds, or
shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, and
government employees that the property is vacant.
FORECLOSURE: Procedure whereby property pledged as security for a debt is sold to pay the debt in the event of default in payments or terms.
LOCAL: Located within sixty (60) road or driving miles distance of the subject property.
MORTGAGE: An instrument by which a borrower pledges certain real property or collateral as guarantee for the repayment of a loan.
MORTGAGEE: The lender in a mortgage loan transaction.
MORTGAGOR: The borrower in a mortgage loan transaction.
NOTICE OF DEFAULT: A notice issued pursuant to the applicable real estate security document or required by law that a default has occurred under a
deed of trust or mortgage.
OUT OF STATE BENEFICIARY: A beneficiary who does not have a physical presence in the state of Iowa.
OWNER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary, or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in real property.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person holding recorded title to the property at any point in time when official records are produced by the county recorder's
office.
PROPERTY: Any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the
property regardless of condition.
REGISTERED REPRESENTATIVE: The person designated by a beneficiary as the beneficiary's representative for purposes of accepting notice, service,
and summons on behalf of the beneficiary and for otherwise ensuring compliance with the requirements of this code.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: Any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and
shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or
exchange as "residential" whether or not it is legally permitted or zoned for such use.
SECURING: Such measures as may be directed by an enforcement official that assist in rendering the real property inaccessible to unauthorized persons,
including, but not limited to, repairing fences and walls, chaining or padlocking of gates, and the repairing or boarding of doors, windows, or other
openings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 267/687
TRUSTEE: Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary, or other legal entity holding a deed of trust or mortgage securing an interest in real
property.
TRUSTOR: Any borrower under a deed of trust or mortgage who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.
VACANT: Any building, structure, or real property that is unoccupied or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-3: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
The following provisions shall apply to commercial and residential properties located in the city that have been subject to a foreclosure action.
Beneficiaries who have voluntarily registered their properties with the city at any time following the issuance of a notice of default by the mortgagee or
trustee to the mortgagor or trustor, but prior to obtaining title to the property through a foreclosure action, or who have registered their properties on the
MERS system allowing the city to access current property preservation contact information, shall be considered exempt from complying with the following
registration requirements:
A. Any beneficiary under a deed of trust or mortgage covering a property located within the city shall be responsible for having an inspection performed of
the property that is the security for the deed of trust or mortgage within twenty (20) days of obtaining title to the property through a foreclosure action. If,
at the time of the inspection, the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, the beneficiary shall, within ten (10) days of the
inspection, register the property with the city's police department on forms provided by the city. There is no fee associated with the property registration
if the beneficiary complies with these time deadlines.
B. The registration shall contain the full legal name of the beneficiary and the registered representative, the direct street or office mailing address of the
beneficiary and the registered representative (no post office boxes), a direct contact name and telephone number for the beneficiary and registered
representative, and, if applicable, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the property for
an out of state beneficiary. A company e-mail address may be used for the beneficiary and registered representative in lieu of a direct contact name
and telephone number.
C. The registration shall be valid as long as the subject property remains vacant and shall be amended as needed.
D. This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title to the property was transferred to the beneficiary
of a deed of trust or mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
E. Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the security and maintenance standards of this chapter as long as they remain vacant.
F. Any person or entity that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10)
days of the change. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-4: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
A. All registered properties shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. This includes, without limitation,
the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding, and garage), gates, and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to
access the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows, "securing" means the reglazing or boarding of the window.
B. If the beneficiary is an out of state beneficiary, a local property management company shall be contracted by the beneficiary to perform appropriate and
timely inspections to verify that the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable laws, have been satisfied.
C. The beneficiary shall cause the property to be inspected on an appropriate and timely basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-5: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All registered properties shall comply with all of the requirements of this code. Adherence to this chapter does not relieve the beneficiary or property owner
of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and restrictions or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property.
The duties and obligations specified in this chapter shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective
agents. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-6: ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter is intended to be cumulative to, and not in place of, other rights and remedies available to the city pursuant to this code. The city attorney's
office and the city's enforcement officials have the authority to enforce this chapter, including the pursuit of any right or remedy permitted by this code,
including, but not limited to, commencement of any civil action or administrative action to abate any nuisances. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-7: VIOLATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 268/687
Violations of this chapter are declared to be municipal infractions pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Any civil penalties imposed shall be in addition
to any alternative relief sought by the city, such as seeking reimbursement for the city's costs for abatement or correction of the violation(s). (Ord. 1843, 9-
21-2009)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
The police department of the city is established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the corporate limits
of the city. (1985 Code §2.1-4.0101)
5-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
DEPARTMENT: The police department of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa.
POLICE CHIEF: The individual appointed as chief of police for the supervision, direction and control of the city of the West Des Moines police department.
(1985 Code §5.1-4.0102)
5-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
The department shall consist of the police chief and such other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by
the council. (1985 Code §2.1-4.0103)
5-1-4: REQUIRED TRAINING:
All police officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
(1985 Code §2.1-4.0104)
5-1-5: OATH:
Every police officer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall qualify for office by taking the oath prescribed by section 1-7-1 of this code. (1985
Code §2.1-4.0105)
5-1-6: COMPENSATION:
Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the council. (1985 Code
§2.1-4.0106; amd. 1992 Code)
5-1-7: PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED:
The police chief shall be appointed by the city manager, as provided by chapter 400.13, code of Iowa, or as amended thereto. Other members of the
department shall be appointed or promoted by the police chief, subject to civil service procedures and chapter 35C, code of Iowa. (Ord. 1703, 7-31-2006)
5-1-8: POLICE CHIEF POWERS AND DUTIES:
The police chief shall have the following powers and duties, subject to the approval of the city manager:
A. General: The police chief is the executive head of the police department and shall cause the public peace to be preserved. He shall supervise and
direct the police department and shall perform all duties required of the police chief or marshal by law or ordinance.
B. Enforce Laws: Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
C. Writs: Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to him.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 269/687
D. Accident Reports: Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated by the department to the state department of public safety or to the appropriate
agency1.
E. Prisoners: Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
F. Assist Officials: When requested, provide aid to other city officers, boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
G. Investigations: Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
H. Record Of Arrests: Keep a record of all arrests made in the city by members of the department showing whether said arrests were made under
provisions of state law or city ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
I. Reports: Compile and submit to the mayor and council an annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the mayor or council.
J. Command: Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and
materials of the department. (Ord. 913, 7-9-1990)
5-1-9: DEPARTMENTAL RULES:
The police chief shall establish from time to time such rules, regulations and orders not in conflict with the city code as needed for the detail operation,
conduct and guidance of the department, and subject to the approval of the city manager, including rules governing the following:
A. Rules Of Conduct: The conduct and activity of members of the department during off duty and on duty hours.
B. Uniform: The wear and care of uniforms.
C. Weapons: The care, use and practice of sidearms and other police weapons.
D. Communication: The procedures, use and care of the police radio and other communication systems.
E. Training: The nature, time and attendance requirements for in service training of members of the department.
F. Emergencies: Temporary rules for the protection and functioning of the department as may be necessary in the event of an emergency until such rules
may be considered by the council.
G. Other: Such other rules as may be deemed necessary and advisable in assuring efficient and proper performance of the duties of the department.
H. Penalties: The penalties which may be imposed for violation of established departmental rules by members.
I. Notice: The police chief shall give written notice to any member charged with a violation of departmental rules, regulations or orders specifying the
violation and the nature thereof and the penalty to be imposed.
J. Appeal: A member of the department charged with the violation of a rule, regulation or order may request a hearing before the civil service commission
in accordance with the civil service laws of the city and the state. (Ord. 913, 7-9-1990)
5-1-10: SUMMONING AID:
Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid him or her in making the
arrest. (1985 Code §2.1-4.0110)
5-1-11: TAKING WEAPONS:
Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may
have within his or her control, to be disposed of according to law. (1985 Code §2.1-4.0111)
5-1-12: EMERGENCIES:
The mayor shall have the following powers and duties during a time of emergency or public danger exists in which the peace and order of the city is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 270/687
endangered by reason of fire, flood, storm or mob violence wherein additional protection of life and property is necessary:
A. The mayor may take command of the police and govern the city by proclamation when a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within the city
limits, he has all the powers conferred upon the sheriff to suppress disorders.
B. The mayor, with the approval of the council, may deputize additional persons to act as peace officers during any periods of emergency. Such periods of
emergency when such officers may act shall be declared by the police chief or his authorized representative and shall last during the duration
determined by the police chief or his authorized representative. During such period of emergency only, all such emergency officers shall have all the
powers of a police officer. All appointments made during the period of emergency shall continue until the termination of the emergency. (Ord. 913, 7-9-
1990)
5-1-13: SPECIAL RESERVE AUXILIARY OFFICERS:
The city manager, after receiving the recommendation of the police chief, may appoint such reserve officers as deemed necessary to act as special
officers to perform duties auxiliary to and in general support of the police department. Such reserve officers once approved shall give such assistance to
the police department as shall be determined by the city manager, after receiving the recommendation of the police chief, and as permitted by the code of
Iowa. (Ord. 913, 7-9-1990)
5-1-14: ADOPTION OF JOB CLASSIFICATION:
The council may, from time to time, establish, by resolution, a job classification plan, rank, composition and use of the plan for members of the police
department. (1985 Code §2.1-4.0114; amd. 1993 Code)
Chapter 2
CRIMINAL CODE
5-2-1: PENALTY:
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a simple misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Iowa Code (2003) section 903.1(a),
maximum sentence for misdemeanants, which is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitional sections provided in Iowa Code (2003) chapter 702 are adopted and shall govern the meaning of
language in this chapter unless such term is specially defined elsewhere:
ACT: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.2.
ANIMAL: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.3.
BROTHEL: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.4.
CHILD: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.5.
COMPUTER TERMINOLOGY DEFINITIONS: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.1A.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.6.
DANGEROUS WEAPON: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.7.
DECEPTION: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.9.
DWELLING: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.10.
INCENDIARY DEVICE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.21.
LIBRARY MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.22.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.12.
PARTICIPATING IN A PUBLIC OFFENSE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.13.
PROPERTY: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.14.
PROSTITUTE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.15.
RECKLESS: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.16.
SERIOUS INJURY: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.18.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 271/687
SEX ACT: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.17.
STEAL: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.19.
VIDEO RENTAL PROPERTY: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.20A. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-3: UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY PROPERTY:
No person shall use or permit any other person to use the property owned by the city for any private purpose and for personal gain, to the detriment of the
city. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-4: CRIMINAL MISCHIEF:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 5-2-1 of this chapter to commit an act of criminal mischief as defined in Iowa Code
(2003) section 716.1, which is adopted by reference, in which the cost of repairing, replacing or restoring the property damaged, defaced or destroyed
does not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-5: TRESPASS:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 5-2-1 of this chapter to commit a trespass as defined by Iowa Code (2003) section
716.7 which is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-6: THEFT:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 5-2-1 of this chapter to commit a theft as defined in Iowa Code (2003) section 714.1,
which is adopted by reference, involving the theft of property or services the value of which does not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) in value. (Ord.
1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-7: BLOCKING A HIGHWAY CROSSING:
Iowa Code (2003) section 327G.32, blocking a highway crossing, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-8: TAMPERING WITH A MOTOR VEHICLE:
Iowa Code (2003) section 321.78, injuring or tampering with vehicle, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-9: PUBLIC EXPOSURE:
A. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall expose those parts of his or her body hereinafter listed to another in any public place, or in any place
where such exposure is seen by another person or person located in any public place:
1. A woman's nipple, the areola thereof, or full breast, except as necessary in the breast feeding of a baby.
2. The pubic hair, pubes, perineum, or anus of a male or female, the penis or scrotum of a male, or the vagina of a female, except such body parts of
prepubescent infants of either sex.
B. This section shall not apply to limited or minimal exposures incident to the use of public restrooms or locker rooms or such other places where such
exposures occur incident to the prescribed use of those facilities.
C. This section shall not apply to exposures occurring in live stage plays, live theatrical performances, or live dance performances conducted in a theater,
concert hall or similar establishment, which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-10: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
Iowa Code (2003) section 124.414, drug paraphernalia, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-11: OBSTRUCTION OF EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS:
Iowa Code (2003) section 727.5, obstruction of emergency communications, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-12: TAINTED FOOD:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 272/687
It shall be unlawful for a person to sell or offer for sale any tainted, unsound or rotten meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, eggs, butter, canned goods,
packaged goods or other articles of food, or to sell or offer for sale the flesh of any animal that was diseased. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-13: DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES:
Iowa Code (2003) section 727.1, distributing dangerous substance, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-14: FIREWORKS:
A. Consumer Fireworks: As authorized by Iowa Code section 364.2(6) (2017), it shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for any person to use or explode consumer fireworks as defined in Iowa Code section 727.2 within the corporate limits of the City.
B. Display Fireworks: Unless approved upon written application to the City, a person, firm, partnership or corporation who uses or explodes display
fireworks as defined in Iowa Code section 727.2 within the corporate limits of the City commits a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 2256, 10-16-2017)
5-2-15: ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS:
Iowa Code (2003) section 727.3, abandoned or unattended refrigerators, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-16: ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES:
It shall be unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk
or public property, except as allowed by franchise ordinances. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-17: BARBED WIRE:
It shall be unlawful for a person to use barbed wire within any residential zone of the City without the consent of the City Council unless such land consists
of ten (10) acres or more and is used for an agricultural purpose. The term "barbed wire" as used herein shall mean any wire or strands of wire with any
sharp projections or any sharp projections with points oblique. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-18: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Iowa Code (2003) section 723.4, disorderly conduct, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-19: PUBLIC DEFECATION AND URINATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other place open to the public view or public use,
provided that this shall not apply to private restrooms or public facilities designated for such purpose. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-20: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
Iowa Code (2003) section 723.2, unlawful assembly, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-21: FAILURE TO DISPERSE:
Iowa Code (2003) section 723.3, failure to disperse, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-22: VANDALISM AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT ON COMMON CARRIERS:
No person shall, while a passenger on any vehicle used as a common carrier which transports members of the public at large from place to place for a
fare, do any of the following acts:
A. Intentionally injure, deface, break, or destroy any portion of the interior or exterior of such carrier.
B. Consume any beverage or food, or throw, deposit, or place any paper, bottles, cans, or any garbage or solid waste in or upon such vehicle.
C. Throw any object of any kind within such vehicle or out of any door or window of such vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 273/687
D. Spit, urinate or defecate in or upon any part of such vehicle.
E. Play any radio, cassette, tape player, record player or similar electronic sound amplification device unless it is played through an earphone so that it is
totally inaudible to all other passengers.
F. Bring any pet or animal onto such vehicle other than a seeing eye dog accompanying a blind person or an animal in a cage or held exclusively on the
lap of the rider.
G. Stand or remain in front of any white line marked on the forward end of the floor of such vehicle after being asked to step back by the driver.
H. Act in any other manner which unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of another person or disrupts or impedes the safe operation of that public
vehicle.
The driver of any vehicle or common carrier may refuse to transport and/or at his discretion may order off of the carrier any person violating the
provisions of this section and, upon refusal of any person to remove himself after being so directed, may report such conduct for further action
appropriate under this chapter or other ordinances of the city or statutes or laws of the state. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-23: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 5-2-1 of this chapter, to commit an act in violation of Iowa Code (2003) section
719.1(1), interference with official acts, which is adopted by reference, if said act does not cause injury nor if the person who so violates this section is
armed with a firearm or displays a dangerous weapon. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-24: REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER:
Iowa Code (2003) section 719.2, refusing to assist officer, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-25: HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
Iowa Code (2003) section 718.4, harassment of public officers and employees, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-26: FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 5-2-1 of this chapter to violate the provisions of Iowa Code (2003) section 718.6, false
reports to or communications with public safety entities, which is adopted by reference, except when the false information or false report of a criminal act
involves serious, aggravated or felony offenses as provided in Iowa Code (2003) section 718.6(1) and (3). (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-27: DISCHARGING WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, guns, or firearms of any kind within the city limits except by authorization of
the council or as excepted by sections 5-2-30 and 5-2-31 of this chapter. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-28: THROWING OR SHOOTING:
It shall be unlawful for a person to throw stones or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles or other dangerous
instruments or toys on or into any street, highway, alley, sidewalk or public place, except when under proper supervision of persons authorized by the city
council. Shooting of arrows is allowed in the Raccoon River Park Archery Facility with a city issued permit. (Ord. 2021, 2-24-2014)
5-2-29: TRAPPING; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, locate, set, use or attempt to use within the city limits, any trap of a claw, spring or metal nature, either on
public or private property, on land or in the water, or to set, use or maintain any snare, pitfall, deadfall, spring gun, set gun or device of a similar character
or purpose; except, any owner, or any tenant of any private property may use the following:
A. Cage trap or box trap for removal of small animals in a humane manner; or
B. Mousetrap, rattrap or similar small trap for the purpose of removing small rodents from their property.
Exceptions: The city or its authorized agents are exempt from the above and may control or manage animals, birds, or insects pursuant to established
policies that have been approved by the city council or park board. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-30: HUNTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 274/687
For the purposes of preserving ecological integrity by controlling animal populations within the city corporate boundaries and adjacent communities,
providing recreational opportunities for residents, and the overall health, safety and welfare of the general population, this section hereby declares that it
shall be unlawful for any person to engage in hunting activity within the corporate city limits using a rifle, shotgun, bow and arrow or any other means either
on public or private property, on land or in the water, except as follows:
A. On private property which is zoned as agricultural land or open space and/or classified by the county assessor of the county in which the land is located
as agriculture land or forest preserve and with the permission of the landowner; and
1. Which is a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres or more in size and the hunting activity is for deer or turkey and is done in accordance with the
code of Iowa and the administrative rules adopted by the Iowa department of natural resources; and/or
2. Which is a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres or more in size and the hunting activity is for all other small game animals other than deer,
turkey, or migratory waterfowl and is done using a shotgun with shot ammunition or a .22 caliber rim firearm and in accordance with the code of Iowa
and the administrative rules adopted by the Iowa department of natural resources; and/or
3. Which is a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres or more in size and the hunting activity is for migratory waterfowl and is done using a shotgun
with shot ammunition and in accordance with the code of Iowa and the administrative rules adopted by the Iowa department of natural resources;
and
4. Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and the Iowa department of natural resources, including, but not limited to, all
licensing provisions of the Iowa department of natural resources; and
5. Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the use of a firearm,
bow and arrow or other legal instrument of hunting which relates to the use of such legal instruments of hunting at or near an occupied or unoccupied
structure; and
6. Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the use of a firearm,
bow and arrow, or other legal instrument of hunting which relate to the use of such legal instruments in respect to discharging of a weapon on or over
any public waters, highways or railroad rights of way or from a road right of way; or
B. On public property which has been declared by special provision by the Iowa department of natural resources and approved by the city council of the
city of West Des Moines, or by direct approval of the city council of the city of West Des Moines designating a special animal management zone and/or
otherwise mentioned herein; and
1. Which lies in a special hunting zone as declared by the Iowa department of natural resources and approved by the city council of the city of West
Des Moines and whose boundaries are described elsewhere herein and/or delineated on a map on file in the office of the city clerk; and
2. Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the city council, the code of Iowa, and the Iowa department of natural resources including, but not
limited to, all licensing provisions of the department of natural resources; and
3. Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the city council, the code of Iowa and the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the
types of weapons and ammunition allowed for use in the declared special hunting zone; and
4. Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the use of a firearm,
bow and arrow or other legal instrument of hunting which relate to the use of such instruments of hunting at or near an occupied or unoccupied
structure; and
5. Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the use of a firearm,
bow and arrow or other legal instrument of hunting which relate to the use of such legal instruments of hunting in respect to discharging of a weapon
on or over any public waters, highways, or railroad rights of way or from a road right of way; or
C. Within an area designated by the Iowa department of natural resources (DNR) as a special deer management zone and which has been designated as
a West Des Moines deer management zone (WDMDMZ) by a resolution of the city council and subject to the following provisions:
1. Hunting in a WDMDMZ shall be limited to the harvesting of antlerless deer. The city manager or designee may authorize an issuance of licenses for
the harvesting of antlered deer under an incentive program authorized by the DNR.
2. Hunting shall be limited to bow and arrow and shall be restricted to dates and hours established by the DNR. The city manager or designee may
issue regulations to shorten the dates and hours for hunting within a WDMDMZ.
3. The number of permits issued for each WDMDMZ shall be fixed by the city manager or designee.
4. All hunters participating in this program must apply for and receive a West Des Moines deer management zone permit. The city of West Des Moines
reserves the right to refuse to issue the permit due to any criminal convictions or permit denials, suspensions, or revocations by another government
entity. In order to receive the permit, a hunter must present a valid state of Iowa special urban deer license and show proof of the following:
a. Successful completion of a one time bowhunter safety education course approved by the International Bowhunter Education Foundation (IBEF).
b. Successful completion of an authorized archery proficiency test using the bow which the hunter will use to hunt. Testing must be taken at a
National Field Archery Association approved indoor lane and administered by a certified IBEF instructor. Testing must be performed under rules
approved by the Polk County deer management task force. The proficiency test must be successfully completed each hunting season.
5. All individuals hunting under a West Des Moines deer management zone permit shall follow all procedures and regulations established by the DNR
applicable to deer hunting and special deer management zones. In addition, hunters shall abide by the following requirements:
a. Hunters must meet with the city's hunter coordinator to review the rules and boundaries of the WDMDMZ prior to hunting.
b. All hunters must check in with the city prior to entering the WDMDMZ to hunt.
c. All shots must be made from an elevated stand and shall not be made in excess of twenty five (25) yards from the hunter's location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 275/687
d. Elevated stands on public land shall be portable with no screw in steps allowed.
e. Elevated stands shall be located not less than two hundred feet (200') from a residence or building and shall be located not less than seventy five
feet (75') from a trail, road, or highway.
f. A hunter shall carry a bow in a case while traveling to and from the elevated stand site.
g. A hunter shall not dispose of deer entrails in a conspicuous place on public property.
h. All deer taken shall be processed for meat or the meat given to charity.
i. If a hunter wounds a deer and is unable to locate the deer, the hunter shall report this to a West Des Moines animal control officer within twelve
(12) hours of the wounding.
j. While engaged in hunting, the hunter shall carry all necessary state, county and city hunting licenses and permits.
k. Hunters shall report the harvesting of a deer under a WDMDMZ permit to the city of West Des Moines under regulations promulgated by the city
manager or designee.
l. A hunter shall not harvest more than three (3) deer in a single day under a WDMDMZ permit. A state license shall be required for each deer.
m. If necessary to cross private property to access a WDMDMZ, permission must be received by the hunter from a property owner who has agreed
to allow access.
n. Hunters must remove themselves from any harassment situation and immediately report the incident to the city.
o. The city manager or designee may promulgate additional regulations, not inconsistent with this section, to administer this program and/or ensure
the safety of the public.
p. Failure to abide by the requirements of this section or any additional regulations promulgated by the city manager or designee may result in the
suspension or revocation of the permit issued by the city of West Des Moines.
6. Designation of a WDMDMZ within city park lands shall be first referred to the West Des Moines park board for approval and then may be established
by resolution of the city council. Designation of a WDMDMZ on other city owned lands shall be by resolution of the city council.
7. Designation of a special deer management zone on private property shall be considered if an application to create such a zone is approved by and
complies with the regulations and standards promulgated by the DNR and PCCB. Upon such an approval, a WDMDMZ may be established by a
resolution of the city council, subject to the regulations and ordinances provided herein and such additional conditions as the city council provides by
said resolution; or
D. Within the Brown's Woods forest preserve as designated by the Iowa department of natural resources (hereinafter "DNR") and approved by the city
council as a special deer management zone (the "zone"). This zone is comprised of the northern and eastern portions of Brown's Woods, commencing
one hundred (100) yards north and east of the back loop of the walking trail, as generally delineated on the map of Brown's Woods on file in the office
of the city clerk.
1. Harvesting of deer shall be allowed within this zone solely by bow and arrow during restricted time periods and under permitted conditions as
established by the Polk County conservation board (PCCB) and in accordance with the code of Iowa and the administrative rules adopted by the
Iowa department of natural resources, and pursuant to the guidelines set out in this subsection D:
a. The harvest periods and hours shall be fixed by the PCCB;
b. Signs shall be posted at the entrance and in strategic locations around the perimeter of Brown's Woods adequately informing the general public of
the deer management program being conducted within Brown's Woods; and
c. All individuals participating in this special deer harvest period shall follow all procedures and regulations established by the DNR and PCCB
applicable to this designated special deer management zone.
2. The number of permits shall be fixed by the PCCB for deer control harvesting by bow and arrow within this designated zone.
3. No special events shall be authorized by the PCCB for hunting within this designated zone except as set forth in this section.
4. All deer meat harvested under this deer management program shall be processed for private consumption or shall be donated to a charitable
organization.
5. The director of the Polk County conservation board shall provide the city council, on or before March 31 of each year, a report summarizing the
harvesting activity within this designated special deer management zone.
6. The PCCB may authorize an issuance of licenses for the harvesting of antlered deer under an incentive program authorized by the DNR. (Ord. 1773,
8-13-2007)
5-2-31: TARGET SHOOTING ON A FIRING RANGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a weapon within the corporate city limits either on public or private property, on land or in the water, except:
A. As provided in sections 5-2-27 and 5-2-30 of this chapter, and
B. For the purpose of target practice on a firing range specifically designed for the weapon being discharged according to the design standards set forth in
section II of the "NRA Range Source Book, A Guide To Planning And Construction", National Rifle Association of America, November 1999, or
hereafter amended. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 276/687
5-2-32: ANIMAL NEGLECT:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 5-2-1 of this chapter to commit an act of animal neglect as defined in Iowa Code
(2003) section 717B.3, animal neglect, which is adopted by reference, except for such an act of neglect intentionally committed by a person which results
in serious injury to or death of an animal. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-33: LIVESTOCK NEGLECT:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 5-2-1 of this chapter to commit an act of livestock neglect as defined in Iowa Code
(2003) section 717.2, livestock neglect, which is adopted by reference, except for such an act of neglect intentionally committed by a person which results
in serious injury to or death of livestock. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-34: ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS:
A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person
who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound as defined in Iowa Code (2003), section
162.2. A person who violates this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-35: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
Iowa Code (2003) section 123.46, consumption or intoxication in public places _ notifications _ chemical tests _ exoneration, is adopted by reference.
(Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-36: SALE OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL UNDER LEGAL AGE:
Iowa Code (2003) section 123.47(1), (2), and (3), persons under legal age _ penalty, is adopted by reference, except that section 123.47(1) shall not apply
to persons who are of legal age as provided in Iowa Code (2003) section 123.47(4). (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-37: FRAUDULENT PRACTICE:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 5-2-1 of this chapter to commit fraudulent practice as defined in Iowa Code (2003)
section 714.8, fraudulent practices defined, which is adopted by reference, when the amount of money or the value of the property involved does not
exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-38: SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS:
5-2-38-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section 5-2-38 is to protect the health and safety of children from the risk that convicted sex offenders may reoffend in areas in which
children congregate and/or play and that are in close proximity to the sex offender's residence. As recognized by the eighth circuit United States court of
appeals in Doe v. Miller, 405 F.3d 700 (Iowa 2005) and the Iowa supreme court in State v. Seering, 701 N.W.2d 655 (Iowa 2005) that the risk of recidivism
posed by sex offenders is "frightening and high", the city finds and declares that sex offenders are a serious threat to public safety. Given the high rate of
recidivism of sex offenders, reducing the opportunity and the temptation is important in minimizing the risk of reoffending. In addition to the protections
afforded by state law that prohibit sex offenders from residing near schools and childcare facilities, the city seeks to provide further protection to children
by prohibiting sex offenders from residing near other public areas where children congregate or play, as identified in section 5-2-38-3 of this chapter. (Ord.
1665, 11-21-2005)
5-2-38-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section 5-2-38 and unless the context otherwise requires:
AGGRAVATED OFFENSE: A conviction for any of the following offenses:
A. Sexual abuse in the first degree in violation of Iowa Code section 709.2.
B. Sexual abuse in the second degree in violation of Iowa Code section 709.3.
C. Sexual abuse in the third degree in violation of Iowa Code section 709.4, subsection 1.
D. Lascivious acts with a child in violation of Iowa Code section 709.8, subsection 1.
E. Assault with intent to commit sexual abuse in violation of Iowa Code section 709.11.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 277/687
F. Burglary in the first degree in violation of Iowa Code section 713.3, subsection 1, paragraph d.
G. Kidnapping, if sexual abuse as defined in Iowa Code section 709.1 is committed during the offense.
H. Murder, if sexual abuse as defined in Iowa code section 709.1 is committed during the offense.
I. Criminal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus in violation of Iowa Code section 709C.1, subsection 1, paragraph a.
CRIMINAL OFFENSE AGAINST A MINOR: Any of the following criminal offenses or conduct:
A. Kidnapping of a minor, except for the kidnapping of a minor in the third degree committed by a parent.
B. False imprisonment of a minor, except if committed by a parent.
C. Any indictable offense involving sexual conduct directed toward a minor.
D. Solicitation of a minor to engage in an illegal sex act.
E. Use of a minor in a sexual performance.
F. Solicitation of a minor to practice prostitution.
G. Any indictable offense against a minor involving sexual contact with the minor.
H. An attempt to commit an offense enumerated in this definition.
I. Incest committed against a minor.
J. Dissemination and exhibition of obscene material to minors in violation of Iowa Code section 728.2.
K. Admitting minors to premises where obscene material is exhibited in violation of Iowa Code section 728.3.
L. Stalking in violation of Iowa Code section 708.11, subsection 3, paragraph b, subparagraph (3), if the fact finder determines by clear and convincing
evidence that the offense was sexually motivated.
M. Sexual exploitation of a minor in violation of Iowa Code section 728.12.
N. Enticing away a minor in violation of Iowa Code section 710.10, subsection 1.
O. An indictable offense committed in another jurisdiction which would constitute an indictable offense under subsections A through N of this definition.
MINOR: A person under the age of eighteen (18), unless otherwise specified.
OTHER RELEVANT OFFENSE: Any of the following offenses:
A. Telephone dissemination of obscene materials in violation of Iowa Code section 728.15.
B. Rental or sale of hardcore pornography in violation of Iowa Code section 728.4.
C. Indecent exposure in violation of Iowa Code section 709.9.
D. Incest committed against a dependent adult as defined in Iowa Code section 235B.2 in violation of Iowa Code section 726.2.
E. A criminal offense committed in another jurisdiction which would constitute an indictable offense under subsections A through D of this definition if
committed in this state.
PERSON: A person who has committed a criminal offense against a minor, an aggravated offense, a sexually violent offense, or other relevant offense that
involved a minor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 278/687
RESIDENCE: The place where a person sleeps, which may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
SEXUALLY VIOLENT OFFENSE: Any of the following indictable offenses:
A. Sexual abuse as defined under Iowa Code section 709.1.
B. Assault with intent to commit sexual abuse in violation of Iowa Code section 709.11.
C. Sexual misconduct with offenders in violation of Iowa Code section 709.16.
D. Any of the following offenses, if the offense involves sexual abuse or attempted sexual abuse: murder, attempted murder, kidnapping, burglary, or
manslaughter.
E. A criminal offense committed in another jurisdiction which would constitute an indictable offense under subsections A through D of this definition if
committed in this state. (Ord. 1665, 11-21-2005)
5-2-38-3: RESTRICTIONS:
A. A person shall not reside within two thousand feet (2,000') of the real property comprising any of the following child oriented facilities:
1. A public park;
2. A public swimming pool;
3. A public library; or
4. A multiuse recreational trail.
B. The distance shall be measured from the closest boundary line of the residence to the closest boundary line of the child oriented facilities identified in
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1665, 11-21-2005)
5-2-38-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A person residing within two thousand feet (2,000') of the real property comprising a child oriented facility identified in section 5-2-38-3 of this chapter does
not commit a violation of this section 5-2-38 if any of the following apply:
A. The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution or facility.
B. The person is subject to an order of commitment under chapter 229A of the Iowa Code.
C. The person has established a residence prior to the effective date hereof, or a child oriented facility as identified in section 5-2-38-3 of this chapter is
newly located on or after the effective date hereof and the person has established a residence prior to the date of the start of construction of such
newly located child oriented facility.
D. The person is a minor or a ward under a guardianship. (Ord. 1665, 11-21-2005)
5-2-38-5: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who resides within two thousand feet (2,000') of the real property comprising a child oriented facility identified in section 5-2-38-3 of this
chapter in violation of this section 5-2-38 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment as provided by section 5-2-1 of this chapter
or shall be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1665, 11-21-2005)
Chapter 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control dogs, cats and other animals within the corporate limits of the City and to safeguard and protect
property and the general public. It is further the purpose of this chapter to provide regulations to prevent cruelty to all animals and to establish regulations
relating to kennels, pet shops, riding schools and horse stables. (1985 Code §3-2.01)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 279/687
Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, the masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine the masculine. For
use within this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMAL: Every wild, tame or domestic member of the animal kingdom other than the genus and species Homo sapiens.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: A person designated by the City to perform such duties involving animal control and having police authority for the
enforcement of this chapter.
ANIMAL POUND OR SHELTER: Any premises, either designated, or contracted for, by the Council for the proper care of impounded animals held under
the authority of this chapter.
AT LARGE: An animal off the premises of the owner. An animal properly licensed as required by this chapter shall not be deemed at large if such animal:
A. Is on the premises of the owner, or
B. Is under the control of a person competent to restrain and control the animal, either by leash, cord, chain, or other similar restraint not more than ten
feet (10') in length, or properly restrained within a motor vehicle, or
C. Is properly housed in a veterinary hospital or licensed kennel, pet shop, or City designated animal pound, or
D. Is accompanied by or "at heel" beside and obedient to the commands of the owner or a competent responsible person.
CAT: All members of the Felis domestica species, male or female, altered or unaltered.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL:
A. Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious injury
upon, or causing disease among, human beings or domestic animals and having known tendencies as a species to do so;
B. Any animals declared to be dangerous by the Board of Health or the City Council or its designee;
C. The following animals which shall be deemed to be dangerous animals per se:
1. Wolves and coyotes;
2. Badgers, wolverines, weasels, mink, and other mustelids (except ferrets);
3. Bears;
4. All apes (including chimpanzees), baboons, and macaques;
5. Monkeys, except the squirrel monkey;
6. Elephants;
7. Wild boar;
8. Black widow spiders and scorpions;
9. Snakes which are naturally venomous or poisonous;
10. All cats, except domestic cats (Carnivora of the family Felidae including, but not limited to, lions, cougars, tigers, jaguars, leopards, lynx, bobcats,
etc.);
11. Raccoons, opossums, and skunks;
12. Alligators and crocodiles.
DOG: Members of the canine species, male or female, whether neutered or not.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Health Department of the City of West Des Moines or the County having jurisdiction.
HORSE: A large solid hoofed herbivorous mammal (Equus caballus).
KENNEL: Any premises on which five (5) or more dogs, or five (5) or more cats, or a combination thereof, six (6) months old or older, are kept or raised
solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and which are kept under constant restraint.
LEASHED: A vicious animal under the control of a responsible person and restrained with a leash so that the distance between the responsible person
and the animal does not exceed six feet (6') in length.
MUZZLED: A vicious animal under the control of a responsible person and restrained with a muzzle, which shall be made in a manner that will not cause
injury to the animal or obscure its vision or interfere with its respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human being or animal.
OWNER OR OWNERS OF AN ANIMAL: Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation, owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 280/687
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, or agency thereof.
PET SHOP: Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding animals of any species, except the
operation of a kennel, agriculture or wildlife pursuits.
PROPER ENCLOSURE: A vicious animal that has been ordered to be confined within a proper enclosure requires:
A. The vicious animal is securely confined within an occupied house or residence or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when
leashed and muzzled as provided in this section. Such pen, kennel, or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides or, in
lieu of a top, walls at least six feet (6') in height and at least six feet (6') taller than any internal structure;
B. All pens or other structures designed, constructed, or used to confine the vicious animal must be locked with a key or combination lock when such
animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom, floor, or foundation attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the
pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet (2') so as to prevent digging under the walls by the confined vicious animal; and
C. The structure erected to house the vicious animal must comply with all city zoning and building regulations. The structure must be adequately lighted
and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No vicious animal may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that
would allow the vicious animal to exit such building on its own volition.
PROVOCATION: The threat, injury, or damage caused by the animal was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a wilful trespass or
other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was committing or attempting to
commit a crime.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person at least eighteen (18) years old who is able to keep a vicious animal under complete control at all times.
RIDING SCHOOL OR HORSE STABLE: Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of teaching persons to ride horses, or providing
horses to ride for a fee.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal, except for a dangerous animal per se, as listed herein, which has engaged in one or more of the following actions, or has
exhibited one or more of the following characteristics: a) the animal has bitten or attacked a human being or domestic animal one or more times, without
provocation; b) the animal possesses a history, tendency, or disposition to attack, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or
domestic animals, which may be evidenced by its habitual or repeated chasing, snapping, or biting so as to potentially cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; c) the animal has been trained for animal fighting or animal baiting or has been owned or kept
for such purposes; or d) the animal has been trained to attack human beings, upon command or spontaneously in response to human activities, unless
owned by and under the control of the police department, a law enforcement agency of the state of Iowa or the United States, or a branch of the armed
forces of the United States. (Ord. 1774, 8-13-2007; amd. Ord. 2001, 9-3-2013)
5-3-3: KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act as a custodian temporary or otherwise for such animal, or keep such animal
for any other purpose or in any other capacity within the city except as provided in section 5-3-4 of this chapter.
While the following animals are not declared by this chapter to be dangerous per se: a) constricting snakes exceeding six feet (6') in length, and b) lizards
exceeding two feet (2') in length, the owners of such animals shall, within two (2) hours of knowledge of the possibility of such an animal being "at large"
within the community, so notify the police department of the city. (1985 Code §3-2.32)
5-3-4: DANGEROUS ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition contained in section 5-3-3 of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of dangerous animals in the following circumstances:
A. The keeping of dangerous animals in a public zoo, bona fide educational or medical institution, humane society or museum where they are kept as live
specimens for the public to view, or for the purpose of instruction research or study.
B. The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a circus, carnival, exhibit or show where such circus, carnival, exhibit or show is of a
traveling nature, is displayed before large assemblages of people, and maintains any and all required federal or state licenses.
C. The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary hospital for treatment.
D. The keeping of dangerous animals by a wildlife rescue organization with appropriate permit from the Iowa conservation commission.
E. Any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession of the Iowa conservation commission, pursuant to chapters 109 and 109A of the
Iowa Code. (1985 Code §3-2.33)
5-3-5: SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
A. In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large and unattended upon public property, park property, public right of way or the property of
someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to person or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the animal control officer or the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 281/687
chief of police, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The city shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous
animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
B. Upon the written complaint of any individual that a person is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal on premises located in the city, the
animal control officer shall cause the matter to be investigated, and if after investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is
keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal in the city, the animal control officer shall order the person named in the complaint to permanently
place the animal with an organization or group allowed under section 5-3-4 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy the animal, within
three (3) days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be contained in a notice, which shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering or
harboring the dangerous animal, and shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice shall not be required where such dangerous
animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which case the animal control officer shall cause the animal to be
immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.
C. The order issued by the animal control officer may be appealed to the city council. In order to appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be filed
with the city clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the order. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal
the order of the animal control officer.
D. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the city clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of notice of appeal. After such hearing, the city council may affirm or reverse the
order of the animal control officer. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with the city clerk within three (3) days
after the hearing, or any continued sessions thereof.
E. If the city council affirms the action of the animal control officer, the council shall order in its written decision that the individual or entity owning,
sheltering, harboring, or keeping such dangerous animal, permanently place such animal with an organization or group allowed under section 5-3-4 of
this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy it. The decision and order shall immediately be served upon the person or entity against whom
rendered in the same manner as the notice. If the original order of the animal control officer is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3)
days, or the order of the city council after appeal is not complied with within three (3) days of its issuance, the animal control officer is authorized to
seize and impound such dangerous animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the impoundment
period, the individual or entity against whom the decision and order of the city council was issued has not petitioned the district court for a review of
said order, the city shall cause the animal to be disposed of by sale, permanently place such animal with an organization or group allowed under
section 5-3-4 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy such animal in a humane manner. Failure to comply with an order of the city
issued pursuant hereto shall constitute a simple misdemeanor and is also punishable pursuant to section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1774, 8-13-2007)
5-3-6: KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the city a "vicious animal" so defined herein, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Once an animal has been deemed a vicious animal, the animal shall not be removed from the city and transferred to another city. (Ord. 1774, 8-13-2007)
5-3-7: VICIOUS ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition contained in section 5-3-6 of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of vicious animals in the following circumstances:
A. Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
B. The keeping of guard dogs. However, guard dogs must be kept within a structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of section 5-3-8 of this chapter. Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently
posted with a sign containing the wording "guard dog", "vicious dog", or words of similar import, and the owner of such premises shall inform the chief
of police that a guard dog is on duty at such premises. (1985 Code §3-2.36)
5-3-8: SEIZURE, CONFINEMENT, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION OF VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. The animal control officer or designee, in his or her discretion or upon receipt of a complaint alleging that a particular animal is a "vicious animal" as
defined herein, may investigate to determine whether the animal is vicious. After the investigation, the animal control officer or designee may declare
such animal a vicious animal. The declaration shall set forth whether the vicious animal shall be destroyed and, if not destroyed, whether the owner of
the vicious animal shall be required to securely confine the animal within a proper enclosure, whether the vicious animal shall be required to be leashed
and muzzled, and whether the owner of the vicious animal shall be required to comply with any additional or alternative terms and conditions in order to
maintain ownership or possession of the animal. The declaration shall also notify the animal owner that the owner must possess and maintain personal
liability insurance coverage at all times should the owner decide to continue to own or possess the vicious animal. Once an animal has been declared
vicious, the animal shall not be removed from the city and transferred to another city unless and until it has been decided that the animal is not vicious.
B. Notice that the animal has been declared vicious shall be promptly served upon the animal owner, if known, by personal service or certified mail. The
city shall take reasonable measures to attempt to ascertain the identity and address of the animal owner. Serving notice upon any adult residing at the
premises where the animal is regularly kept, or posting notice on those premises if no resident adult is present to accept service, shall constitute proper
notice. The notice shall include a description of the animal in question, the basis for the declaration that the animal is vicious, and set forth any
requirements that the animal owner shall fulfill regarding the animal, either as noted in the declaration or as otherwise required by this chapter. The
notice shall also provide that the declaration that the animal is vicious may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within
three (3) business days of the date the notice has been served. The animal owner may also appeal any requirements imposed by the animal control
officer or designee, without appealing the vicious animal declaration. Upon the city clerk's receipt of a timely notice of appeal, a hearing on the matter
shall be conducted by the municipal hearing officer. The person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring the animal in question shall be given not less
than seventy two (72) hours written notice of the time and place of the hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 282/687
C. After the hearing, the municipal hearing officer may affirm or reverse the decision of the animal control officer or designee, in whole or in part. The order
of the municipal hearing officer shall immediately be served upon the individual or entity against whom issued in the same manner as the notice of
hearing. The individual or entity so served shall have three (3) business days from the date of service to file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk
of the municipal hearing officer's order to the city council. The city council may confirm or alter the findings of the municipal hearing officer after holding
a hearing on the matter. If the animal owner does timely appeal to the city council and the city council affirms the order of the municipal hearing officer,
the animal owner has seven (7) calendar days to petition the district court for a review of the city council's decision.
D. If deemed necessary by the animal control officer or designee, he or she may seize and impound the animal declared vicious unless the animal has
been licensed and insured as required by this chapter, and the animal owner has demonstrated to the reasonable satisfaction of the animal control
officer or designee the owner's willingness and ability to keep the animal confined. The animal shall remain seized and impounded, or licensed,
insured, and confined with the owner, during the pendency of any appeal(s). The animal owner shall be responsible for the cost of the impoundment if
the animal is ultimately found to be vicious. The city shall be responsible for the cost of the impoundment if the animal is ultimately found to not be
vicious. Any seized and impounded animal determined to not be vicious shall be immediately returned to the owner.
E. The animal control officer or designee is authorized to take necessary measures to enforce his or her own decision absent a timely appeal by the
animal owner. The animal control officer or designee is similarly authorized to take necessary measures to enforce any order of the municipal hearing
officer or decision of the city council absent any further timely appeals by the animal owner. Failure to timely appeal or petition at any stage of the
proceedings shall constitute a waiver of any and all rights to contest any decisions or orders of the animal control officer or designee, municipal hearing
officer, or city council.
F. Any failure by the animal owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter or the decision or order of the animal control officer or designee, the
municipal hearing officer, or the city council issued pursuant hereto shall constitute a simple misdemeanor, and is also punishable pursuant to section
1-4-1 of this code.
G. Any animal found at large which displays vicious tendencies may be impounded and processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the foregoing, unless
the animal is so vicious that it cannot safely be apprehended, in which case the animal control officer or designee may immediately destroy it. If an
animal is so impounded, the animal control officer shall try to ascertain and contact the owner of the animal, but if unable to ascertain the owner within
seventy two (72) hours of the animal's seizure, the animal control officer may destroy the seized animal in a humane manner.
H. Vicious animals may be required to be securely confined within a "proper enclosure", as that term has been defined in section 5-3-2 of this chapter.
Vicious animals may also be required to be "leashed" and "muzzled", as those terms have been defined in section 5-3-2 of this chapter. Vicious
animals required to be securely confined within a proper enclosure shall not be kept on a chain, rope, or other type of leash unless the animal is under
the actual physical control of a "responsible person", as that term has been defined in section 5-3-2 of this chapter. Vicious animals required to be
securely confined within a proper enclosure shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, or any other object or structure,
and shall not be solely restrained by the use of an invisible fence or other similar device.
I. All vicious animals shall be prohibited from visiting or staying on the property of any of the following locations: 1) residences utilized as in-home daycares
for children, including any outdoor play areas; 2) properties utilized for children's education, including schools, preschools, and daycare facilities, plus
associated outdoor play areas; 3) city parks and greenways, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, recreational trails, and dog parks. (Ord. 2001, 9-
3-2013)
5-3-9: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any animal, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, cattle, horses, swine, sheep, fowl or any animal defined as dangerous or vicious
by this chapter to run at large within the corporate limits of the City. The owner shall be held responsible and subject to penalty. (1985 Code §3-2.03)
5-3-10: UNLAWFUL TO CAUSE HARM OR INJURY:
It shall be unlawful for any dog, cat, or any animal to attack persons, birds, fowl, other domestic animals, or to destroy property other than the property of
the owner of said animal. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog, cat or any animal to permit such dog, cat or other animal to attack persons or
domestic animals, or to place any person in reasonable fear of attack or injury. (1985 Code §3-2.04)
5-3-11: REPORTING OF BITE CASES:
It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of a dog or cat bite case to report such information to the Chief of Police. It shall also be the duty of
every physician or other practitioner to report to the Chief of Police or his lawful agent, the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by
animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. (1985 Code §3-2.11)
5-3-12: RESPONSIBILITIES OF VETERINARIANS:
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Chief of Police or his lawful agent, his diagnosis of any animal observed by him where
suspicion of rabies is evident. (1985 Code §3-2.12)
5-3-13: QUARANTINE FOR A MINIMUM PERIOD OF TEN DAYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 283/687
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or designee, to order the owner of any animal which has bitten or scratched a person or another animal, or any
animal suspected of being infected with rabies, to confine such animal for a period of ten (10) days at the Municipal animal pound, a veterinary clinic or
a registered kennel. The Chief of Police or designee may allow a dog or cat which has bitten or scratched a person or another animal while on the
owner's property and which is either probably under six (6) months of age or is properly licensed and has a current certificate of inoculation for rabies,
to remain in quarantine for that period on the property of the owner so long as the dog or cat is there confined and out of contact with members of the
public or other animals during the quarantine period. Such home quarantine shall not be allowed where there is a reasonable belief that the animal's
condition requires observation at a veterinary clinic or where the animal does not remain in quarantine in the manner prescribed by the Chief of Police
or designee.
B. The owner of animals confined or quarantined as stated herein shall pay all impoundment and confinement costs, together with veterinary charges and
tests involved. (Ord. 2199, 2-21-2017)
5-3-14: APPREHENSION AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or the duly appointed animal control officer of the City, or their lawful agents, to cause to be taken up and
impounded any dog, cat or any other animal found to be at large within the City contrary to the provisions of section 5-3-9 of this chapter.
B. When a dog, cat or other animal has bitten a person or suspected to have bitten a person and the owner of same refuses to comply with the required
confinement as provided by law, such dog, cat or other animal shall be apprehended by police authorities or the animal control officer, and confined as
soon as possible under the care of a licensed veterinarian, and the owner shall pay all costs involved with said confinement.
C. Notice shall be given the owners, if known, of all animals apprehended and impounded by the City. The police authorities or animal control officer shall
send notice in not less than forty eight (48) hours to the owner. All dogs and cats impounded without a current license, collar or similar identification
shall be kept for not less than four (4) days after being impounded unless redeemed by the owner in accordance with this chapter. Dogs and cats with
identification attached thereto shall be kept not less than seven (7) days after being impounded unless sooner redeemed by the owner in accordance
with this chapter. All animals that have been impounded and not claimed within the period herein stated may be humanely destroyed or otherwise
disposed of in accordance with law.
D. An owner may redeem an animal by having it immediately vaccinated, if deemed necessary by the City, and by paying the costs of impoundment and
any license fees and penalties due. The animal control officer has the authority to release the animal to the owner temporarily for vaccination purposes
provided said owner returns immediately and shows evidence of immunization. (1985 Code §3-2.14)
5-3-15: IMPOUNDMENT, PICK UP, AND DISPOSAL FEES:
The owner of any dog, cat or other animal shall pay impoundment, pick up, and disposal fees to the City or designee. The amounts of the fees shall be
established by resolution approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2204, 3-6-2017)
5-3-16: OWNER OR PERSON IN CHARGE OF ANIMAL TO CLEAN UP DROPPINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in charge of a dog, cat, horse or other animal to fail to clean up and/or remove as soon as possible any
excrement or droppings deposited by said dog, cat, horse, or other animal on any real estate whether privately or publicly owned. This shall apply equally
to the owner's property, however an exception shall be granted to farm property or large tracts of land used as riding stables. (1985 Code §3-2.07)
5-3-17: OWNER OR PERSON IN CHARGE OF ANIMALS TO KEEP PLACE IN SANITARY CONDITION:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any dog, cat, horse, or other animal to fail to keep the premises where the animal is kept in a clean
and sanitary condition at all times. (1985 Code §3-2.08)
5-3-18: CITY MAY ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN ANIMAL POUND; DUTIES OF POUND SUPERVISOR:
The City may establish and maintain a Municipal small animal pound or shelter to be conducted and operated by the City.
A. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer appointed by the City to supervise and control such pound or shelter; to cause same to be kept in a
sanitary condition and free from offensive odors, and to provide for adequate wholesome food for animals impounded therein, and to provide careful
and humane treatment toward such animals, and to isolate known diseased or dangerous animals.
B. The animal control officer shall provide for humane destruction of animals when necessary or as provided by this chapter.
C. The animal control officer may use reasonable effort in the placement of unclaimed animals to the custody of responsible persons. The new owner must
have the animal vaccinated and secure a current license. The City takes no responsibility nor makes any warranties or assumes any liability for the
condition of the animal adopted.
D. The City may, in lieu of or in addition to the establishment and maintenance of a Municipal small animal pound, contract with any other governmental
body, or an incorporated society or association for the prevention of cruelty to animals, for service. (1985 Code §3-2.13)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 284/687
5-3-19: PROCLAMATION:
The Mayor or the Council, may cause to quarantine all domestic animals if deemed urgent and necessary for the immediate preservation and the public
peace, health and safety of property or individuals, by resolution or proclamation according to law. (1985 Code §3-2.17)
5-3-20: VIOLATIONS:
A. The owner of a dog, cat or other animal, shall be subject to penalty herein provided if the said animal:
1. Runs at large contrary to the provisions of section 5-3-9 of this chapter.
2. Causes annoyance or disturbances to any person by frequent and habitual barking, howling, yelping, hissing, meowing or fighting.
3. Defecates on property other than that of the owner.
4. Defaces, scratches or mars any personal property other than that of the owner of said animal.
5. Trespasses upon any property where food or drink is sold, unless provided for otherwise under statute.
6. Violates any provision of this chapter or State law applicable.
B. No person shall aid or cause any animal, whether owned by such person or not, to escape confinement or impoundment, whether such confinement or
impoundment be upon such person's property or that of another, by opening any gate, door or window, by making an opening in any fence, enclosure
or structure, or by unleashing such animal.
C. It shall be the duty of every person owning or having the custody or control of an animal to physically restrain the animal within an enclosure or upon a
leash when such animal is left unattended outside or is not at heel. The animal must be restrained so as to prevent the animal from leaving the
premises of its owner or from coming in contact with public right-of-way or the property of another. Failure to restrain an animal pursuant to the
foregoing shall constitute a misdemeanor.
D. It shall be prohibited for any person in any manner to interfere with any employee or designated representative of the City, so as to hinder, delay or
prevent his executing his duties in relation to the matters and things contained in this chapter.
E. It is unlawful for any person owning, controlling or caring for any animal to fail to keep in a clean and sanitary condition the premises and any pen,
kennel, shelter, house or person's dwelling or other structure where the animal is at any time kept. At least once every twenty four (24) hours or more
often if odors or health problems arise, such person shall pick up any and all feces so as to prevent its accumulation and same shall be properly
disposed of. Feces shall be held in watertight and flytight containers pending disposal and shall be disposed of at least once weekly. The animal and
place where the animal is maintained shall also be kept free of obnoxious odors and shall be maintained so as not to attract or permit the harborage or
breeding of flies and other insects or rodents or other vermin. All animal food and water shall be stored and placed for the animal's consumption in
such a manner so that it will not become food for rodents and other vermin.
F. It is unlawful for any owner or other person to abandon, turn loose or leave any animal within the corporate limits of the City or so that the animal may
find its way into the corporate limits of the City, or to abandon or leave any animal upon or in any premises unattended for a period in excess of three
(3) days. (1985 Code §3-2.05)
5-3-21: PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter are simple misdemeanors and may also be punishable as Municipal infractions pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. Police
officers, animal control officers, and the Police Chief's designees shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter, and shall have the
discretion to enforce this chapter as either a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction. Multiple violations of this chapter may be considered by the City
for purposes of approving licenses or for any other requirements that are subject to approval by the City. For violations of subsection 5-3-20A of this
chapter (violations), police officers, animal control officers, and designees shall be authorized to issue citation-complaints. A fifty dollar ($50.00) civil
penalty shall be imposed for a first offense, a one hundred dollar ($100.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a second offense, and a two hundred dollar
($200.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a third or subsequent offense where a citation-complaint has been issued. (Ord. 1978, 3-4-2013)
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
5-3A-1: ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED:
The owner of all dogs and cats six (6) months of age or older, shall annually obtain a license as hereinafter provided. It shall be unlawful for any owner to
have a dog or cat within the city without obtaining a license as required herein. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-2: APPLICATIONS:
The owner of a dog or cat, for which a license is required, shall on or before April 30 of each year apply to the city clerk or designee for a license for each
dog or cat owned. Applications may be made at any time immediately following the possession of the dog or cat, or at such time said dog or cat has
reached the age of six (6) months. Applications for licenses shall state the breed, sex, age, color, markings, and name, if any, of the dog or cat, and the
name, address, and telephone number of the owner. A certificate from a licensed veterinarian must accompany all applications claiming an animal has
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 285/687
been spayed or neutered.
Applications to license vicious animals must include, in addition to other required information, presentation by the applicant to the city clerk or designee of
a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of Iowa, providing personal liability insurance coverage as
in a homeowner's policy, with a minimum liability amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the injury or death of any person, for damage
to property of others, and for acts of negligence by the owner or his or her agents, in the keeping or owning of such vicious animals. The certificate of
insurance shall require notice to the city if the underlying policy of insurance is canceled for any reason. In lieu of such a certificate, a copy of a current
homeowner's policy designating these requirements shall be sufficient proof of insurance for purposes of this section. If a certificate of insurance or policy
is not immediately available upon the date the animal has been determined to be vicious, the applicant has thirty (30) calendar days to obtain this
insurance coverage. If after thirty (30) calendar days a certificate of insurance or a policy has not been submitted by the applicant to the city clerk or
designee, the vicious animal shall be deemed unlicensed. The animal control officer or designee may then seize and impound the unlicensed vicious
animal. Upon such a seizure and impoundment, the animal control officer or designee shall have sole discretion to determine the disposition of the
unlicensed vicious animal. (Ord. 2002, 9-3-2013)
5-3A-3: LICENSE FEE:
The amount of the annual license fee for dogs and cats shall be established by resolution approved by the city council, subject to the following provisions:
A. The owner of a certified service animal who applies for a dog or cat license may qualify for a waiver of the annual license fee.
B. If the owner of a dog or cat acquires the animal less than six (6) months prior to the expiration date of the license for that period, the license fee shall be
reduced fifty percent (50%) and the full regular license fee as herein provided shall henceforth be in effect the following calendar year. (Ord. 2120, 10-
19-2015)
5-3A-4: DELINQUENCY; LATE FEE PENALTY:
All license fees for dogs and cats become delinquent on May 1 of the year in which they are due and payable, and a late fee penalty shall be added to
each unpaid license on and after said date. The late fee penalty schedule shall be established by resolution approved by the city council. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-
2012)
5-3A-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; EVIDENCE OF VACCINATION:
The city clerk or designee shall issue dog and cat licenses when properly applied for and shall require evidence of rabies vaccination as herein provided.
The rabies vaccination required shall be an injection of antirabies vaccine approved by the state department of agriculture and land stewardship, and the
frequency of revaccination necessary for approved vaccinations shall be established by that state department. The vaccine shall be administered by a
licensed veterinarian and shall be given as approved by the state department of agriculture and land stewardship. The veterinarian shall issue a tag with
the certificate of vaccination, and the tag shall at all times be attached to the collar of the dog or cat. (Ord. 2030, 5-5-2014)
5-3A-6: SUBMISSION OF RABIES VACCINATION CERTIFICATES BY VETERINARIANS:
Each veterinarian within the city limits shall forward to the city clerk or designee by the tenth day of each month a copy of each certificate of rabies
vaccination issued by the veterinarian during the preceding month. Each certificate of vaccination shall be typed or printed so as to be clearly legible. (Ord.
1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-7: TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
When the permanent ownership of a dog or cat is transferred and the animal remains within the city limits, the new owner shall be required to apply for a
new license as herein provided. The new owner shall have thirty (30) calendar days in which to obtain the new license. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-8: DURATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses shall expire on April 30 of the year following the date of issuance. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-9: EXCEPTIONS TO LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The requirements for licensing dogs and cats shall not apply in the following circumstances:
A. The animal is in transit through the city only.
B. The first thirty (30) calendar days of residency in the city by the owner, or the first thirty (30) calendar days the owner has owned the animal.
C. The animal has been temporarily housed in a veterinary hospital, an animal grooming shop, an established licensed kennel, or an accredited institution
for research. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 286/687
5-3A-10: LICENSE TAG; USE OF TAG:
The city clerk or designee shall, upon receipt of application, payment of license fee, proof of rabies vaccination and other necessary required evidence,
deliver or mail to the applicant a license which shall be in the form of a metal, permanent tag. The license tag shall be attached by the owner to the dog's
or cat's collar and shall be kept on the dog or cat for which the license was issued at all times. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-11: TAG NOT TRANSFERABLE:
A license tag issued for one animal shall not be transferable to another animal. A license issued by another city partnering with this city in a consolidated
animal licensing agreement shall be honored when a resident moves from that city to this city with the same dog or cat. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-12: DUPLICATE TAG:
Upon the filing of a written statement that the license tag has been lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag upon payment of the required
license replacement fee, which shall be established by resolution approved by the city council. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-13: VACCINATION OF DOGS AND CATS:
Every owner of a dog or cat which is six (6) months of age or over shall obtain a rabies vaccination for the animal. It is unlawful for any owner to have a
dog or cat within the city which is six (6) months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-14: CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT:
The owner of any female dog or cat in heat shall confine said female dog or cat in a building which is completely enclosed, or housed in a veterinary
hospital or registered kennel, or within the owner's yard enclosed by a fence or other structure having a height of at least forty two inches (42"). Nothing in
this provision, however, shall be construed as prohibiting any competent and responsible person from walking said dog or cat with a leash, cord, chain, or
other similar restraint not more than ten feet (10') in length, or from transporting such a dog or cat within a motor vehicle. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-15: LIMITED NUMBER OF ANIMALS ALLOWED:
It shall be unlawful, except for a licensed kennel or pet shop, veterinary hospital, or animal grooming shop, for an owner to harbor or house on his
premises more than four (4) cats or four (4) dogs, or a combination of four (4) such animals, over the age of six (6) months. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-16: PENALTIES:
Violations of this article are simple misdemeanors and may also be punishable as municipal infractions. Police officers, animal control officers, code
enforcement officers and the police chief's designees shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this article, and shall have the discretion to
enforce this article as either a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
Chapter 4
PARADES
5-4-1: PARADES REGULATED:
No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided herein:
A. Parade Defined: "Parade" shall mean any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized
fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised generally to the public as a parade. (1985 Code §2.1-
1.0110; amd. 1993 Code)
B. Permit Required: No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a written permit from the city clerk. Such permit shall state the time and date for
the parade to be held and the streets or general route therefor. Such written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall be
permission for all participants therein to parade when such participants have been invited by the permittee to participate therein. No fee shall be
required for such permit. (1985 Code §2.1-1.0110; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
C. Parade Not A Street Obstruction: Any parade for which a permit shall have been issued as herein required and the persons lawfully participating therein
shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
D. Control By Police And Firemen: Persons participating in any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance of
their duties of the members of the police and fire departments. (1985 Code §2.1-1.0110; amd. 1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 287/687
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
6-1-1: TITLE:
This Title may be known and cited as the WEST DES MOINES TRAFFIC CODE. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0101)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Where words and phrases used in this Title are defined by State law, such definitions shall apply to their use in this Title and are adopted by reference.
Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, shall have the following meanings:
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three
hundred feet (300') or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
CONTROLLED-ACCESS FACILITY: The highways or streets designated by Section 7-1A-1 of the City Code.
PARK or PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PEACE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent
(40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings
in use for business.
SCHOOL DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway for a distance of two hundred feet (200') in either direction from a school house.
STAND or STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
STOP: When required, the complete cessation of movement.
STOP or STOPPING: When prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: All other parts of the City not included in the business, school or residence districts.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE: All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this Title, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
VEHICLE: Any vehicle in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street or alley. (1985 Code
§2.1-2.0102)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6-2-1: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
Provisions of this title and the Iowa law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road shall be enforced by officers of the police department. (1985 Code
§2.1-2.0103)
6-2-2: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
A. Traffic Files Maintained: The police chief shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported
for each driver during the most recent three (3) year period. Such reports shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. (1985
Code §2.1-2.0108)
B. Annual Traffic Report: The police chief shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor and council. Such report shall contain
information on the number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed and injured, the number and nature of violations and other pertinent traffic
data including plans and recommendations for future traffic safety activities. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0112)
6-2-3: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 288/687
6-2-3-1: VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS:
Any person who shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a fire department officer during a fire, or who
shall fail to abide by the provisions of this title shall be cited accordingly. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0301; amd. 1993 Code)
6-2-3-2: ARREST OR CITATION:
Whenever a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of this title, such officer may:
A. Immediate Arrest: Immediately arrest such person and take him before a local magistrate, or
B. Issue Citation: Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a uniformed traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa commissioner of
public safety and deliver the original and a copy to the court where the defendant is to appear, two (2) copies to the defendant and retain the fifth copy
for the records of the city, or
C. Notice To Appear; Promise To Appear: Proceed as provided in section 6-2-3-7 of this chapter, or
D. Simple Notice Of Fine:
1. In the case of violations of chapter 6 of this title, without arresting the person, prepare in triplicate a simple notice of fine as provided herein; deliver
one copy thereof to the person so charged, or attach it to the vehicle parked in violation of this title as provided in section 6-2-3-3 of this chapter, as a
notice of violation and promise to appear; the original shall be sworn to by the person authorized to issue the citation on behalf of the city as a
complaint and filed in the office of the city's finance department.
2. The simple notice of fine shall contain the following statement:
Failure to pay parking fines owed by you can be grounds for refusing to renew your motor vehicle's registration.
(Ord. 1984, 4-29-2013)
6-2-3-3: PARKING VIOLATIONS; VEHICLE UNATTENDED:
When a vehicle is parked in violation of this title and the driver is not present, the simple notice of fine or citation as hereinbefore provided shall be
attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1102)
6-2-3-4: PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
A. Described Vehicle: The particular vehicle described in the information was parked in violation of this title, and
B. Registered Owner: The defendant named in the information was the registered owner at the time in question. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1103)
6-2-3-5: SIMPLE NOTICE OF FINE:
A. The city's finance department shall assume the duties and responsibilities connected with the collection of all fines for violations of chapter 6 of this title
which are charged pursuant to a simple notice of fine under subsection D of this section and are admitted and collected pursuant to this section and for
the administration and processing of those violations which are so charged, whether or not they are admitted and collected. Any arrest warrants issued
pursuant to a violation of standing and parking of a vehicle can be grounds for refusing to renew the violator's motor vehicle registration.
B. The city shall provide sets of triplicate simple notices of fines for issuance pursuant to this chapter, each identified by separate serial numbers on each
copy of each notice.
C. Any person notified or summoned by a simple notice of fine provided for in this chapter who desires to enter a plea of guilty to any charge of violating
the parking regulations of this title as stated on the notice, may pay the penalty provided on the notice to the city's finance department.
D. In the event that any person notified or summoned by a simple notice of fine wishes to admit the violation and pay the penalty provided on the notice on
or before the date designated for such payment pursuant to such notice, the city's finance department is hereby authorized and directed to receive the
amount of such fine on behalf of the city.
E. The city's finance department shall retain the copy of the notice until collection of the fine for an admitted violation. In the event that such fine is not paid
prior to or on the date designated in the notice, the city may take any measures deemed necessary to attempt to collect the outstanding debt. (Ord.
1984, 4-29-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 289/687
6-2-3-6: IMPOUNDING VEHICLES:
A police officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public or private parking lot, or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the city under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
A. Disabled Vehicle: When a vehicle is upon a roadway and is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle, are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
B. Illegally Parked Vehicle: When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to
the normal movement of traffic, or when any vehicle is left parked continuously on a city lot beyond the twenty four (24) hour limit imposed by section 6-
9-6-3 of this title.
C. Snow Removal: When any vehicle is left parked upon a street during a snowstorm or immediately following a snowstorm, when it is deemed advisable
that snow removal apparatus must be used on said street.
D. Arrest: When the driver or owner of any vehicle is placed under custody of the police officials and it is determined by the arresting officer that the vehicle
should be impounded for safekeeping.
E. Hazard: When any vehicle is parked upon a street and is so parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the movement of traffic or to
maintenance of the street in that area.
F. Parked Over Forty Eight Hour Period: When any vehicle is left parked upon a street for a continuous period of forty eight (48) hours or more. A written
notice shall first be posted upon the parked vehicle by the city's police department. The notice shall provide the date and time it was posted upon the
vehicle, and shall notify the vehicle driver or owner that he or she has forty eight (48) hours from the time the notice was posted to move the vehicle
from its location.
G. Private Property: When any vehicle is illegally parked as defined in sections 6-6-3 and 6-6-4 of this title and proper complaint has been made.
H. Redemption Of Impounded Vehicle: After the impounding of any vehicle under the provisions of this section, the owner thereof may appear and claim
the same upon payment of an impoundment fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day, if stored in the city garage or designated city location, and the payment
of the cost of towing or upon payment of the towing and storage charges if stored in a privately owned public garage or parking, whereupon such
vehicle shall be released to the owner or his authorized representative. Redemption of impoundment vehicles by the owner or his authorized
representative must be accomplished through the police department of the city. If after a period of ten (10) days from the impoundment of the vehicle,
the same has not been reclaimed, then the vehicle will be considered an abandoned vehicle and the provisions as set forth in section 321.89 of the
code of Iowa regarding disposition of abandoned motor vehicles shall be followed. (Ord. 1881, 9-7-2010)
6-2-3-7: NOTICE TO APPEAR; PROMISE TO APPEAR:
A. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of this chapter, such officer may, without arresting
the person, prepare a written citation to appear in court containing the name and address of such person, the nature of the offense, the operator or
chauffeur license number, if any, the registration number, if any, of his or her vehicle, the time when and place where such person shall appear in court
and the penalty for nonappearance.
B. If the officer prepares a citation as provided in this section, the alleged offender shall be requested to sign it. If the person signs, the person may be
released without arrest. In case a citation is issued, the signing shall constitute a written promise to appear as stated in the citation. A copy of the
citation shall be presented to the person named therein. The police officer issuing the citation shall cause to be filed a complaint in the court in which
the cited person is required to appear, as soon as practicable, charging the crime stated in the citation.
C. For preparing the summons for a violation of chapter 321 of the code of Iowa or a violation of this chapter, there shall be charged to the person named
in the summons, upon conviction, a fee of two dollars ($2.00). The fee shall be assessed as part of the costs and shall be paid into the general fund of
the county or the city as the case may be.
D. The number of copies and the form of the citations and memorandums for violations of chapter 321 of the code of Iowa or this chapter shall be as
prescribed by the commissioner of public safety with the concurrence of the director.
E. This section shall not apply to a traffic offense which must be charged upon a uniform citation and complaint as provided in code of Iowa, section 805.6,
and chapter 805 of the code of Iowa shall control such procedures. This section shall not apply to violations of parking regulations charged upon a
simple notice of fine as provided in this code and in code of Iowa, sections 805.8 and 321.236, and this code shall control such procedures. (1985
Code §2.1-2.1106; amd. 1993 Code)
6-2-3-8: REQUIRED APPEARANCE:
Any person receiving a simple notice of fine herein provided for in subsection 6-2-3-5D of this chapter or a uniform citation and complaint, or knowing that
one such notice or citation and complaint has been attached to any vehicle owned or controlled by him, shall appear before the district court at the place
not later than the time and date specified in the notice. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1107; amd. 1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 290/687
6-2-3-9: VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR:
Any person who wilfully fails to appear in court as specified in a citation, a uniform citation and complaint or a simple notice of fine, given as provided in
this chapter, is guilty of a simple misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with the standard penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, regardless of the
disposition of the charge upon which he was cited. Venue shall be in the county where the defendant was to appear or in the county where he resides. An
appearance in response to a citation for a violation of this section may be either in person or by counsel. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1108)
6-2-3-10: PROCEDURE NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The foregoing provisions of this chapter shall govern all peace officers in making arrests without a warrant for violations of this chapter for offenses
committed in their presence, but the procedure prescribed herein shall not be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for the arrest and
prosecution of a person. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1109)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-3-1: POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
A peace officer and any officer of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in
conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency traffic may be directed as conditions require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0104)
6-3-2:POWERS OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES:1
Local authorities shall have no power to enact, enforce or maintain any ordinance, rule or regulation in any way in conflict with, contrary to or inconsistent
with the provisions of Iowa Code, chapter 321, and no such ordinance, rule or regulation of said local authorities heretofore or hereafter enacted shall have
any force or effect, however the provisions of Iowa Code, chapter 321, shall not be deemed to prevent local authorities with respect to streets and
highways under their jurisdiction and within the reasonable exercise of the police power from:
A. Regulating the standing or parking of vehicles: parking meter, snow route and overtime parking violations which are denied shall be charged and
proceed before a court the same as other traffic violations. Filing fees and court costs shall be assessed as provided in Iowa Code, section 602.8106,
subsection 1 and section 805.6, subsection 1, paragraph "a" for parking violation cases. Parking violations which are admitted:
B. Regulating traffic by means of police officers or traffic-control signals.
C. Regulating or prohibiting processions or assemblages on the highways.
D. Designating particular highways as one-way highways and requiring that all vehicles thereon be moved in one specific direction.
E. Regulating the speed of vehicles in public parks.
F. Designating any highway as a through highway and requiring that all vehicles stop or yield the right of way before entering or crossing the same or
designating any intersection as a stop intersection and requiring all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersections.
G. Licensing and regulating the operation of vehicles offered to the public for hire and used principally in intracity operation.
H. Restricting the use of highways as truck routes as authorized in Iowa Code.
I. Regulating or prohibiting the turning of vehicles at and between intersections.
J. Regulating the operation of bicycles and requiring the registration and licensing of the same, including the requirement of a registration fee. However,
the regulations shall not conflict with the provisions of Iowa Code, section 321.234.
K. Establishing speed limits in public alleys and providing the penalty for violation thereof.
L. Designating highways or portions of highways as snow routes. When conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow route, it
is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic if the driving wheels of the vehicle are not equipped with snow tires, tire chains or a
nonslip differential. "Snow tires" as used in this subsection means tires designed for use when there are conditions of snow or ice on the highways, and
meeting the standards which shall be promulgated by rule of the Director of Transportation. The standards promulgated by the Director shall require
that snow tires be so designed to provide adequate traction to maintain reasonable movement of the motor vehicle on highways under snow conditions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 291/687
Any person charged with impeding or blocking traffic for lack of snow tires, chains or nonslip differential shall have said charge dismissed upon a
showing to the court that the person's motor vehicle was equipped with a nonslip differential. (1993 Code)
6-3-3: OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS:2
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic. (1993 Code)
6-3-4: PUBLIC OFFICERS NOT EXEMPT:3
The provisions of this Title applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, this State or any county, city, district or any other political subdivision of the State, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this Title
with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. (1993 Code)
Chapter 4
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
6-4-1: INSTALLATION:
The department of public works shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control devices when and as required under this title to make effective its
provisions and place and maintain emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic
conditions may require to regulate traffic under the traffic code of this city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. The city manager shall keep or
cause to be kept a record of all such traffic control devices. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0201; amd. 1993 Code)
6-4-2: CROSSWALKS:
The department of public works is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the council by resolution and by section 6-9-1 of this title, to designate and
maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where due to traffic conditions there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the street or roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0202; amd. 1993 Code)
6-4-3: TRAFFIC LANES:
The department of public works is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require consistent
with this title. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0203;
amd. 1993 Code)
6-4-4: STANDARDS:
Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by the "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways". (1985 Code
§2.1-2.0204)
6-4-5: COMPLIANCE1:
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this title, unless at the
time otherwise directed by a peace officer subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-4-6: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
A. For the purposes of this section "stop at the official traffic control signal" means stopping at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or
before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection.
B. Official traffic control signals consisting of colored lights or colored lighted arrows shall regulate vehicle and pedestrian traffic in the following manner:
1. A "steady circular red" light means vehicular traffic shall stop. Vehicular traffic shall remain standing until a signal to proceed is shown or vehicular
traffic, unless prohibited by a sign, may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn from the right lane of traffic or a left turn from a one-way
street to a one-way street from the left lane of traffic on a one-way street onto the left most lane of traffic on a one-way street. Turns made under this
subsection shall be made in a manner that does not interfere with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic lawfully using the intersection. Pedestrian
traffic facing a steady circular red light shall not enter the roadway unless the pedestrian can safely cross the roadway without interfering with any
vehicular traffic.
2. A "steady circular yellow" or "steady yellow arrow" light means vehicular traffic is warned that the related green movement is being terminated and
vehicular traffic shall no longer proceed into the intersection and shall stop. If the stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 292/687
through the intersection. Pedestrian traffic is warned that there is insufficient time to cross the intersection and any pedestrian starting to cross the
roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
3. A "steady circular green" light means vehicular traffic may proceed straight, turn right or turn left through the intersection unless otherwise
specifically prohibited. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicular and pedestrian traffic lawfully within the intersection.
4. A "steady green arrow" light shown alone or with another official traffic control signal means vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection
and proceed in the direction indicated by the arrow. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection.
5. A "flashing circular red" light means vehicular traffic shall stop and after stopping may proceed cautiously through the intersection yielding to all
vehicles not required to stop or yield which are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute a hazard, but then may proceed.
6. A "flashing yellow" light means vehicular traffic shall proceed through the intersection or past such signal with caution.
7. A "flashing yellow arrow" light shown alone or with another official traffic control signal means vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection
and proceed only in the direction indicated by the arrow. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection and any vehicle on the opposing approach which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the
driver is moving within the intersection.
8. A "don't walk" or "steady upraised hand" light is a pedestrian signal which means that pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated pedestrian signal shall
not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal, and pedestrian traffic in the crossing shall proceed to a safety zone.
9. A "flashing upraised hand" or "upraised hand with countdown" light is a pedestrian signal which means that pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated
pedestrian signal shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal, and pedestrian traffic in the crossing shall proceed to a
safety zone. The "upraised hand with countdown" light is a pedestrian signal that also provides the time remaining for the pedestrian to complete the
crossing.
10. A "walk" or "walking person" light is a pedestrian signal which means that pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated pedestrian signal may proceed to
cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal and shall be given the right of way by drivers of all vehicles. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-4-7: ARRANGEMENT OF LIGHTS ON OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
A. Colored lights placed on a vertical official traffic control signal face shall be arranged from the top to the bottom in the following order when used:
circular red, steady and/or flashing left turn red arrow, steady and/or flashing right turn red arrow, circular yellow, circular green, straight through green
arrow, steady left turn yellow arrow, flashing left turn yellow arrow, left turn green arrow, steady right turn yellow arrow, flashing right turn yellow arrow,
and right turn green arrow.
B. Colored lights placed on a horizontal official traffic control signal face shall be arranged from the left to the right in the following order when used:
circular red, steady and/or flashing left turn red arrow, steady and/or flashing right turn red arrow, circular yellow, steady left turn yellow arrow, flashing
left turn yellow arrow, left turn green arrow, circular green, straight through green arrow, steady right turn yellow arrow, flashing right turn yellow arrow,
and right turn green arrow. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-4-8: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS2:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles an official parking sign, curb or other marking, traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, if such sign, signal, marking
or device has not been authorized by the state and local authorities with reference to streets and highways under their jurisdiction and no person shall
place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall
not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information of a type that cannot be
mistaken for official signs.
Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby
empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. (1993 Code)
6-4-9: INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES, SIGNS, OR SIGNALS; UNLAWFUL POSSESSION; TRAFFIC SIGNAL PREEMPTION
DEVICES:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.260 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
Chapter 5
RULES OF THE ROAD
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-5A-1: SIDEWALKS OR HIGHWAYS, DRIVING ON OR ACROSS:
A. Vehicles Prohibited On Sidewalks: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway, or in the process
of clearing accumulations of ice or snow. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0303; amd. 1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 293/687
B. Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk Or Highway1:
1. The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the
sidewalk area and thereafter the driver shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when the driver can do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and
the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the driver's vehicle is entering.
2. The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road or driveway shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving on said
highway and shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said highway. (1993 Code)
6-5A-2: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED:
Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space
on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle that he is operating. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0607)
6-5A-3: SCHOOL BUSES:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.372 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5A-4: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.324A is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5A-5: CARELESS DRIVING:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.277A is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5A-6: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the city unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for their
accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers. No
person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, rollerblades, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0304; amd. 1993 Code)
6-5A-7: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES2:
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected perpetrator of a
felony or in response to an incident dangerous to the public or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges
set forth in this section.
B. The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, may:
1. Park or stand an authorized emergency vehicle, irrespective of the provisions of this title.
2. Disregard laws or regulations governing direction of movement for the minimum distance necessary before an alternative route that conforms to the
traffic laws and regulations is available.
C. The driver of a fire department vehicle, police vehicle or ambulance may:
1. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
2. Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as the driver does not endanger life or property.
D. The exemptions granted to an authorized emergency vehicle under subsection B of this section and for a fire department vehicle, police vehicle or
ambulance as provided in subsection C of this section shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of an audible signaling device meeting the
requirements of Iowa Code section 321.433, or a visual signaling device approved by the state, except that use of an audible or visual signaling device
shall not be required when exercising the exemption granted under subsection C2 of this section when the vehicle is operated by a peace officer
pursuing a suspected violator of the speed restrictions imposed by or pursuant to this title, for the purpose of determining the speed of travel of such
suspected violator.
E. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of the driver's reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1993 Code)
6-5A-8: BICYCLES, ANIMALS OR ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES3:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 294/687
A. A person riding an animal or driving an animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway is subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of this title which by their nature can have no application.
B. A person riding a bicycle on the highway is subject to the provisions of this title and has all the rights and duties under this title applicable to the driver of
a vehicle, except those provisions of this title which by their nature can have no application.
C. A person propelling a bicycle on the highway shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle.
D. A person shall not use a bicycle on the highway to carry more persons at one time than the number of persons for which the bicycle is designed and
equipped.
E. This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade authorized by proper permit from local authorities. (1993 Code)
6-5A-9: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; BICYCLE SAFETY FLAG REQUIRED4:
All-terrain vehicles shall be operated on a highway only between sunrise and sunset and only when the operation on the highway is incidental to the
vehicle's use for agricultural purposes. A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a highway shall have a valid motor vehicle license and the vehicle shall
be operated at speeds of less than thirty (30) miles per hour. When operated on a highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall have a bicycle safety flag which
extends not less than five feet (5') above the ground attached to the rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of
not less than thirty (30) square inches, be day glow in color, and shall be in lieu of the reflective equipment required by Iowa Code section 321.383. (1993
Code)
6-5A-10: GOLF CART OPERATION ON CITY STREETS5:
The city council may allow the operation of golf carts on city streets by person possessing a valid motor vehicle license. However, a golf cart shall not be
operated upon a city street which is a primary road extension through the city but shall be allowed to cross a city street which is a primary road extension
through the city. The golf carts shall be equipped with a slow moving vehicle sign and a bicycle safety flag and operate on the streets only from sunrise to
sunset. Golf carts operated on city streets shall be equipped with adequate brakes and shall meet any other safety requirements imposed by the city
council. Golf carts are not subject to the registration provisions of this title. (1993 Code)
6-5A-11: RECKLESS DRIVING6:
Any person who drives any vehicle in such manner as to indicate either a wilful or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of
reckless driving. Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (1993 Code)
6-5A-12: DRAG RACING7:
No person shall engage in any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed on any street or highway in the city and no person shall aid or abet any
motor vehicle speed contest or speed exhibition on any street or highway in the city, except that a passenger shall not be considered as aiding and
abetting. Motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed are defined as one or more persons competing in speed in excess of the applicable speed
limit in vehicles on the public streets or highways. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (1993
Code)
ARTICLE B. SPEED REGULATIONS
6-5B-1: GENERAL:
Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any street
at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume, however, that
all persons using said street will observe the law. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0401)
6-5B-2: SPECIFIC AREAS:
6-5B-2-1: BUSINESS DISTRICT:
A speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in the business district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. (1985 Code
§2.1-2.0402)
6-5B-2-2: RESIDENCE OR SCHOOL DISTRICT:
A speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour in any school or residence district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 295/687
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0403)
6-5B-2-3: SUBURBAN DISTRICT:
A speed in excess of forty five (45) miles per hour in any suburban district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. (1985 Code
§2.1-2.0403)
6-5B-2-4: CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS:
A speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour in any cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. (1985 Code
§2.1-2.0405)
6-5B-2-5: PARKS:
A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any park, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful1. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0406)
6-5B-3: MINIMUM SPEED:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0407)
6-5B-4: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
The speed limitations set forth in this article do not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls and the drivers thereof
sound audible signal by bell, siren or whistle. This provision does not relieve such driver from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of others.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0408)
6-5B-5: SPECIAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
In accordance with requirements of the Iowa state department of transportation, or whenever the council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering
and traffic investigation that any speed limit hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any
intersection or other place or upon any part of the city street system, the council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit
as it deems reasonable and safe thereat. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0409)
6-5B-6: CONTROL OF VEHICLE; REDUCED SPEED:
Iowa Code (2013) section 321.288 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2031, 5-5-2014)
ARTICLE C. DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE; OVERTAKING AND PASSING
6-5C-1: DRIVING ON RIGHT HAND SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS1:
A. A vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway upon all roadways of sufficient width, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement.
2. When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the roadway, provided, any person so doing shall yield the right of
way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
3. Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon.
4. Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic.
B. Any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right
hand lane then available for traffic upon all roadways, or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking
and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection, an alley, private road or driveway.
C. A vehicle shall not be driven upon any roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, to the left
of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the
roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection A2 of this section. This subsection shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. (1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 296/687
6-5C-2: MEETING AND TURNING TO RIGHT2:
Except as otherwise provided in section 6-5C-1 of this article, vehicles or persons on horseback meeting each other on any roadway shall yield one-half
(1/2) of the roadway by turning to the right. (1993 Code)
6-5C-3: OVERTAKING A VEHICLE3:
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated:
A. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
B. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle and shall not increase the speed of the overtaken vehicle until completely passed by overtaking vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-5C-4: FAILURE TO RECOGNIZE SIGNAL:
Iowa Code section 321.300 has been repealed. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5C-5: BURDEN OF PROOF:
Iowa Code section 321.301 has been repealed. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5C-6: OVERTAKING AND PASSING:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.302 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5C-7: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT4:
A vehicle shall not be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or a vehicle overtaken. The overtaking vehicle shall return to
the right hand side of the roadway before coming within three hundred feet (300') of a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction when traveling on a
roadway having a legal speed limit in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour, and the overtaking vehicle shall return to the right hand side of the roadway
before coming within one hundred feet (100') of a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction when traveling on a roadway having a legal speed limit
of thirty (30) miles per hour or less. (1993 Code)
6-5C-8: PROHIBITED PASSING5:
No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
A. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view along the highway is obstructed for a distance of
approximately seven hundred feet (700').
B. When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any narrow bridge, viaduct or tunnel, when so signposted, or when approaching within one
hundred feet (100') of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing.
C. Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the right or a distinctive centerline or off-centerline is marked, which distinctive line also so
directs traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the department of transportation. (1993 Code)
6-5C-9: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS6:
A. Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
B. A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. (1993 Code)
6-5C-10: ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC7:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 297/687
Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent
herewith, shall apply:
A. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained
that such movement can be made with safety.
B. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such
center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction in the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such
allocation.
C. Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction
and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
D. Vehicles moving in a lane designated for slow moving traffic shall yield the right of way to vehicles moving in the same direction in a lane not so
designated when such lanes merge to form a single lane.
E. A portion of a highway provided with a lane for slow moving vehicles does not become a roadway marked for three (3) lanes of traffic. (1993 Code)
6-5C-11: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY8:
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE D. TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS
6-5D-1: AUTHORITY TO MARK:
The Public Works Director may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic
conditions require, that a different course from that specified by the State law be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons
or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0501; 1993 Code)
6-5D-2: "U" TURNS:
It shall be unlawful for a driver to make a "U" turn at any location when signs are posted prohibiting a "U" turn. (Ord. 1164, 1-29-1996)
6-5D-3: TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS1:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
A. Both the approach for a right turn and right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
B. Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and after entering the intersection the
left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered.
C. Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line
thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into two-way street shall be
made by passing to the right of the center line of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. (1993 Code)
6-5D-4: TURNING ON CURVE OR CREST OF GRADE2:
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade or hill, where
such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five hundred feet (500'). (1993 Code)
6-5D-5: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE3:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 298/687
6-5D-6: WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED4:
No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such movement. (1993 Code)
6-5D-7: SIGNAL CONTINUOUS5:
A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before
turning when the speed limit is forty five (45) miles per hour or less and a continuous signal during not less than the last three hundred feet (300') when the
speed limit is in excess of forty five (45) miles per hour. (1993 Code)
6-5D-8: STOPPING6:
No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of
any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. (1993 Code)
6-5D-9: SIGNALS BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE7:
A. Signals Required: The signals required under the provisions of this Article may be given either by means of the hand and arm as provided in Iowa
Code, section 321.318, or by a mechanical or electrical directional signal device or light of a type approved by the State and conforming to the
provisions of this Title relating thereto.
B. Design of Signal Devices: Directional signal devices shall be designed with a white, yellow or amber lamp or lamps to be displayed on the front of
vehicles and with a lamp or lamps of red, yellow or amber to be displayed on the rear of vehicles. Such devices shall be capable of clearly indicating
any intention to turn either to the right or to the left and shall be visible and understandable during both daylight and darkness from a distance of at
least one hundred feet (100') from the front and rear of a vehicle equipped therewith.
C. Signals on Vehicles:
1. It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or operate on the highways of the State any vehicle subject to registration under the provisions of
this Title which has never been registered in this or any other state prior to January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with a directional signal
device of a type approved by the State and is in compliance with the provisions of subsection B of this Section. Motorcycles, motorized bicycles and
semi-trailers and trailers less than forty inches (40") in width are exempt from the provisions of this Section.
2. When a vehicle is equipped with a directional signal device, such device shall at all times be maintained in good working condition. No directional
signal device shall project a glaring or dazzling light. All directional signal devices shall be self-illuminated when in use while other lamps on the
vehicle are lighted.
D. Hazard Signals: Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is disabled or for other reason may present a vehicular traffic hazard requiring
unusual care in approaching, overtaking or passing, the operator then may display on the vehicle or combination of vehicles four (4) directional signals
of a type complying with the provisions of this Section relating to directional signal devices in simultaneous operation.
E. Method of Giving Hand and Arm Signals:8 All signals herein required which may be given by hand and arm shall when so given be given from the left
side of the vehicle and the following manner and interpretation thereof is suggested:
1. Left Turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
2. Right Turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
3. Stop or Decrease of Speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE E. RIGHT OF WAY
6-5E-1: ENTERING INTERSECTIONS FROM DIFFERENT HIGHWAYS1:
When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways or public streets at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
The foregoing rule is modified at through highways and otherwise as hereinafter stated in this article. (1993 Code)
6-5E-2: LEFT TURNS, YIELDING2:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 299/687
approaching from the opposite direction which are within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, then said driver, having
so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this article, may make such left turn. (1993 Code)
6-5E-3: ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAYS3:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as required by this article at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles
which have entered the intersection from said through highway or which are approaching so closely on said through highway as to constitute a hazard, but
said driver having so yielded may proceed cautiously and with due care enter said through highway. (1993 Code)
6-5E-4: VEHICLES ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION4:
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or
before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle
on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection or which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
the driver is moving across or within the intersection.
B. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety, shall stop at the
first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the
right of way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection or which is approaching so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection. (1993 Code)
6-5E-5: MOVING VEHICLE BACKWARD ON HIGHWAY5:
A person shall not cause a vehicle to be moved in a backward direction on a highway unless and until the vehicle can be backed with reasonable safety,
and shall yield the right of way to any approaching vehicle on the highway or an intersecting highway which is so close as to constitute an immediate
hazard. (1993 Code)
6-5E-6: OPERATION ON APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.324 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5E-7: APPROACHING CERTAIN STATIONARY VEHICLES:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.323A is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
ARTICLE F. SPECIAL STOPS, RAILROADS AND HIGHWAYS
6-5F-1: OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF RAILROAD TRAIN OR RAILROAD TRACK EQUIPMENT:
When a person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing and warning is given by automatic signal, crossing gates, a flag person or otherwise
of the immediate approach of a railroad train or railroad track equipment, the driver of the vehicle shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen
feet (15') from the nearest rail and shall not proceed until the driver can do so safely.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain standing and not traverse such a grade crossing when a crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman
gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train or railroad track equipment. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5F-2: STOP AT CERTAIN RAILROAD CROSSINGS1:
The driver of any vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing across which traffic is regulated by a stop sign, a railroad sign directing traffic to stop or an
official traffic control signal displaying a flashing red or steady circular red colored light shall stop prior to crossing the railroad at the first opportunity at
either the clearly marked stop line or at a point near the crossing where the driver has a clear view of the approaching railroad traffic. (1993 Code)
6-5F-3: CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP2:
The driver of a motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, a school bus, or a vehicle carrying hazardous material and required to stop before crossing a
railroad track by motor carrier safety rules adopted under Iowa Code, before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle within fifty feet
(50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail. While stopped, the driver shall listen and look in both directions for an approaching train, and
for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed until the driver can do so safely.
No stop need be made at a crossing where a peace officer or a traffic control device directs traffic to proceed. No stop need be made at a crossing
designated by an "exempt" sign. An "exempt" sign shall be posted only where the tracks have been partially removed on either side of the roadway. (1993
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 300/687
6-5F-4: HEAVY EQUIPMENT AT CROSSING3:
A. No person shall operate or move any caterpillar tractor, steam shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating speed of
six (6) or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of less than nine inches (9") above the level surface of a roadway upon or across any
tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with this section.
B. Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a superintendent of such railroad and a reasonable time be given to such railroad to provide
proper protection at such crossing.
C. Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than ten feet (10')
nor more than fifty feet (50') from the nearest rail of such railway and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed until the crossing can be made safely.
D. No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic signal or crossing gates or a flagman or otherwise of the immediate approach of a
railroad train or car. (1993 Code)
6-5F-5: STOP OR YIELD AT HIGHWAYS4:
The state, based on an engineering study, with reference to primary highways, and local authorities with reference to other highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate through highways and erect stop signs or yield signs, in accordance with specifications established by the state at specified
entrances to the highway or may designate any intersection as a stop intersection or as a yield intersection and erect like signs at one or more entrances
to such intersection. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE G. MISCELLANEOUS RULES
6-5G-1: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE1:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, or when standing upon any
perceptible grade without effectively setting the brake thereof and turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (1993 Code)
6-5G-2: OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW2:
No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's control over
the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-5G-3: COASTING PROHIBITED3:
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive with the source of motive power disengaged from the driving wheels except when disengagement is necessary
to stop or to shift gears. (1993 Code)
6-5G-4: ACTS PROHIBITED ON FULLY CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES4:
It is unlawful for a person, except a person operating highway maintenance equipment or an authorized emergency vehicle, to do any of the following on a
fully controlled access facility:
A. Drive a vehicle over, upon or across a curb, central dividing section or other separation or dividing line.
B. Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn at a maintenance crossover where an official sign prohibits the turn.
C. Drive a vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb, separation,
section or line.
D. Drive a vehicle into the facility from a local service road.
E. Stop, park or leave standing a vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved portion.
F. Stop, park or leave standing a vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the shoulders or the right of way except at designated rest areas or in
case of an emergency or other dire necessity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 301/687
For the purpose of this section, fully controlled access facility is a highway which gives preference to through traffic by providing access connections at
interchanges with selected public roads only and by prohibiting crossings at grade or direct access at driveway connections. (1993 Code)
6-5G-5: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS5:
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred
feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (1993 Code)
6-5G-6: CROSSING FIRE HOSE6:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. (1993 Code)
6-5G-7: PUTTING DEBRIS ON HIGHWAY7:
No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal or any other debris.
No substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such highway shall be thrown or deposited by any person upon any highway. Any person
who violates any provision of this section or section 6-5G-8 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1993 Code)
6-5G-8: REMOVING INJURIOUS MATERIAL8:
Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any destructive or injurious material and other material as defined in section
6-5G-7 of this article shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. (1993 Code)
6-5G-9: CLEARING UP WRECKS9:
Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from
such vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-5G-10: GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
A. Proof of security against liability - driving without liability coverage. Iowa Code (2011) section 321.20B is adopted by reference.
1. The person cannot provide proof of vehicle liability insurance coverage with the occurrence of a motor vehicle accident.
2. The person cannot provide proof of vehicle liability insurance coverage without the occurrence of a motor vehicle accident.
B. Operation without registration. Iowa Code (2011) section 321.98 is adopted by reference.
C. Fraudulent use of registration. Iowa Code (2011) section 321.99 is adopted by reference.
D. Operation without proper driver's license. Iowa Code (2011) section 321.174 is adopted by reference.
E. Child restraint devices. Iowa Code (2011) section 321.446 is adopted by reference.
F. Safety belts and safety harnesses - use required. Iowa Code section 321.445 is adopted by reference.
G. Operation of motor vehicle with expired license. Iowa Code (2015) section 321.174A is adopted by reference.
H. Permitting unauthorized minor to drive. Iowa Code (2015) section 321.219 is adopted by reference.
I. Permitting unauthorized person to drive. Iowa Code (2015) section 321.220 is adopted by reference.
J. Display of plates. Iowa Code (2015) section 321.37 is adopted by reference.
K. Injuring or tampering with vehicle. Iowa Code (2015) section 321.78 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2121, 10-19-2015)
L. Use of electronic communication device while driving. Iowa Code (2017) section 321.276 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2298, 4-30-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 302/687
Chapter 6
PARKING REGULATIONS
6-6-1: PARKING PROHIBITED:
No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer
or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
A. Crosswalk: On a crosswalk at an intersection.
B. Center Parkway: On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided street.
C. Mailboxes: Within twenty feet (20') on either side of a mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on
the roadway.
D. Sidewalks: On or across a sidewalk.
E. Driveway: In front of or within three feet (3') of a public or private driveway.
F. Intersection: Within, or within ten feet (10') of an intersection of any street or alley.
G. Fire Hydrant: Within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant.
H. Stop Sign Or Signal: Within ten feet (10') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
I. Railroad Crossing: Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
J. Fire Station: Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted.
K. Excavations: Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
L. Double Parking: On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
M. Hazardous Locations: When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when
other traffic conditions require, the chief of police may cause curbings to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
N. Theaters, Hotels And Auditoriums: A space of fifty feet (50') is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theater, auditorium, hotel having
more than twenty five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church or other building where large assemblages of
people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on
or discharging passengers or freight and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.
O. Alleys Generally: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10')
of width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
P. Parking Or Terrace: No person shall park or drive a vehicle upon the parking or terrace, designated as that area between the curb line and the sidewalk
line, where curbing has been installed. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1007; amd. 1993 Code)
6-6-2: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any public street or right of way or upon school district or municipally owned property for any of the following principal
purposes:
A. Sale: Displaying such vehicle for sale.
B. Repairing: For washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 303/687
C. Advertising: Displaying advertising.
D. Merchandise Sales: Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established marketplace and in accordance with applicable provisions of
this code and other applicable city regulations or policies as approved by the city council.
E. Storage: Storage or as junkage or dead storage for more than forty eight (48) hours1. (Ord. 1359, 5-3-1999)
6-6-3: ILLEGAL PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall drive, stop, stand, or park a vehicle onto or upon privately owned property or in an area developed as an off street parking facility, without
the consent of the owner, lessee or person in charge of such privately owned property or facility. A violation of this section shall place such vehicle in the
status of an illegally parked vehicle, and upon complaint of the owner, lessee or person in charge of the privately owned property or facility, said vehicle
may be dealt with pursuant to section 6-2-3-5 of this title; provided, however, no vehicle shall be deemed illegally parked under this section on land zoned
commercial or industrial unless the owner, lessee or person in charge of such privately owned property or facility shall first post in a conspicuous location a
sign or signs designating the specific use of the off street parking facility. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1022)
6-6-4: FIRE LANES2:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane as provided herein.
A. Fire Lanes Established: The fire chief may designate fire lanes on any private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access to property
or premises by authorized emergency vehicles.
B. Signs And Markings: Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the public works director shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed
identifying such fire lanes and the parking prohibition established by this section.
C. Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1025; amd. 1993 Code)
D. Scheduled Violation: A violation of this section is a scheduled violation and subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1287, 2-23-1998)
6-6-5: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
Parking for the use of the physically handicapped is provided as follows:
A. Public Property: The city council, by resolution, may set aside on or off street parking spaces as handicapped parking spaces.
B. Private Property: A person may set aside handicapped parking spaces on the person's property, provided each parking space is clearly and prominently
designated as a handicapped parking space, and provided that such signage designating each space is in accordance with state law using the
international symbol of accessibility.
C. Unlawful Use: The use of a handicapped parking space by a motor vehicle not displaying a handicapped identification device, or by a motor vehicle
displaying such a device but not being used by a handicapped person, as operator or passenger is a misdemeanor.
D. Scheduled Violation: A violation of this section is a scheduled violation and subject to a fine as per state code. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1008; amd. 1993
Code)
6-6-6: LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the loading and unloading of material or merchandise or passengers in
any designated loading zone.
A. Loading Zones Identified: The locations designated as loading zones shall be marked by signs with the words "loading zone" and the designated area
marked off with yellow paint with the words "no parking - loading zone" visibly stenciled inside the marked off area, and it shall be the duty of the driver
or operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle within the limits of the marked off loading zone areas.
B. Loading Zones Designated: See section 6-9-13 of this title for specific loading and unloading zones. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1021; amd. 1993 Code)
6-6-7: SNOW REMOVAL:
No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on any public street, alley, or city owned off street parking area during any snow
emergency proclaimed by the mayor, public works director, or their respective designees. A snow emergency parking ban shall continue from its
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 304/687
proclamation through five o'clock (5:00) P.M. the following day. The mayor, public works director, or their respective designees may extend the duration of
the parking ban if conditions require additional time to clear the snow and ice. Notice of an extension shall be posted in the same manner as a
proclamation of snow emergency and shall contain the date and time the parking ban shall expire. Such a parking ban shall be of uniform application. The
city shall publish information regarding the responsibilities of vehicle owners under this section in the fall and/or winter editions of the "WDM Magazine"
distributed to city residents, as well as post such information on the city of West Des Moines website in the fall and/or winter of each year. When
predictions or occurrences indicate the need, the mayor, public works director, or their respective designees, shall proclaim the snow emergency and direct
the appropriate city employee to post said proclamation on the city of West Des Moines website and forward notice of the proclamation to at least two (2)
radio and two (2) television stations that broadcast their signals into the city of West Des Moines. Such emergency may be extended or shortened as the
emergency warrants or when conditions warrant. This section shall not be construed as suspending parking limitations or restrictions imposed by any other
section of this title. In addition to enforcement of this section by police officers, code enforcement officials and public works employees have the authority
to enforce the provisions of this section. The code enforcement officials and public works employees shall have the power to issue citation-complaints for
violations of this section and impound vehicles found in violation of this section as provided in subsections 6-6-15A and G of this chapter. (Ord. 1844, 10-5-
2009)
6-6-8: TRUCK PARKING LIMITED:
No person shall park a motor truck, semitrailer or other motor vehicle with trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to pickup, light delivery or panel delivery trucks.
A. Diagonal Parking Areas: No such vehicle shall be left unattended or parked in any diagonal or angle parking district.
B. Two Hour Limit: No such vehicle shall be left unattended or parked on any public street for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours.
C. Public Off Street Parking: No such vehicle shall be left unattended or parked in a twenty four (24) hour public off street parking zone in the locations
designated in section 6-9-6-3 of this title.
D. Semitrailers And Special Mobile Equipment: It shall be unlawful to park a trailer, semitrailer, implement of husbandry, special mobile equipment, mobile
home or travel trailer, except bicycles, in a twenty four (24) hour public off street parking zone designated in section 6-9-6-3 of this title. (1985 Code
§2.1-2.1015)
6-6-9: MANNER OF PARKING:
A. Adjacent To Curb: No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or edge of the roadway and not placed closer
than four feet (4') from another vehicle except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left hand side of one-way
streets.
B. Park Adjacent To Curb On One-Way Street: No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the
edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the
curb or edge of the roadway and not closer than four feet (4') from another vehicle except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.
C. Angle Parking; Manner: Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as indicated by such signs and markings and with the right hand front wheel, if parked
on the right hand side, or the left hand front wheel, if parked on the left hand side of a one-way street, within twelve inches (12") of the curb. No part of
any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen feet (16')
when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
D. Stalls And Sections: Where now or hereafter stalls or sections may be marked or painted upon the surface of any street or portion thereof, and including
upon publicly owned parking lots or alleys located within the zoned Valley Junction historic business district, it shall be the duty of the driver or operator
of any vehicle to park the same within the limits of one of the said stalls or sections and not over, across, or outside said lines.
E. Parking On Grass: No person shall stand or park a vehicle on grass on public property, unless the city council, parks and recreation director, or
designee has specifically authorized parking on the grass within a designated area. This provision does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or
authorized maintenance vehicles. (Ord. 2110, 8-24-2015)
6-6-10: SIGNS REQUIRED:
Whenever by this chapter or any other section of this code any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets or portions of
streets, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to erect or cause to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be
effective unless signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. When the signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1024)
6-6-11: STOPPING ON TRAVELED WAY; EXCEPTION3:
A. Prohibition: Upon any highway outside of a business district, rural residence district or residence district a person shall not stop, park or leave standing
a vehicle, whether attended or unattended:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 305/687
1. Upon the paved part of the highway when it is practical to stop, park or leave the vehicle off that part of the highway, however, a clear and
unobstructed width of at least twenty feet (20') of the paved part of the highway opposite the standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of
other vehicles. As used in this subsection, "paved highway" includes an asphalt surfaced highway.
2. Upon the main traveled part of a highway other than a paved highway when it is practical to stop, park or leave the vehicle off that part of the
highway. However, a clear and unobstructed width of that part of the highway opposite the standing vehicle shall be left to allow for the free passage
of other vehicles.
A clear view of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of two hundred feet (200') in each direction upon the highway. However, school
buses may stop on the highway for receiving and discharging pupils and all other vehicles shall stop for school buses which are stopped to receive or
discharge pupils, as provided in Iowa Code. This subsection does not apply to a vehicle making a turn as provided in section 6-5D-3 of this title.
B. Disabled Vehicle4: Subsection A of this section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or improved or main
traveled portion of a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in
such position. (1993 Code)
6-6-12: OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE5:
Whenever any peace officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of any of the provisions of section 6-6-11 of this chapter, such officer is
hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or
improved or main traveled part of such highway. (1993 Code)
6-6-13: REMOVAL FROM BRIDGE6:
Whenever any peace officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. (1993 Code)
6-6-14: MOVING OTHER VEHICLE7:
No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. (1993 Code)
6-6-15: PARKING VIOLATIONS; FAILURE TO PAY:
A. Notice On Illegally Parked Vehicles: Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions
imposed by this chapter or any other city ordinance or by state law, police officers, code enforcement officers, and any other city employees designated
by the police chief finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may
identify its owner or user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation-complaint, in writing, on a form as provided by this code for the owner
to appear to the charge against him or her at the city's finance department. In addition to enforcement of this chapter by police officers, code
enforcement officials, and designated city employees, fire department officials and any other city employees designated by the fire chief shall have the
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter for fire lane violations. Also, in addition to enforcement of this chapter by police officers, code
enforcement officials, and designated city employees, public works employees shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter for
snow ordinance violations.
B. Failure To Pay Or To Contest: Failure to pay or to contest a parking citation-complaint within thirty (30) calendar days of its issuance under the
provisions of this chapter shall render the charges contained therein admitted.
C. Payment Of Parking Citation-Complaint: Persons receiving a citation-complaint who desire to admit and pay the violation may do so in one of the
following ways:
1. Place the amount specified on the face of the citation-complaint in the envelope provided and mail the payment to the city's finance department
within thirty (30) calendar days of the date issued.
2. Appear in person no sooner than five (5) calendar days but no more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of issuance of the citationcomplaint.
Place of appearance will be the city's finance department and pay in person the amount specified on the face of the citation-complaint to
the city.
3. Persons wishing to contest the citation-complaint must do so by appearing in person in the office of the city's finance department no sooner than five
(5) calendar days but not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of issuance of the citation-complaint.
D. Notification Of Contest And Assignment Of Court Dates: Persons wishing to contest the citation-complaint must do so in writing on forms provided by
the city's finance department and shall appear as provided in subsection C3 of this section. At the time of filing of the notification of contest, a date and
time of court appearance will be established by the city's finance department, subject to approval by the Polk County clerk of court, and notice thereof
provided to the person contesting the citation-complaint. The person contesting the citation-complaint will be required to post an unsecured appearance
bond in the amount specified pursuant to section 805.6, code of Iowa (2013), providing for the setting of unsecured appearance bonds for a scheduled
fine. The city's finance department shall forward the contested citation-complaint to the traffic division of the Polk County clerk of court. Violations of this
chapter shall be considered traffic violations for purposes of Iowa Code sections 803.3 and 805.13 (2013). Because the city is located in two (2) or
more counties and the city's seat of government is located in Polk County, venue shall be in Polk County.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 306/687
E. Form And Use Of Parking Citation-Complaint Forms: Parking citation-complaints shall be issued by the police department, including code enforcement
officials, the fire department, the public works department, and other designated personnel, upon serially numbered sets of parking citation-complaint
forms, each copy of each set to be clearly imprinted with the citation-complaint number. Copies of the citation-complaint forms shall be used as follows:
one to be used as a notice of violation to be delivered to the owner of the vehicle, or affixed to the vehicle illegally parked, as provided in subsection A
of this section; one to be placed on file with the city's finance department which may be proceeded upon as a simple notice pursuant to code of Iowa,
which, if admitted, shall be paid to the city's finance department as specified in the citation-complaint or which, if denied, shall be handled pursuant to
subsection D of this section; and one to be retained for record purposes by the police, fire, or public works department.
F. Habitual Violator: For the purposes of this section, a delinquent parking citation-complaint is one which has not been paid within thirty (30) calendar days
of the date upon which the violation occurred.
Any person who has allowed three (3) or more parking citation-complaints issued on a single motor vehicle to become delinquent shall be deemed to
be a habitual violator.
No person shall park a vehicle and permit it to remain standing upon any public street or public metered lot or city owned parking facility in the city
when there are three (3) or more delinquent parking citation-complaints outstanding against that vehicle.
A violation of this section shall place such vehicle in the status of an illegally parked vehicle and the vehicle may be dealt with pursuant to subsection G
of this section.
G. Removal And Impoundment Of Illegally Parked Vehicles: The police department may remove and impound vehicles or cause vehicles to be removed
and impounded, when the vehicles are stopped or parked in violation of this chapter or other city ordinances and, in so doing, may employ such means
as are reasonably necessary. Impounded vehicles shall be stored in a location designated by the city.
H. Right Of Owner To Redeem Impounded Vehicle: The registered owner or person having a legal entitlement to possession of a motor vehicle impounded
pursuant to subsection G of this section may claim the same by appearing personally in the office of the city's finance department and either paying, in
full, all delinquent parking citation-complaints pursuant to subsection C2 of this section, or timely contesting the citation-complaints pursuant to the
procedure established in subsection D of this section. The city's finance department, upon compliance with the above procedure, shall provide the
registered owner or person having a legal entitlement to possession of the motor vehicle, a written release to be presented to the towing-impoundment
entity which, upon payment of all towing and storage fees by the registered owner or person having legal entitlement or possession of the motor
vehicle, shall enable the individual to possession of the automobile.
I. Failure Of Owner To Claim Impounded Vehicle: If an impounded vehicle is not claimed by the owner within ten (10) calendar days after impoundment,
the unclaimed vehicle shall be placed in the status of and shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle as provided by state law and/or this code.
J. Notice Of Impoundment: When a vehicle has been impounded pursuant to subsection G of this section, the registered owner of the vehicle shall be
sent, by certified mail, to the owner's last known address of record, within seventy two (72) hours of the impoundment, excluding weekends and
holidays, a notice of said impoundment along with a description of any personal property contained within the vehicle and of the right to a hearing
pursuant to this chapter. Notice personally presented within said period to said owner or person having a legal entitlement to possession shall satisfy
the mailing requirement. (Ord. 1985, 4-29-2013)
6-6-16: PENALTY:
A. In the event a violation of this chapter constitutes a violation charged, admitted, and collected pursuant to a simple notice of fine as established by
chapter 2 of this title, the fine shall be as follows:
1. Unless otherwise specified in this title, the scheduled fine for a violation of the parking regulations provided in this title or any other city ordinance
shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). For a violation of section 6-6-7 of this chapter, the scheduled fine shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). See subsection 6-6-
4D of this chapter for the scheduled fine for fire lane violations, and subsection 6-6-5D of this chapter for the scheduled fine for handicapped parking
violations.
2. In the event the fifteen dollar ($15.00) scheduled fine as set forth in this subsection A has not been paid or contested within thirty (30) calendar days
from the date of issuance of the parking citation-complaint, the penalty shall automatically increase to twenty dollars ($20.00), in accordance with
state law.
B. It is further provided that in the event such violation has been charged but not admitted and collected pursuant to a simple notice of fine, the provisions
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code may also apply. (Ord. 2110, 8-24-2015)
Chapter 7
ACCIDENTS
6-7-1: DAMAGE TO VEHICLE:1
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop
such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such
accident until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of Section 6-7-3 of this Chapter. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than
is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with said requirements under such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as
provided in Iowa Code. (1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 307/687
6-7-2: PROPERTY DAMAGE ACCIDENTS:2
A. Striking Unattended Vehicle: The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and
there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the
unattended vehicle, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck, written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the
owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof.
B. Striking Fixtures Upon a Highway:3 The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to property legally upon or adjacent to a
highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner, a peace officer or person in charge of such property of such fact and of the driver's
name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle causing the damage and shall, upon request and if available exhibit the driver's motor
vehicle license and shall make report of such accident. (1993 Code)
6-7-3: INFORMATION AND AID; LEAVING SCENE OF ACCIDENT:4
A. The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident relating in injury to or death of a person or damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by a person
shall give the driver's name, address and the registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit the
driver's motor vehicle license to the person struck, the driver or occupant of, or the person attending the vehicle involved in the accident and shall
render to a person injured in the accident reasonable assistance, including the transporting or arranging for the transporting of the person for medical
treatment if it is apparent that medical treatment is necessary or if transportation for medical treatment is requested by the injured person.
B. If the accident causes the death of a person, all surviving drivers shall remain at the scene of the accident except to seek necessary aid or to report the
accident to law enforcement authorities. Before leaving the scene of the fatal accident, each surviving driver shall leave the surviving driver's motor
vehicle license, automobile registration receipt, or other identification data at the scene of the accident. After leaving the scene of the accident, a
surviving driver shall promptly report the accident to law enforcement authorities, and shall immediately return to the scene of the accident or inform the
law enforcement authorities where the surviving driver can be located. (1993 Code)
Chapter 8
PEDESTRIANS
6-8-1: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO SIGNALS:1
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as heretofore declared in this Chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be
accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in Sections 6-8-3 through 6-8-7 of this Chapter. (1993 Code)
6-8-2: PEDESTRIANS ON LEFT:2
Pedestrians shall, at all times when walking on or along a highway, walk on the left side of such highway. (1993 Code)
6-8-3: PEDESTRIANS RIGHT OF WAY:3
Where traffic-control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so
yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter. (1993 Code)
6-8-4: CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALK:4
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. Where traffic-control signals are in operation at any place not an intersection, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk.
(1993 Code)
6-8-5: DUTY OF DRIVER; PEDESTRIANS CROSSING OR WORKING ON HIGHWAYS:5
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6-8-4 of this Chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise due care upon observing any child or any confused
or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 308/687
B. Every driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to pedestrian workers engaged in maintenance or construction work on a highway whenever the
driver is notified of the presence of such workers by a flagman or a warning sign. (1993 Code)
6-8-6: USE OF CROSSWALKS:6
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. (1993 Code)
6-8-7: PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES:7
A. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
B. Nothing in this Section or this Title shall be construed so as to prevent any pedestrian from standing on that portion of the highway or roadway, not
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-8-8: WHITE CANE OR WALKING STICK, PRECAUTIONS:
A. White Canes Restricted to Blind Persons:8 For the purpose of guarding against accidents in traffic on the public thoroughfares, it shall be unlawful for
any person except persons wholly or partially blind to carry or use on the streets, highways and public places of the City any white canes or walking
sticks which are white in color or white tipped with red.
B. Duty of Drivers:9 Any driver of a vehicle or operator of a motor-driven vehicle who approaches or comes in contact with a person wholly or partially blind
carrying a cane or walking stick white in color or white tipped with red, or being led by a guide dog wearing a harness and walking on either side of or
slightly in front of said blind person, shall immediately come to a complete stop, and take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid accident or
injury to the person carrying a cane or walking stick white in color or white tipped with red or being led by a guide dog.
C. Penalty:10 Any person who shall carry a cane or walking stick such as prescribed in subsection 6-8-8A of this Chapter contrary to the provisions hereof,
or who shall fail to heed the approach of a person lawfully so carrying a cane or walking stick white in color or white tipped with red, or being led by a
guide dog, or who shall fail to immediately come to a complete stop, and take such precautions against accident or injury to such person, shall be fined
not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (1993 Code)
6-8-9: DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE:11
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. (1993 Code)
Chapter 9
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
6-9-1: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS:
Every driver and pedestrian shall observe and comply with the directions provided by all official traffic control signals.
Intersection Of:
ASHWORTH ROAD and:
Jordan Creek Parkway
Prairie View Drive
First Street
Eighth Street
Nineteenth Street
Twenty Second Street
Twenty Eighth Street
Thirty Fifth Street
Thirty Ninth Street
Forty Second Street
Fiftieth Street
Sixtieth Street
Seventy Second Street
E.P. TRUE PARKWAY and:
Jordan Creek Parkway
Prairie View Drive
Railroad Avenue and Grand Avenue
Thirty Fifth Street, Mills Civic Parkway
Fiftieth Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 309/687
Sixty Eighth Street
Sixty Eighth Street, 1,700 feet west of (north entrance of Jordan Creek Town Center)
GRAND AVENUE and:
Fuller Road
Interstate 35, east ramps
Interstate 35, west ramps
Vine Street
First Street
Fourth Street
Eighth Street
Thirteenth Street
Fiftieth (South) Street
GRAND PRAIRIE PARKWAY and:
Interstate 80 south ramps
JORDAN CREEK PARKWAY and:
Aspen Drive
Bridgewood Boulevard
E.P. True Parkway, 850 feet south of
Interstate 80, north ramp
Interstate 80, south ramp
Office Plaza Drive
Vista Drive
Westown Parkway
Woodland Avenue
JORDAN CREEK PARKWAY (South) and:
Cascade Avenue
Coachlight Drive
Mills Civic Parkway, 1,000 feet south of
Stagecoach Drive
MILLS CIVIC PARKWAY and:
Fuller Road
Glen Oaks Golf Course, north entrance
Interstate 35 interchange
Jordan Creek Parkway
Jordan Creek Parkway (South), 1,300 feet west of (Mills Civic Parkway)
Prairie View Drive
Stagecoach Drive
Fiftieth Street
Sixty Fourth (South) Street
Sixty Eighth Street
Sixty Eighth Street, 1,050 feet west of (south entrance of Jordan Creek Town Center)
Eighty First (South) Street
RAILROAD AVENUE and:
Fuller Road
Eighth Street
UNIVERSITY AVENUE and:
Farm Bureau driveway/NW
One Hundred Eighteenth Street (Clive)
Interstate 35/80, east ramps
Interstate 35/80, west ramps
Jordan Creek Parkway
Northwest One Hundred Forty Second Street (Clive)
Private driveway (520 feet east of Fiftieth Street)
Private driveway (1,400 feet east of Fiftieth Street)
West Lakes Parkway/NW
One Hundred Twenty Third Street (Clive)
Twenty Second Street
Twenty Fifth Street
Twenty Eighth Street
Thirty First Street
Thirty Fifth Street
Thirty Seventh Street (entrance Westridge Shopping Center)
Forty Second Street
Fiftieth Street
Fifty Ninth Place
Sixtieth Street
Ninety Eighth Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 310/687
VALLEY WEST DRIVE and:
Sylvania Drive
WESTOWN PARKWAY and:
West Lakes Parkway
Twenty Second Street
Twenty Eighth Street
Thirty First Street
Thirty Fifth Street
Forty Second Street
Fiftieth Street
FIRST STREET and:
Railroad Avenue
FIRST (South) STREET and:
Park Avenue
EIGHTH STREET and:
Center Street and Interstate 235, south ramps
Office Park Road
TWENTY SECOND STREET and:
Interstate 235, north ramps
Interstate 235, south ramps
Kingman Avenue
THIRTY FIFTH STREET and:
Interstate 235, north ramps
Interstate 235, south ramps
North drive of Valley West Mall
Westown Place
Woodland Avenue
FIFTIETH STREET and:
Corporate Drive
Stonebridge Road
FIFTIETH (South) STREET and:
Wistful Vista Drive
FIFTY FIRST (South) STREET and:
Mills Civic Parkway
SIXTIETH STREET and:
E.P. True Parkway
Mills Civic Parkway
Vista Drive
Westown Parkway
Fifty Ninth Place
SIXTIETH (South) STREET and:
Village View Drive
Wistful Vista Drive
SIXTY FOURTH (South) STREET and:
Coachlight Drive
SIXTY FIFTH STREET and:
Ashworth Road
SIXTY EIGHTH STREET and:
Coachlight Drive
Wistful Vista Drive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 311/687
SIXTY EIGHTH (South) STREET and:
Stagecoach Drive
EIGHTY EIGHTH STREET and:
Ashworth Road - west intersection
NINETY SECOND STREET and:
University Avenue
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0609; amd. Ord. 838, 10-12-1987; Ord. 864, 10-10-1988; Ord. 937, 11-26-1990; Ord. 946, 4-29-1991; Ord. 988, 2-3-1992; Ord. 999, 3-
30-1992; 1993 Code; Ord. 1057, 8-16-1993; Ord. 1065, 10-25-1993; Ord. 1114, 11-21-1994; Ord. 1119, 1-16-1995; Ord. 1148, 8-14-1995; Ord. 1193, 7-29-
1996; Ord. 1244, 5-5-1997, eff. 7-1-1997; Ord. 1304, 5-4-1998; Ord. 1318, 7-13-1998; Ord. 1345, 12-28-1998; Ord. 1411, 5-30-2000; Ord. 1495, 11-11-
2002; Ord. 1550, 9-29-2003; Ord. 1584, 6-21-2004; Ord. 1602, 10-25-2004; Ord. 1642, 7-18-2005; Ord. 1644, 8-15-2005; Ord. 1686, 5-8-2006; Ord. 1766,
7-30-2007; Ord. 1807, 6-16-2008; Ord. 1819, 11-17-2008; Ord. 1826, 3-23-2009; Ord. 1827, 3-23-2009; Ord. 1831, 6-29-2009; Ord. 1833, 8-10-2009; Ord.
1938, 11-28-2011; Ord. 1959, 9-17-2012; Ord. 2109, 8-24-2015; Ord. 2128, 11-30-2015; Ord. 2134, 12-28-2015; Ord. 2139, 2-22-2016; Ord. 2168, 8-22-
2016; Ord. 2178, 10-31-2016; Ord. 2188, 12-12-2016; Ord. 2251, 9-18-2017)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2335 - THROUGH STREETS STOP REQUIRED. Go to new ordinance.
6-9-2: THROUGH STREETS STOP REQUIRED:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with an official traffic control device, unless a yield is permitted by this chapter before entering an
intersection with the following designated through streets:
Through Street From To
Army Post Road East corporate limits West corporate limits
Ashworth Road First Street Western corporate limits
Aspen Drive Jordan Creek Parkway Western corporate limits
Prairie View Drive Fifty Eighth Street
Forty First Street Knolls Road
Beechtree Drive Sixtieth Street Sixty Eighth Street
Bridgewood Boulevard Jordan Creek Parkway Western terminus of Bridgewood Boulevard
Brookview Drive Thirty Second Street Thirty Fifth Street
Brown's Woods Drive First (South) Street Eleventh (South) Street
Buffalo Road East corporate limits The western terminus at Nineteenth Street Place
Cascade Avenue Eighty Eighth (South) Street Western terminus
Center Street Place Seventeenth Street Twentieth Street
Chalk Street Eighty Eighth Street West corporate limits
Coachlight Drive Sixtieth (South) Street Sixty Second (South) Street
Eighty First (South) Street Eighty Eighth (South) Street
Cody Drive Jordan Creek Parkway Eighty First Street
Prairie View Drive Fifty Eighth Street
Sixty Fifth Place Jordan Creek Parkway
Eighty First Street Western terminus
Corporate Drive Forty Fifth Street Fiftieth Street
County Line (South) Road East corporate limits West corporate limits
E.P. True Parkway Grand Avenue West corporate limits
Fairlawn Drive Twenty Fourth Street Twenty Eighth Street
Fuller Road Railroad Avenue Thirty Fifth (South) Street
Giles Street Twenty Eighth Street Thirty Fifth Street
Grand Avenue East corporate limits West corporate limits
Grand Prairie Parkway (South) North corporate limits Mills Civic Parkway
Jordan Creek Parkway North corporate limits South corporate limits
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 312/687
Kingman Drive Ninetieth Street Ninety Second Street
Knolls Road Fiftieth Street The northern terminus at Aspen Drive
Lincoln Street 230 feet east of Thirteenth (South) Street Fuller Road
Locust Street Eighth Street Sixteenth Street
Maffitt Lake Road Southwest connector West corporate limits
Maffitt Lake (SE) Road Soteria (SE) Avenue Veterans Parkway
Maple Street E.P. True Parkway Thirty Fifth Street
Eighth Street Fourteenth Street
Meadow Lane Twenty Seventh Street Thirty Fifth Street
Mills Civic Parkway E.P. True Parkway Sixtieth Street
Sixtieth (South) Street Western terminus of Mills Civic Parkway
Orilla (South) Road Maffit Lake Road South corporate limits
Pine Avenue East corporate limits Southwest connector
Pleasant Street The east terminus at Forty Fifth Street Fiftieth Street
Pommel Place Thirty Fifth Street Thirty Ninth Street
Prairie View Drive The beginning of Prairie View Drive at Center Street South terminus
Prospect Road Nineteenth Street Twenty Fourth Street
Raccoon River Drive Grand Avenue Western terminus of Raccoon River Drive
Railroad Avenue East corporate limits The west terminus at E.P. True Parkway
Southwest connector Army Post Road Southern terminus
Stagecoach Drive Mills Civic Parkway Western terminus of Stagecoach Drive
Eighty Eighth (South) Street Western terminus
Stonebridge Road Thirty Fifth Street Fiftieth Street
Sugar Creek Drive Eighty Eighth (South) Street Ninety Fifth (South) Street
Thornwood Road Thirty Fifth (South) Street Grand Avenue
University Avenue Twenty Second Street West corporate limits
Vine Street East corporate limits Ashworth Road
Vista Drive Center Street Jordan Creek Parkway
Walnut Woods Drive Eleventh (South) Street Forty Second (South) Street
Western Hills Drive Thirty Fifth Street Cody Drive
Westown Parkway The eastern terminus at Nineteenth Place Western corporate limits
Sixtieth Street Jordan Creek Parkway
Wistful Vista Drive South Prairie View Drive West corporate limits
Sixtieth (South) Street Sixty Second (South) Street
Woodland Avenue Twenty Second Street Fiftieth Street
Sixty Eighth Street Jordan Creek Parkway
Woodland Park Drive Woodland Avenue Ashworth Road
First Street North corporate limits Railroad Avenue
First (South) Street Brown's Wood Drive Army Post Road
Fourth Street Ashworth Road Railroad Avenue
Fifth Street Grand Avenue Railroad Avenue
Eighth Street North corporate limits Railroad Avenue
Eleventh Street Office Park Road Ashworth Road
Eleventh (South) Street Brown's Woods Drive Army Post Road
Sixteenth Street Ashworth Road Grand Avenue
Seventeenth Street Buffalo Road Pleasant Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 313/687
Nineteenth Street Ashworth Road E.P. True Parkway
Nineteenth (South) Street Grand Avenue Fuller Road
Twenty Second Street North corporate limits Ashworth Road
Twenty Third Street Ashworth Road Prospect Avenue
Twenty Eighth Street North corporate limits Vine Street
Thirty Fifth Street North corporate limits E.P. True Parkway
Thirty Fifth (South) Street Army Post Road Maffitt Lake Road
Mills Civic Parkway Grand Avenue
Thirty Ninth Street Woodland Avenue Western Hills Drive
Forty First (South) Street E.P. True Parkway Mills Civic Parkway
Forty Second Street North corporate limits Ashworth Road
Forty Second (South) Street Oakwood Lane Grand Avenue
Forty Fifth Street The north terminus at Pleasant Street Woodland Avenue
Fiftieth Street North corporate limits E.P. True Parkway
Fiftieth (South) Street E.P. True Parkway Grand Avenue
Fifty Sixth Street E.P. True Parkway Wistful Vista Drive
Fifty Seventh Court E.P. True Parkway Wistful Vista Drive
Fifty Eighth Street Vista Drive Eastern terminus at Cody Drive
Sixtieth Street North corporate limits Wistful Vista Drive
Sixtieth (South) Street Wistful Vista Drive Grand Avenue
Sixty Eighth Street Cody Drive Wistful Vista Drive
Sixty Eighth (South) Street Wistful Vista Drive South terminus of Sixty Eighth Street
Eighty First Street Ashworth Road E.P. True Parkway
E.P. True Parkway Bridgewood Boulevard
Eighty First (South) Street Bridgewood Boulevard Mills Civic Parkway
Mills Civic Parkway South terminus of Eighty First (South) Street
Eighty Eighth Street Ashwood Road Nine Iron Drive
University Avenue Lake Drive
Eighty Eighth (South) Street Mills Civic Parkway Booneville Road
Ninetieth Street University Avenue Kingman Drive
Ninety First (South) Street Cascade Avenue Stagecoach Drive
Mills Civic Parkway Cascade Avenue
Stagecoach Drive Booneville Road
Ninety Second Street North corporate limits South terminus of Ninety Second Street
Ninety Third (South) Street Stagecoach Drive Sugar Creek Drive
Sugar Creek Drive Booneville Road
Ninety Fifth (South) Street Cascade Avenue Stagecoach Drive
Mills Civic Parkway Cascade Avenue
Stagecoach Drive Booneville Road
Ninety Eighth Street University Avenue Ashwood Road
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0601; amd. Ord. 891, 10-2-1989; Ord. 974, 11-1-1991; Ord. 1001, 3-30-1992; Ord. 1027, 9-14-1992; 1993 Code; Ord. 1103, 10-24-
1994; Ord. 1195, 7-29-1996; Ord. 1208, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1324, 8-24-1998; Ord. 1347, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1348, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1385, 9-7-1999; Ord. 1410,
5-30-2000; Ord. 1502, 12-9-2002; Ord. 1603, 10-25-2004; Ord. 1669, 1-3-2006; Ord. 1692, 6-5-2006; Ord. 1718, 12-4-2006; Ord. 1722, 1-15-2007; Ord.
1752, 5-7-2007; Ord. 1768, 7-30-2007; Ord. 1968, 12-10-2012; Ord. 2004, 9-30-2013; Ord. 2039, 6-2-2014; Ord. 2153, 6-13-2016; Ord. 2156, 7-11-2016;
Ord. 2172, 10-17-2016; Ord. 2179, 10-31-2016; Ord. 2277, 2-5-2018)
6-9-3: STOPS OR YIELDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 314/687
6-9-3-1: SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:
Street Vehicles Traveling
Shall Stop At
Alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street North Locust Street
Army Post Road Forty Second (South) Street
Aspen Drive Sixty Third Street
Brookview Drive East Thirty Second Street
Canyon Drive Ninetieth Street
Cedarwood Drive/Cedarwood Court Ninety Fifth Street
Colt Drive Fifty Fifth Street
Corporate Drive East Forty Fifth Street
Dakota Drive Seventy First Street
Fairlawn Drive Twenty Fourth Street
Frontage road (City school campus) East access road City Hall (805 feet east of centerline of Waterford Drive)
West access road City Hall (south of Waterford Drive)
Heatherwood Drive South Heatherwood Drive
West Heatherwood Drive
Hidden Creek East Commerce Drive
High Street West Forty Fifth (South) Street
Locust Street Thirty Third Street
Maple Street Thirtieth Street
West Fourteenth Street
Meadow Lane East Twenty Seventh Street
Locust Street
Meadow Valley Drive/Forty Ninth (South) Street
Wistful Vista Drive
Mountain Avenue East Fourteenth Street
Office Park Road West Fifteenth Street
Orchard Drive Sixty Third Street
Sixty Fifth Street
Pine Avenue West Eleventh (South) Street
Pommel Place Fortieth Street
Prospect Road Ninth Street
Tenth Street
Eleventh Street
West Thirteenth Street
Red Sunset Drive/Red Sunset Court Ninety Fifth Street
Reed Lane Seventy First Street
Silver Street Ninetieth Street
Valley Ridge Court West Briar Ridge
Valley View Drive Thirty Fourth (South) Street
Walnut Street Ninth Street
Westown Parkway Eighty Eighth Street
Westown Place West Thirty Sixth Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 315/687
Wistful Vista Drive West Eighty Second (South) Street
Woodland Avenue West Fifteenth Street
Second Street Elm Street
Locust Street
Maple Street
Walnut Street
Third Street Elm Street
Locust Street
Maple Street
Walnut Street
Sixth Street Elm Street
Locust Street
Walnut Street
Seventh Street Elm Street
Locust Street
Maple Street
Walnut Street
Eleventh Street North Maple Street
Office Park Road
Walnut Street
Twelfth Street North Prospect Road
Seventeenth Street Pleasant Street
Eighteenth Street North Pleasant Street
Twenty Sixth Street Crown Flair Drive
Thirtieth Street South Maple Street
Thirty Sixth Street Aspen Drive
Thirty Seventh Street Brookview Drive
Forty Fifth (South) Street Westwood Drive
Fiftieth (South) Place Oakwood Lane
Park Circle
Sixty Fifth Street Aspen Drive
Seventy Second Place Pommel Place
Eighty Eighth Street North Oxford Drive
Ninety Fourth Street South Bishop Drive
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0602; amd. Ord. 883, 9-5-1989; Ord. 891, 10-2-1989; Ord. 921, 8-6-1990; Ord. 938, 11-26-1990; Ord. 976, 11-1-1991; 1993 Code;
Ord. 1194, 7-29-1996; Ord. 1314, 6-29-1998; Ord. 1487, 7-8-2002; Ord. 1813, 9-8-2008; Ord. 1852, 12-28-2009; Ord. 1856, 1-25-2010; Ord. 1964, 10-29-
2012; Ord. 1969, 12-10-2012; Ord. 2040, 6-2-2014; Ord. 2073, 12-1-2014; Ord. 2094, 6-1-2015; Ord. 2164, 8-8-2016; Ord. 2214, 4-17-2017; Ord. 2308, 6-
11-2018; Ord. 2325, 8-6-2018)
6-9-3-2: FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated four-way stop intersections:
Fourth Street and Maple Street
Fourth Street and Vine Street
Sixth Street and Maple Street
Eighth Street and Vine Street
Eighth (South) Street and County Line (South) Road
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 316/687
Nineteenth Street and Vine Street
Twenty Second Street and Vine Street
Thirty Fifth Street and Western Hills Drive
Thirty Fifth (South) Street and Fuller Road
Thirty Ninth Street and Stonebridge Road
Thirty Ninth Street and Western Hills Drive
Forty Second Street and Woodland Avenue
Sixtieth (South) Street and E.P. True Parkway
Sixty Fourth (South) Street and Wistful Vista Drive
Eighty First Street and E.P. True Parkway
Eighty First Street/Eighty First Street (South) and Bridgewood Boulevard
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0603; amd. Ord. 895, 12-27-1989; Ord. 938, 11-26-1990; Ord. 975, 11-1-1991; 1993 Code; Ord. 1324, 8-24-1998; Ord. 1346, 1-11-
1999; Ord. 1347, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1348, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1503, 12-9-2002; Ord. 1538, 8-4-2003; Ord. 1666, 12-5-2005; Ord. 1742, 4-9-2007; Ord. 2065,
11-17-2014; Ord. 2295, 4-16-2018; Ord. 2309, 6-11-2018)
6-9-3-3: SCHOOL STOPS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1179, 5-20-1996)
6-9-3-4: SPECIAL YIELD REQUIRED:
Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:
Street
Vehicles
Traveling
And
Turning
Onto
Shall Yield At
Flagstone Way South Right Blue Stem Circle Blue Stem Circle
Office Plaza Drive North South East/West Office Plaza Drive South Office Plaza Drive South
Prairie View (South) Drive North Right Blue Stem Circle Blue Stem Circle
West Right Blue Stem Circle Blue Stem Circle
Village View Drive East Right Blue Stem Circle Blue Stem Circle
Fourth Street North East Grand Avenue Grand Avenue
Eighth Street North East Center Street Center Street
South West Office Park Road Office Park Road
Ninety Second Street North-south n/a n/a Westown Parkway
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0604; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1371, 6-14-1999; Ord. 1789, 12-3-2007; Ord. 1856, 1-25-2010; Ord. 2157, 7-11-2016)
6-9-4: ANGLE OR DIAGONAL PARKING:
Angle or diagonal parking shall be permitted only in the following locations:
Street From To Side
Elm Street Fifth Street Alley between Fifth Street
and Sixth Street
North
Maple Street Alley between Fifth Street
and Sixth Street
Sixth Street North
Railroad Place Fourth Street Fifth Street North
Walnut Street Alley between Fourth Street and Fifth Street Alley between Fifth Street
and Sixth Street
South
Fifth Street Locust Street Railroad Avenue West
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 317/687
Locust Street Railroad Place East
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1003; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1201, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1317, 7-13-1998)
6-9-5: PARKING PROHIBITED; ENFORCEMENT:
The Chief of Police and designees have authority to enforce all properly posted no parking zones. (1993 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2336 - NO PARKING. Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2343 - NO PARKING ZONES. Go to new ordinance.
6-9-5-1: NO PARKING ZONES:
No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control signal:
Alley 200 block of Ninth Street 200 block of Eleventh Street North
and
south
Army Post Road East corporate limits West corporate limits
Ashworth Road East corporate limits West corporate limits
Aspen Drive 230 feet east of centerline on Fiftieth Street 220 feet west of centerline on Fiftieth Street South
Beechtree Drive Sixtieth Street Sixty Eighth Street South
Bennett Drive Centerline of Nineteenth (South) Street 150 feet south of centerline of Nineteenth (South) Street
South
Bentley Drive Fiftieth (South) Street Fifty First (South) Street South
Bishop Drive Eighty Eighth Street Ninety Second Street South
Centerline of Ninety Second Street 400 feet west South
Booneville Road Glen Oaks Drive Sixtieth (South) Street
Bridgewood
Boulevard
Jordan Creek Parkway West terminus South
Bridgewood Drive Cottonwood Lane Bridgewood Boulevard West
Cottonwood Lane E.P. True Parkway West
Bridgewood (South)
Drive
Bridgewood Boulevard Wistful Vista Drive West
E.P. True Parkway Wistful Vista Drive West
Brown's Woods
Drive
First (South) Street Eleventh (South) Street South
Buffalo Road East corporate limits Nineteenth Street Place
Cascade Avenue Eighty Eighth (South) Street 250 feet west of centerline of Ninety First (South) Street South
Center Street East terminus at Walnut Creek Hoak Drive South
Center Street Place Seventeenth Street Twentieth Street
Chalk Street Eighty Eighth Street Ninety Eighth Street South
Clegg Road Fourth Street Alley between Fourth Street and Fifth Street South
169 feet east of Eighth Street Eighth Street South
Coachlight Drive Sixtieth (South) Street Sixty Eighth (South) Street South
Eighty First (South) Street Eighty Eighth (South) Street South
Eighty Fourth (South) Street Eighty Eighth (South) Street South
Cody Drive Sixty Fifth Place Western terminus of Cody Drive South
Corporate Drive Forty Second Street Fiftieth Street South
E.P. True Parkway Grand Avenue West corporate limits
Street From To Side
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 318/687
Elm Street Alley between Fourth Street and Fifth Street Fifth Street South
145 feet east of centerline of Eighth Street Eighth Street South
Frontage road (City
school campus)
1,230 feet west of centerline of Thirty Fifth (South)
Street (west side of parking lot of library)
310 feet east of centerline of Fuller Road (west property
line of West Des Moines School District)
North
and
south
Fuller Road Grand Avenue Mills Civic Parkway South
Railroad Avenue Grand Avenue
Giles Street Twenty Eighth Street 150 feet west of centerline of Twenty Eighth Street South
162 feet east of centerline of Valley West Drive Valley West Drive South
Grand Avenue East corporate limits West corporate limits
Grand Prairie
Parkway (South)
North corporate limits Mills Civic Parkway West
Harper Lane 200 feet east of centerline of Ninety Second (South)
Street
200 feet west of centerline of Ninety Second (South)
Street
South
Hawthorne Drive Fiftieth (South) Street Fifty First (South) Street South
160 feet east of centerline of Fiftieth (South) Street Fiftieth (South) Street South
Hidden Point (South)
Court
Stagecoach Drive Terminus of Hidden Point (South) Court West
Hillside Fourth Street 100 feet west of Fourth Street South
112 feet east of centerline of Fourth Street Fourth Street South
Industrial Circle Eighteenth (South) Street Nineteenth (South) Street South
Jordan Creek
Parkway
North corporate limits Bridgewood Boulevard West
Jordan Creek
(South) Parkway
Bridgewood Boulevard South terminus of Jordan Creek (South) Parkway West
Kingman Avenue Twentieth Street Twenty Second Street South
Knolls Court Fifty Second Place Pommel Place West
Pommel Place South terminal of Knolls Court East
Lake Drive Westown Parkway Jordan Creek Parkway South
Lincoln Street First (South) Street Eleventh (South) Street South
230 feet east of centerline of Thirteenth (South)
Street
Fuller Road South
Locust Street Fifth Street Sixth Street South
150 feet east of centerline of Meadow Lane 25 feet west of centerline of Meadow Lane South
Maffitt Lake (SE)
Road
East corporate limits West corporate limits South
Maple Street Eleventh Street Fourteenth Street
Alley between Fifth Street
and Sixth Street
Sixth Street South
90 feet east of centerline of Eighth Street Eighth Street South
Sixth Street 75 feet west of centerline of Sixth Street South
Mills Civic Parkway E.P. True Parkway Terminus of Mills Civic Parkway
Mountain Avenue Fourteenth Street 105 feet west of centerline of Fourteenth Street South
Office Park Road Eighth Street Fifteenth Street
Office Plaza Drive Vista Drive Jordan Creek Parkway South
Park Lane 200 feet north of the centerline of Vine Street Vine Street West
Pine Avenue East corporate limits Western terminus South
Pleasant Street Centerline of Forty Ninth Street Centerline of Fiftieth Street South
Fifty Eighth Street Fifty Ninth Street South
Street From To Side
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 319/687
Pommel Circle Sixtieth Street East end of cul-de-sac South
Prairie View Drive 77 feet north of centerline of Fifty Third Street 41 feet south of center of Fifty Third Street West
240 feet south of center of Boulder Drive South terminus Both
Prairie View (South)
Drive
Prairie View Drive South terminus of Prairie View (South) Drive West
Prospect Street Grand Avenue 48 feet west of centerline of Grand Avenue South
46 feet east of centerline of Thirteenth Street Thirteenth Street South
Raccoon River Drive
Grand Avenue West corporate limits South
Railroad Avenue East corporate limits Grand Avenue
Railroad Place Fourth Street Fifth Street South
Soteria (SE) Avenue
Willow Creek (SE) Drive County Line (SE) Road West
Southwest connector
Army Post Road Southern terminus West
Stagecoach Drive Mills Civic Parkway West terminus of Stagecoach Drive South
Stonebridge Road Stonebridge Circle Fifty First Street South
Sugar Creek Drive Eighty Eighth (South) Street 250 feet west of centerline of Ninety Second (South)
Street
South
Sugar Street 250 feet east of centerline of Ninety Second (South)
Street
Ninety Third (South) Street South
Sylvania Drive Centerline of Thirty Second Street 130 feet west of centerline of Thirty Second Street South
University Avenue East corporate limits West corporate limits
Val High Road 150 feet east of centerline of Eighth Street Eighth Street South
Village View Drive Sixtieth (South) Street Sixty Fourth (South) Street South
Vine Street Centerline of Ashworth Road 195 feet south of centerline of Ashworth Road West
East corporate limits Fourth Street
Fifth Street Twenty Seventh Street
78 feet east of centerline of Fifth Street Fifth Street North
Vista Drive Sixtieth Street Jordan Creek Parkway
272 feet east of centerline of Sixtieth Street Sixtieth Street South
Walnut Street East corporate limits Second Street
Fifty First Street Fifty Second Street South
Walnut Woods Drive
Eleventh (South) Street Forty Second (South) Street West
Waterford Drive 160 feet east of centerline of Fiftieth (South) Street Fiftieth (South) Street South
West Lakes Parkway
North corporate limits Terminus of West Lakes Parkway
Westown Parkway Nineteenth Place West terminus of Westown Parkway South
Westown Place Thirty Fifth Street Thirty Sixth Street
White Crane (SE)
Road
Soteria (SE) Avenue Eastern terminus South
Wistful Vista Drive Prairie View (South) Drive West terminus of Wistful Vista Drive South
Sixtieth (South) Street Sixty Eighth (South) Street South
Woodland Avenue Cedar Drive (west intersection) Fiftieth Street
Centerline of Twentieth Street Centerline of Twentieth Place South
Centerline of Twenty Second Street 166 feet west of centerline of Twenty Second Street South
Centerline of Twenty Sixth Street 250 feet east of centerline of Twenty Sixth Street South
Street From To Side
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 320/687
Thirty Third Street (north intersection) Forty Ninth Street
115 feet east of centerline on Thirty First Street Centerline of Thirty First Street South
Woodland Park
Drive
Centerline of Woodland Avenue 235 feet south of centerline of Woodland Avenue West
First Street North corporate limits Railroad Avenue
First (South) Street Railroad Avenue South corporate limits
Fourth Street Ashworth Road 260 feet south centerline of Grand Avenue West
Hillside Avenue (south intersection) Railroad Avenue West
260 feet south of centerline of Grand Avenue Hillside Avenue (south intersection) West1
Fifth Street Grand Avenue 90 feet south of centerline of Grand Avenue West
Vine Street Locust Street West
230 feet north of centerline of Colonial Circle 200 feet south of centerline of Colonial Circle West
Sixth Street Maple Street 170 feet south of centerline of Maple Street West
96 feet north of centerline of Ashworth Road Ashworth Road West
129 feet north of centerline of Railroad Avenue Railroad Avenue West
Eighth Street North corporate limits Railroad Avenue
Tenth Street Grand Avenue 80 feet south of centerline of Grand Avenue West
100 feet north of center of Vine Street Vine Street West
Eleventh Street Grand Avenue 67 feet south of centerline of Grand Avenue West
Office Park Road Ashworth Road
Vine Street 125 feet south of centerline of Vine Street West
75 feet north of center of Vine Street Vine Street West
Eleventh (South)
Street
Brown's Woods Drive Army Post Road West
Railroad Avenue Lincoln Street West
Twelfth Street Ashworth Road 133 feet south of centerline of Ashworth Road West
Centerline of Vine Street 106 feet south of centerline of Vine Street West
60 feet north of centerline of Vine Street Vine Street West
167 feet north of centerline of Grand Avenue Grand Avenue West
Thirteenth Street Ashworth Road Vine Street
Locust Street Walnut Street West
Vine Street 78 feet south of centerline of Vine Street West
Thirteenth (South)
Street
Railroad Avenue Lincoln Street West
Fourteenth Street Centerline of Ashworth Road 102 feet south of centerline of Ashworth Road West
Mountain Avenue Grand Avenue
280 feet north of centerline of Maple Street Railroad Avenue West
Sixteenth Street Vine Street 100 feet south of centerline of Vine Street West
Sixteenth (South)
Street
Fuller Road 1,556 feet south of centerline of Fuller Road West
Seventeenth Street Buffalo Road 182 feet south of centerline of Buffalo Road West
130 feet north of centerline of Center Place 150 feet south of centerline of Center Street West
Eighteenth Street Centerline of Buffalo Road 150 feet south of centerline of Buffalo Road West
Eighteenth (South)
Street
Fuller Road Industrial Circle West
Nineteenth Street Ashworth Road 245 feet south of centerline of Ashworth Road West
Centerline of Vine Street North curb line of Pearl Street West
Street From To Side
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 321/687
Elm Circle E.P. True Parkway West
157 feet north of centerline of Vine Street 170 feet south of centerline of Vine Street West
Nineteenth (South)
Street
Fuller Road 1,165 feet south of centerline of Fuller Road West
Grand Avenue Fuller Road
Nineteenth Street
Place
Centerline of Buffalo Road 160 feet south of centerline of Buffalo Road West
Twentieth Street Kingman Avenue Center Street Place
Twenty First Street 150 feet north of centerline of Vine Street Vine Street West
Twenty Second
Street
North corporate limits Ashworth Road
Vine Street 130 feet south of centerline of Vine Street West
Twenty Second
(South) Street
Army Post Road Maffitt Lake Road West
Twenty Third Street Ashworth Road Crown Flair Drive
Twenty Fourth Street
100 feet north of centerline of Vine Street Vine Street West
Twenty Fifth Street North corporate limits Westown Parkway
Twenty Eighth Street
Ashworth Road 140 feet south of centerline of Ashworth Road West
North corporate limits Ashworth Road
150 feet north of centerline of Giles Street Giles Street West
Twenty Ninth Street Westown Parkway To terminus at Thirtieth Street
Thirtieth Street Westown Parkway To terminus at Twenty Ninth Street
245 feet north of centerline of Vine Street Vine Street West
Thirty First Street North corporate limits Westown Parkway
Thirty Second Street
Centerline of Sylvania Drive 170 feet south of centerline of Sylvania Drive West
235 feet north of centerline of Vine Street Vine Street West
Thirty Fifth Street North corporate limits E.P. True Parkway
Thirty Fifth (South)
Street
Army Post Road Maffitt Lake Road West
Mills Civic Parkway Grand Avenue
Thirty Sixth Street North corporate limits Westown Parkway
Thirty Ninth Street Ashworth Road 113 feet south of centerline of Ashworth Road West
100 feet north of centerline of Western Hills Drive 147 feet south of centerline of Western Hills Drive West
1,010 feet north of centerline of E.P. True Parkway E.P. True Parkway West
Fortieth Street Ashworth Road 75 feet south of centerline of Ashworth Road West
Forty First (South)
Street
E.P. True Parkway Mills Civic Parkway West
Forty Second Street
North corporate limits Ashworth Road
Forty Second
(South) Street
Walnut Woods Drive Maffitt Lake Road West
Forty Fifth Street Corporate Drive Westown Parkway West
Forty Eighth Street Corporate Drive Westown Parkway West
Fiftieth Street North corporate limits 574 feet south of centerline of E.P. True Parkway
Fiftieth (South)
Street
574 feet south of centerline of E.P. True Parkway South corporate limits
Street From To Side
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 322/687
Fifty First (South)
Street
Hawthorne Drive Park Circle West
Fifty Second Place Fifty Second Court Aspen Drive West
Fifty Second Street E.P. True Parkway 125 feet south of centerline of E.P. True Parkway West
Fifty Third Place Prairie View Drive Fifty Third Street West
Fifty Sixth Street Centerline of Highland Court 85 feet south of centerline of Highland Court East
20 feet north of centerline of Northview Place 60 feet south of centerline of Northview Place East
Fifty Ninth Place Centerline of University Avenue Centerline of Sixtieth Street West
Fifty Ninth Street Center Street Pleasant Street West
Sixtieth Street North corporate limits Delavan Drive
Sixtieth (South)
Street
Delavan Drive South corporate limits
Sixty Fourth Street Wistful Vista Drive Beechtree Drive West
Sixty Fourth (South)
Street
Mills Civic Parkway Wistful Vista Drive West
Mills Civic Parkway Sixty Eighth (South) Street South
Sixty Eighth Street Cody Drive E.P. True Parkway West
Cody Drive Wistful Vista Drive West
North corporate limits Westown Parkway
Sixty Eighth (South)
Street
Wistful Vista Drive South terminal of Sixty Eighth (South) Street West
Seventy First Street North corporate limits Westown Parkway
Eighty First Street North terminus Bridgewood Boulevard West
Eighty First (South)
Street
Bridgewood Boulevard Mills Civic Parkway West
Eighty Fourth Street
E.P. True Parkway 320 feet north of Cody Drive West
Ninetieth Street Canyon Street 250 feet south of centerline of Westown Parkway West
University Avenue 350 feet south of Bishop Drive West
Ninety Second
Street
North corporate limits South terminus of Ninety Second Street West
Ninety Third (South)
Street
Stagecoach Drive 200 feet south of centerline of Stagecoach Drive West
200 feet north of centerline of Harper Lane 200 feet south of centerline of Harper Lane West
Ninety Fifth Street Chalk Street Red Sunset Drive West
One Hundredth
(South) Street
Stagecoach Drive Centerline of Wildfire (South) Avenue West
Note:
1. Except for hours of 6:00 P.M. to 2:00 A.M., Sundays and legal holidays.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1009; amd. Ord. 880, 7-24-1989; Ord. 885, 10-2-1989; Ord. 890, 12-2-1989; Ord. 949, 5-13-1991; Ord. 973, 11-1-1991; Ord. 991, 2-
18-1992; Ord. 1008, 6-12-1992; Ord. 1029, 9-14-1992; Ord. 1034, 10-26-1992; Ord. 1044, 2-1-1993; 1993 Code; Ord. 1056, 7-19-1993; Ord. 1067, 11-8-
1993; Ord. 1069, 11-8-1993; Ord. 1102, 10-24-1994; Ord. 1111, 11-7-1994; Ord. 1133, 6-5-1995; Ord. 1134, 6-5-1995; Ord. 1135, 6-5-1995; Ord. 1159, 11-
8-1995; Ord. 1171, 3-25-1996; Ord. 1182, 6-3-1996; Ord. 1192, 7-15-1996; Ord. 1204, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1206, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1218, 11-18-1996; Ord.
1263, 7-28-1997; Ord. 1333, 10-5-1998; Ord. 1381, 7-26-1999; Ord. 1385, 9-7-1999; Ord. 1391, 11-15-1999; Ord. 1403, 4-17-2000; Ord. 1404, 4-17-2000;
Ord. 1450, 10-1-2001; Ord. 1464, 12-10-2001; Ord. 1466, 12-26-2001; Ord. 1473, 4-1-2002; Ord. 1489, 9-3-2002; Ord. 1493, 10-14-2002; Ord. 1496, 11-
11-2002; Ord. 1499, 11-25-2002; Ord. 1504, 12-9-2002; Ord. 1527, 4-28-2003; Ord. 1549, 9-29-2003; Ord. 1551, 10-27-2003; Ord. 1594, 8-30-2004; Ord.
1621, 2-28-2005; Ord. 1667, 12-5-2005; Ord. 1670, 1-3-2006; Ord. 1685, 5-8-2006; Ord. 1693, 6-5-2006; Ord. 1705, 8-28-2006; Ord. 1719, 12-4-2006;
Ord. 1723, 1-15-2007; Ord. 1790, 12-3-2007; Ord. 1798, 2-11-2008; Ord. 1861, 4-5-2010; Ord. 1867, 5-17-2010; Ord. 1884, 11-1-2010; Ord. 1885, 11-1-
2010; Ord. 1915, 4-18-2011; Ord. 1919, 5-31-2011; Ord. 1952, 6-11-2012; Ord. 1966, 11-12-2012; Ord. 2005, 9-30-2013; Ord. 2051, 8-25-2014; Ord.
2095, 6-1-2015; Ord. 2131, 12-14-2015; Ord. 2158, 7-11-2016; Ord. 2161, 7-25-2016; Ord. 2173, 10-17-2016; Ord. 2200, 2-21-2017; Ord. 2215, 4-17-
2017; Ord. 2278, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2310, 6-11-2018; Ord. 2317, 7-9-2018)
6-9-5-2: NO PARKING ON NORTH SIDE OF STREETS:
Street From To Side
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 323/687
Parking of vehicles in the street on the north side of all streets in the City, running in an east to west direction is hereby prohibited, except for:
Cody Drive Sixty Eighth Street Seventy Second Place
Elm Street Fourth Street Seventh Street
Maple Street Fourth Street Sixth Street
Pleasant Street Fifty Eighth Street Fifty Ninth Street
Pommel Circle Sixtieth Street East end of cul-de-sac
Railroad Place Fourth Street Fifth Street
Vine Street Fourth Street Fifth Street
Walnut Street Fifty First Street Fifty Second Street
(1993 Code; amd. Ord. 1135, 6-5-1995; Ord. 1797, 2-11-2008; Ord. 1884, 11-1-2010; Ord. 1885, 11-1-2010)
6-9-5-3: NO PARKING ON EAST SIDE OF STREETS:
Parking of vehicles in the street on the east side of all streets in the city running in a north to south direction is hereby prohibited, except as follows:
Street From To
Knolls Court Fifty Second Place Pommel Place
Fifth Street Vine Street Railroad Place
Twenty Fifth Street Crown Flair Drive Fairlawn Drive
Fifty Second Court Fifty Second Place Aspen Drive
Fifty Third Place Prairie View Drive Fifty Third Street
Fifty Sixth Street E.P. True Parkway Beechtree Drive
Fifty Ninth Street Center Street Pleasant Street
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1001; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1066, 10-25-1993; Ord. 1202, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1218, 11-18-1996; Ord. 1868, 5-17-2010)
6-9-5-4: SPECIAL RESTRICTED NO PARKING AREAS:
No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated no parking zones during the hours specifically outlined in the
following subsections, except only when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control
signal:
A. No parking, school days (August 15 through June 15), 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., Monday through Friday:
Aspen Drive South Thirty Fifth Street Thirty Eighth Street
South Thirty Ninth Street Fortieth Street
Belle Mar Drive West Woodland Avenue Maplenol Drive
Brookview Drive South Thirty Second Street Thirty Eighth Street
Clared Circle South Marcourt Lane End of cul-de-sac
Colt Drive South Forty First Street Forty Second Street
Dakota Drive South Thirty Ninth Street Fortieth Street
Denny Court South Thirty First Street End of cul-de-sac
Francrest Drive South Thirty Ninth Street Maplenol Drive
Maplenol Circle West Maplenol Drive End of cul-de-sac
Maplenol Drive West Ashworth Road Belle Mar Drive
West Woodland Avenue Belle Mar Drive
Street From To
Street Side From To
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 324/687
Marcourt Lane West Francrest Drive Maplenol Drive
Orchard Circle South Thirty First Street End of cul-de-sac
Orchard Drive South Thirty First Street End of cul-de-sac
Pleasant Street South Thirty First Street Thirty Second Street
South 224 feet east of centerline of Thirty Third Street 248 feet west of centerline of Thirty Third Street
Pommel Place South Thirty Fifth Street Thirty Ninth Street
Prospect Avenue South Thirty Second Street Thirty Third Street
Saundra Circle South Cul-de-sac Thirty Second Street
Sylvania Drive South Twenty Eighth Street Thirty First Street
South Thirty Second Street Thirty Third Street
Vividell Circle South
Vividell Lane West Woodland Avenue Belle Mar Drive
Woodland Avenue South Twenty Eighth Street Thirty Third Street intersection (north)
Seventeenth Street West Center Place Buffalo Road
Twenty Third Street West Crown Flair Drive Prospect Avenue
Thirty First Street West Pleasant Street Woodland Avenue
Thirty Second Street West Sylvania Drive Ashworth Road
West Pleasant Street Woodland Avenue
Thirty Third Street West Pleasant Street Sylvania Drive intersection (east)
West Pleasant Street Woodland Avenue
West 100 feet south of centerline of Western Hills Drive 100 feet north of centerline of Stonebridge Drive
Thirty Fourth Street West Brookview Drive Meadow Lane
Thirty Sixth Street West Brookview Drive Aspen Drive
West Aspen Drive Pommel Place
Thirty Seventh Street West Ashworth Road End of cul-de-sac
Thirty Eighth Street West Brookview Drive Aspen Drive
West Pommel Place Western Hills Drive
Thirty Ninth Street West Ashworth Road Dakota Drive
Forty First Street West Ashworth Road Aspen Drive
Forty Second Street West Colt Drive Aspen Drive
B. No parking, school days (August 15 through June 15), 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., Monday through Saturday:
Street Side From To
Thirty Ninth Street West Woodland Avenue Ashworth Road
Fortieth Street West Ashworth Road Western Hills Drive
(Ord. 1169, 3-25-1996; amd. Ord. 1151, 9-11-1995; Ord. 1170, 3-25-1996; Ord. 1183, 6-3-1996; Ord. 1245, 5-5-1997; Ord. 1375, 6-28-1999; Ord. 1386, 9-
7-1999; Ord. 1408, 5-30-2000; Ord. 1409, 5-30-2000; Ord. 1443, 4-30-2001; Ord. 1459, 10-29-2001; Ord. 1471, 3-18-2002; Ord. 1486, 6-24-2002; Ord.
1533, 7-7-2003; Ord. 1535, 8-4-2003; Ord. 1546, 9-29-2003; Ord. 1547, 9-29-2003; Ord. 1555, 11-10-2003; Ord. 1556, 11-10-2003; Ord. 1639, 7-5-2005;
Ord. 1650, 10-10-2005; Ord. 1658, 10-24-2005; Ord. 1659, 11-7-2005; Ord. 1660, 11-7-2005; Ord. 1664, 11-21-2005; Ord. 1936, 10-31-2011; Ord. 2054,
9-8-2014; Ord. 2183, 11-14-2016; Ord. 2253, 10-2-2017)
6-9-5-5: ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a vehicle on any of the following named streets between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day:
Street Side From To
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 325/687
Street Side From To
Elm Street North Fourth Street Sixth Street
South Fourth Street Alley between Sixth Street and Seventh Street
Maple Street North Fourth Street Sixth Street
South Fourth Street Alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street
Railroad Place North Fourth Street Fifth Street
Walnut Street South Fourth Street Alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street
Fifth Street East Vine Avenue Railroad Place
West Locust Street Railroad Avenue
Sixth Street West Elm Street Maple Street
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1014; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1146, 7-17-1995; Ord. 1203, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1915, 4-18-2011; Ord. 2283, 3-5-2018)
6-9-5-6: SCHOOL LOADING ZONES:
The following designated locations are hereby reserved for the exclusive use of school buses to load and unload passengers and such designated
locations shall be appropriately marked by signs. It shall be unlawful to stop any vehicle other than a school bus in any of the locations designated in this
section between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on school days, except to avoid an accident or in obedience to the
signal of a police officer or a traffic control device.
Street Side From To
Vine Street
North 240 feet east of centerline of Sixteenth Street 60 feet west of centerline of Sixteenth Street
North 123 feet west of centerline of Fourteenth Street (south intersection)
163 feet west of Fourteenth Street (south intersection)
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1023; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1070, 11-8-1993; Ord. 1071, 11-8-1993)
6-9-6: PARKING LIMITED:
6-9-6-1: TEN MINUTE LIMITED PARKING:
Subject to all other provisions of the Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle directly in front of the Municipal Building, when signs are posted, for
more than ten (10) minutes, except on Sunday.
Additional locations:
The southerly 3 parking stalls of the City's parking lot along the rear of lot line of the north 36 feet of Lot 11, block 11 of Valley Junction, official plat of West
Des Moines, Iowa. Between the hours of 5:00 P.M. to 10:00 P.M. (1993 Code)
The 3 parking stalls directly behind and adjacent to the northwest corner of the City of West Des Moines Human Services Office, 318 5th Street, Lots 4
and 5, block 19 of the 1st Addition to Valley Junction, official plat of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1554, 11-10-2003)
6-9-6-2: TWO HOUR LIMITED PARKING:
(Rep. by Ord. 1145, 7-17-1995)
6-9-6-3: TWENTY FOUR HOUR OFF STREET PARKING LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle continuously at the following locations for more than twenty four (24) hours:
Lot A:
All of Lots 12, 13, 15 and 16, block 19, 1st Addition to Valley Junction.
Lot B:
All of Lots 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17, block 10, Valley Junction.
Parts of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11 and 12, block 10, Valley Junction which are either owned by the City or on which the City holds an easement
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 326/687
for public parking.
Lot C:
All of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 14 and 17, block 11, Valley Junction.
Parts of Lots 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 16 and 18, block 11, Valley Junction which are either owned by the City or on which the City holds an easement for
public parking.
Lot D:
All of Lots 15, 16, and 17, block 5, Valley Junction.
Parts of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 13 and 14, block 5, Valley Junction which are either owned by the City or on which the City holds an easement
for public parking.
Lot E:
All of Lots 4, 5 and 6, block 4, Valley Junction.
Parts of Lots 10 and 13, block 4, Valley Junction which are either owned by the City or on which the City holds an easement for public parking.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1020; amd. 1993 Code)
6-9-6-4: ONE HOUR LIMITED PARKING:
Subject to all other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in any block for more than one hour between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except Sundays, upon the following described streets:
Street Side From To
Maple Street North Fourth Street Alley between Fourth Street and Fifth Street
South Fourth Street Alley between Fourth Street and Fifth Street
(Ord. 1127, 4-24-1995)
6-9-6-5: FOUR HOUR LIMITED PARKING:
Subject to all other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in any block for more than four (4) hours between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except Sundays, upon the following described streets:
Street Side From To
Elm Street North Fourth Street Seventh Street
South Fourth Street Alley between Sixth Street and Seventh Street
Maple Street North Fourth Street Sixth Street
South Fourth Street Alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street
Railroad Place North Fourth Street Fifth Street
Walnut Street South Fourth Street Alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street
Fifth Street East 133 feet south of Locust Street Railroad Place
West Walnut Street Railroad Place
(Ord. 1145, 7-17-1995; amd. Ord. 1915, 4-18-2011; Ord. 2284, 3-5-2018)
6-9-6-6: THIRTY MINUTE LIMITED PARKING, POST OFFICE HOURS:
Subject to all other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in the designated area described below during normal U.S. post office
business hours for more than thirty (30) minutes:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 327/687
Street Side From To
Fifth Street West 100 feet south centerline of Locust Street 300 feet south centerline of Locust Street
(Ord. 1200, 10-21-1996)
6-9-7: TURNING RESTRICTIONS:
6-9-7-1: RIGHT TURN ON RED SIGNAL PROHIBITED:
Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal shall not proceed or make a right turn at the following locations when appropriate signs are in place:
Street Direction To Direction
I-235 West Valley West Drive North
I-235 West Fiftieth Street North
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0503; amd. Ord. 992, 2-18-1992; Ord. 1728, 2-12-2007)
6-9-7-2: LEFT TURN PROHIBITED:
Vehicle traffic proceeding as described below shall not proceed or make a left turn at the following locations when appropriate signs are in place:
Street Direction To Direction
Valley West Drive South Eastbound entrance ramp East
(Ord. 1228, 2-10-1997; amd. Ord. 1506, 1-6-2003; Ord. 1583, 6-21-2004)
6-9-7-3: U-TURN PROHIBITED:
Vehicle traffic proceeding as described below shall not proceed or make a U-turn at the following locations when appropriate signs are in place:
Street Direction Location
Ashworth Road Eastbound 690 feet east of the centerline of Jordan Creek Parkway
Jordan Creek Parkway Northbound Westown Parkway
Mills Civic Parkway Westbound Prairie View Drive
(Ord. 1526, 4-28-2003; amd. Ord. 2237, 7-24-2017)
6-9-8: ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED:
Upon the following streets and alleys vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate signs
are in place:
Street From To Direction
Alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street 110 feet north of centerline of Railroad Avenue Railroad Avenue Northbound
Alley between Sixth Street and Seventh Street 260 feet south of Maple Street centerline Railroad Avenue Northbound
Alley between Seventh Street and Eighth Street Maple Street Railroad Avenue Northbound
Railroad Place Fourth Street Fifth Street Eastbound
Wistful Vista Drive Traffic circle Traffic circle Counterclockwise
Fifth Street Vine Street Railroad Avenue Northbound
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0901; amd. Ord. 980, 11-15-1991; 1993 Code; Ord. 1405, 4-17-2000; Ord. 1630, 5-9-2005; Ord. 2048, 8-11-2014)
6-9-9: CHANNELIZED INTERSECTIONS:
Traffic at the following channelized intersections shall move in accordance with traffic control devices located at such intersections:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 328/687
Street On Curve Approaching
Westown Parkway Eastbound lane of Westown Parkway
Fourth Street Grand Avenue
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0902; amd. Ord. 1315, 7-13-1998; Ord. 1837, 8-24-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2337 - SPECIAL SPEED ZONES. Go to new ordinance.
6-9-10: SPECIAL SPEED ZONES:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the following designated streets or portions thereof, at a speed in excess of that specified herein. Special speed
zones are established as follows:
All Granular Surfaced Roadways
On all granular surfaced roadways within the City limits at 35 miles per hour unless a special speed zone is established which requires a lower speed limit.
Adams Street East corporate limits West corporate limits 35
Army Post Road East corporate limits Western terminus 45
Ashworth Road East corporate limits West corporate limits 35
Sixty Eighth Street Seventy Second Street 25/35*
Bridgewood Boulevard Jordan Creek Parkway West terminus 35
Brown's Woods Drive First (South) Street Eleventh (South) Street 35
Cascade Avenue Jordan Creek (South) Parkway Eighty First (South) Street 35
Chalk Street Eighty Eighth Street Ninety Second Street 35
E.P. True Parkway Grand Avenue Prairie View Drive 35
Jordan Creek Parkway 1,300 feet east of centerline of Eighty First Street 35
Prairie View Drive Fifty Sixth Street 25/35*
Fifty Sixth Street Sixtieth Street 35
Sixtieth Street Jordan Creek Parkway 40
Eighty First Street West corporate limits 35
1,300 feet east of centerline of Eighty First Street Eighty First Street 25/35*
Fuller Road Railroad Avenue 1,285 feet west of centerline of Thirty Fifth (South)
Street
35
1,305 feet east of centerline of Mills Civic Parkway
Mills Civic Parkway 35
1,285 feet west of centerline of Thirty Fifth (South)
Street
1,305 feet east of centerline of Mills Civic Parkway
25/35*
Grand Avenue East corporate limits Fourteenth Street 35
Vine Street 1,268 feet south of centerline of Park Drive 35
Fourteenth Street Vine Street 25/35*
Fiftieth (South) Street West corporate limits 45
1,268 feet south of Park Drive Fiftieth (South) Street 45
Grand Prairie Parkway (South) North corporate limits 1,500 feet south of north corporate limits 35
1,500 feet south of north corporate limits Mills Civic Parkway 40
Interstate 35 West interchange of Interstate 35/80/235 South corporate limits 65
Street
From
To
Speed
(mph)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 329/687
Interstate 35/80 North corporate limits West interchange of Interstate 35/80/235 65
Interstate 80 West interchange of Interstate 35/80/235 Sixtieth Street 55
Sixtieth Street West corporate limits 65
Interstate 235 East corporate limits West interchange of Interstate 35/80/235 60
Iowa Highway 5 East corporate limits Interstate 35 65
Jordan Creek Parkway North corporate limits Bridgewood Boulevard 40
Jordan Creek (South) Parkway Bridgewood Boulevard South terminus 40
Lake Drive Westown Parkway Jordan Creek Parkway 30
Lincoln Street East corporate limits 2,150 feet west of centerline of First (South) Street
25
Eleventh (South) Street 3,150 feet west of Eleventh (South) Street 25
2,150 feet west of centerline of First (South) Street
Eleventh (South) Street 35
Maffitt Lake Road Thirty Fifth (South) Street West corporate limits 45
Maffitt Lake (SE) Road Soteria (SE) Avenue Thirty Fifth (SE) Street 35
Mills Civic Parkway E.P. True Parkway Interstate 35 35
Interstate 35 West terminus 40
Office Plaza Drive Vista Drive Jordan Creek Parkway 30
Pine Avenue East corporate limits Southwest connector 35
Prairie View Drive E.P. True Parkway Ponderosa Drive 30
Prairie View Drive (South) Ponderosa Drive Blue Stem Circle 30
Raccoon River Drive Grand Avenue West terminus 45
Railroad Avenue East corporate limits Grand Avenue 35
Railroad Place Fourth Street Fifth Street 20
Soteria (SE) Avenue Willow Creek (SE) Drive County Line (SE) Road 35
Stagecoach Drive Mills Civic Parkway Jordan Creek Parkway 35
University Avenue Twenty Second Street West ramp of Interstate 35/80 35
West ramp of Interstate 35/80 West corporate limits 45
Valley West Drive (Thirty Fifth
Street)
South ramp Interstate 235 E.P. True Parkway 30
Veterans Parkway East corporate limits SE Maffitt Lake Road 40
Village View Drive Sixtieth (South) Street Sixty Fourth (South) Street 35
Vista Drive Sixtieth Street Jordan Creek Parkway 35
Walnut Woods Drive Eleventh (South) Street Forty Second (South) Street 40
West Lakes Parkway North corporate limits Terminus of West Lakes Parkway 30
Westown Parkway Twenty Second Street Forty Second Street 30
Forty Second Street West corporate limits 35
White Crane (SE) Road Soteria (SE) Avenue Eastern terminus Soteria (SE) Avenue 35
First Street Grand Avenue Railroad Avenue 40
North corporate limits Grand Avenue 35
First (South) Street Brown's Woods Drive Army Post Road 40
Railroad Avenue 1,000 feet south of Railroad Avenue 40
1,000 feet south of Railroad Avenue East corporate limits 50
Fifth Street Vine Street Railroad Avenue 20
Street
From
To
Speed
(mph)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 330/687
Eighth Street Clegg Road Ashworth Road 25/35*
North corporate limits Clegg Road 35
Eleventh (South) Street Brown's Woods Drive Army Post Road 35
Railroad Avenue Lincoln Street 25
Nineteenth Street Ashworth Road E.P. True Parkway 30
Twentieth (South) Street County Line (South) Road South corporate limits 35
Maffitt Lake Road South corporate limits 45
Twenty Second Street Ashworth Road South ramp Interstate 235 30
North corporate limits South ramp Interstate 235 35
Twenty Second (South) Street Army Post Road Maffitt Lake Road 35
Twenty Fifth Street North corporate limits Westown Parkway 30
Twenty Eighth Street North corporate limits Interstate 235 30
Thirty First Street North corporate limits Westown Parkway 30
Thirty Fifth Street Ashworth Road E.P. True Parkway 30
North corporate limits South ramp Interstate 235 35
Thirty Fifth (South) Street Army Post Road Maffitt Lake Road 35
Mills Civic Parkway Grand Avenue 35
Thirty Sixth Street North corporate limits Westown Parkway 30
Thirty Ninth Street 1,008 feet north of centerline of E.P. True Parkway
E.P. True Parkway 25
Forty Second Street North corporate limits Woodland Avenue 30
Forty Second (South) Street Army Post Road Maffitt Lake Road 35
Walnut Woods Drive Army Post Road 45
Fiftieth Street Ashworth Road 575 feet south of centerline of E.P. True Parkway 35
North corporate limits 225 feet north of centerline of Woodland Avenue 35
225 feet north of Woodland Avenue Ashworth Road 25/35*
Fiftieth (South) Street Maffitt Lake Road South corporate limits 45
575 feet south of centerline of E.P. True Parkway Grand Avenue 35
Fifty Ninth Place North corporate limits Sixtieth Street 30
Sixtieth Street North corporate limits Sixtieth (South) Street 35
Sixtieth (South) Street Sixtieth Street Grand Avenue 35
Sixty Fourth Street Mills Civic Parkway Sixty Eighth (South) Street 30
Wistful Vista Drive Beechtree Drive 35
Sixty Fourth (South) Street Mills Civic Parkway Wistful Vista Drive 35
Sixty Eighth Street E.P. True Parkway Sixty Eighth (South) Street 35
North corporate limits Westown Parkway 30
Sixty Eighth (South) Street Sixty Eighth Street South terminus 35
Seventy First Street North corporate limits Westown Parkway 30
Eighty First Street Ashworth Road Bridgewood Boulevard 35
E.P. True Parkway Beechtree Lane 25/35*
Eighty First (South) Street Bridgewood Boulevard Southern terminus 35
Eighty Eighth Street Nine Iron Drive Bridgewood Boulevard 35
Street
From
To
Speed
(mph)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 331/687
University Avenue Lake Drive 25
Eighty Eighth (South) Street Bridgewood Boulevard Raccoon River Drive 35
Ninety Second Street North corporate limits Terminus of Ninety Second Street 35
*The maximum speed limit with the variable display speed limit signs and beacons in operation shall be 25 mph. The maximum speed limit with variable
display speed limit signs and beacons not activated shall be 35 mph. The hours of operation shall be established by the City Engineer.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0410; amd. Ord. 866, 11-21-1988; Ord. 889, 11-3-1989; Ord. 968, 9-6-1991; Ord. 977, 11-1-1991; Ord. 989, 2-18-1992; Ord. 1000, 3-
30-1992; Ord. 1020, 8-17-1992; Ord. 1025, 8-31-1992; Ord. 1028, 9-14-1992; Ord. 1032, 10-12-1992; 1993 Code; Ord. 1060, 8-30-1993; Ord. 1144, 7-17-
1995; Ord. 1152, 9-11-1995; Ord. 1153, 9-25-1995; Ord. 1205, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1316, 7-13-1998; Ord. 1342, 11-16-1998; Ord. 1346, 1-11-1999; Ord.
1376, 6-28-1999; Ord. 1385, 9-7-1999; Ord. 1462, 10-29-2001; Ord. 1497, 11-11-2002; Ord. 1505, 12-9-2002; Ord. 1587, 8-2-2004; Ord. 1614, 11-8-2004;
Ord. 1640, 7-5-2005; Ord. 1668, 12-5-2005; Ord. 1691, 5-22-2006; Ord. 1714, 11-20-2006; Ord. 1717, 12-4-2006; Ord. 1769, 7-30-2007; Ord. 1775, 8-13-
2007; Ord. 1791, 12-3-2007; Ord. 1805, 6-2-2008; Ord. 1823, 12-15-2008; Ord. 1825, 1-12-2009; Ord. 1834, 8-10-2009; Ord. 1853, 12-28-2009; Ord.
1888, 11-15-2010; Ord. 1927, 7-25-2011; Ord. 1970, 12-10-2012; Ord. 2066, 11-17-2014; Ord. 2074, 12-1-2014; Ord. 2129, 11-30-2015; Ord. 2132, 12-14-
2015; Ord. 2159, 7-11-2016; Ord. 2165, 8-8-2016; Ord. 2174, 10-17-2016; Ord. 2262, 11-13-2017; Ord. 2264, 11-27-2017; Ord. 2301, 5-14-2018)
6-9-11: INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS 35, 80, AND 235:
6-9-11-1: STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING:
No person shall stop, park, or leave standing, any vehicle whether attended or unattended, within the right of way of Interstate Highways 35, 80, and 235
within the boundaries of the city except duly authorized construction, maintenance, and law enforcement vehicles and vehicles present for the purpose of
servicing or removing a disabled vehicle or aiding the injured. The foregoing shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such manner
and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. The driver of a disabled vehicle
shall, if possible, stop or push the vehicle off the paved or improved part of the main traveled part of the right of way. Whenever any peace officer finds a
vehicle standing upon such right of way in violation hereof or disabled, such officer is hereby authorized to remove such vehicle or to cause the driver or
other person in charge of such vehicle to remove same. (Ord. 2061, 11-3-2014)
6-9-11-2: PEDESTRIANS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to walk upon, along, or across any portion of the right of way of Interstate Highways 35, 80, and 235 within the
boundaries of the city, except for persons engaged in construction, maintenance, or law enforcement thereon, and except for persons present thereon in
connection with leaving or removing a disabled vehicle or giving aid to the injured. The right of way of Interstate Highways 35, 80, and 235 include the exit
and entrance ramp areas. Nothing herein set forth shall be construed as prohibiting pedestrian traffic from traversing upon sidewalks or pedestrian
overpasses or underpasses which cross the said interstate right of way. (Ord. 2061, 11-3-2014)
6-9-11-3: BICYCLES, HORSES, ETC.:
No person shall drive, ride, or lead any horse or other animal upon any portion of the Interstate Highways 35, 80, and 235 within the boundaries of the city,
nor shall any person ride or drive any bicycle or vehicle other than a motor vehicle upon said interstate highways. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed as prohibiting the otherwise lawful transportation of a horse, other animals, bicycle, or other vehicle within or upon a motor vehicle upon said
interstate highways, nor shall this section be construed as prohibiting the otherwise lawful towing of a trailer or other vehicle thereon by means of a motor
vehicle. (Ord. 2061, 11-3-2014)
6-9-12: LOAD LIMITS; TRUCK ROUTES:
6-9-12-1: LOAD AND SIZE LIMITS:
A. Load Limits: Unless otherwise provided, no person shall operate any vehicle on a public street or highway within the city of West Des Moines with a
gross weight in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds. The maximum limit allowed for vehicles weighing eighty thousand (80,000) pounds or less
shall be as set forth in Iowa Code chapter 321, "size, weight and load" or succeeding legislation.
B. Size Limits: Unless otherwise provided, no person shall operate any vehicle on a public street or highway within the city of West Des Moines in excess
of the size limits as provided in Iowa Code chapter 321, "size, weight and load" or succeeding legislation.
C. Overweight Vehicle: Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds but less than one hundred fifty six thousand
(156,000) pounds shall be designated an "overweight vehicle" and shall not operate on a public street or highway within the city of West Des Moines
without a valid annual permit issued by the Iowa department of transportation. Vehicles weighing in excess of one hundred fifty six thousand (156,000)
pounds shall be designated an "overweight vehicle" and shall not operate on a public street or highway within the city of West Des Moines without a
valid single trip permit issued by the city of West Des Moines. Operation of an overweight vehicle with a validly issued permit shall only be allowed to
operate on those public roadways within the city of West Des Moines not prohibited on the "overweight/oversize truck embargo locations" map
maintained and administered by the West Des Moines department of public works and on file in the office of the city clerk.
Street
From
To
Speed
(mph)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 332/687
D. Oversize Vehicle: Any vehicle in excess of the size limits as provided in Iowa Code chapter 321, "size, weight and load" or succeeding legislation or up
to one hundred twenty feet (120') in length or thirteen feet five inches (13'5") in width or fifteen feet five inches (15'5") in height shall be designated an
oversize vehicle and shall not operate on a public street or highway within the city of West Des Moines without a valid annual permit issued by the Iowa
department of transportation. Any vehicle in excess of one hundred twenty feet (120') in length or thirteen feet five inches (13'5") in width or fifteen feet
five inches (15'5") in height shall be designated as an oversize vehicle and shall not operate on a public street or highway within the city of West Des
Moines without a valid single trip permit issued by the city of West Des Moines. Operation of an oversize vehicle with a validly issued permit shall only
be allowed to operate on those public roadways within the city of West Des Moines not prohibited on the "oversize truck embargo locations" map
maintained and administered by the West Des Moines department of public works and on file in the office of the city clerk.
E. Permit Fee: The fee for a single trip permit to operate an overweight/oversize or overweight vehicle shall be established by resolution of the West Des
Moines city council. (Ord. 1690, 5-22-2006)
6-9-12-2: TRUCK ROUTE:
Truck route regulations are established as follows:
A. Truck Routes Designated: Every motor vehicle or combination of vehicles, including attached trailers, with an actual weight, gross vehicle weight rating,
or gross combination weight rating of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds or more, when loaded or empty, shall only travel upon the city streets
identified below, unless that vehicle is making a scheduled or definite stop within the city for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo or passengers at
a specific location within the city, is an exempt vehicle as defined in this section, or has obtained a special permit from the city as set forth in this
section. (Ord. 2105, 7-27-2015)
Army Post Road East corporate limits West corporate limits
Ashworth Road East corporate limits West corporate limits
Buffalo Road East corporate limits Nineteenth Street Place
E.P. True Parkway Grand Avenue West corporate limits
Fuller Road Railroad Avenue Grand Avenue
Grand Avenue East corporate limits West corporate limits
Grand Prairie Parkway (South) North corporate limits Mills Civic Parkway
Industrial Circle Nineteenth (South) Street Eighteenth (South) Street
Jordan Creek Parkway North corporate limits Bridgewood Boulevard
Jordan Creek (South) Parkway Bridgewood Boulevard South terminus
Lincoln Street First (South) Street Eleventh (South) Street
Thirteenth (South) Street Fuller Road
Maffitt Lake Road Southwest connector Twentieth (South) Street
Thirty Fifth (South) Street Fiftieth (South) Street
Mills Civic Parkway E.P. True Parkway Terminus at Mills Civic Parkway
Raccoon River Drive Grand Avenue West corporate limits
Railroad Avenue East corporate limits Grand Avenue
Southwest connector Army Post Road Southern terminus
Stagecoach Drive Mills Civic Parkway West terminus
University Avenue Twenty Second Street West corporate limits (south side only)
Vista Drive Sixtieth Street Jordan Creek Parkway
Westown Parkway Nineteenth Street Place West corporate limits
First Street North corporate limits Railroad Avenue
First (South) Street contiguous with Iowa Highway
28
Railroad Avenue East corporate limits
Eighth Street North corporate limits Grand Avenue
Eleventh (South) Street Railroad Avenue Lincoln Street
Thirteenth (South) Street Railroad Avenue Lincoln Street
Eighteenth (South) Street Fuller Road Industrial Circle
Nineteenth Street Ashworth Road E.P. True Parkway
Street From To
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 333/687
Nineteenth (South) Street Fuller Road Industrial Circle
Twentieth (South) Street Maffitt Lake Road South corporate limits
Twenty Second Street North corporate limits Ashworth Road
Thirty Fifth Street North corporate limits E.P. True Parkway
Thirty Fifth (South) Street Army Post Road Maffitt Lake Road
Forty Second (South) Street Walnut Woods Drive Army Post Road
Fiftieth Street North corporate limits 574 feet south of centerline of E.P. True
Parkway
Fiftieth (South) Street 574 feet south of centerline of E.P. True
Parkway
Grand Avenue
Maffitt Lake Road South corporate limits
Sixtieth Street North corporate limits Wistful Vista Drive
Sixtieth (South) Street Wistful Vista Drive Grand Avenue
Sixty Eighth Street E.P. True Parkway Wistful Vista Drive
Sixty Eighth (South) Street Wistful Vista Drive South terminus
Ninety Second Street University Avenue Ashworth Road
(Ord. 2105, 7-27-2015; amd. Ord. 2175, 10-17-2016; Ord. 2267, 12-11-2017)
B. Deliveries Off Truck Route: Any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles, including attached trailers, with an actual weight, gross vehicle weight rating,
or gross combination weight rating of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds or more, when loaded or empty, making a scheduled or definite stop within
the City for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo or passengers at a specific location within the City, shall proceed over or upon the designated
truck routes set forth in this section to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload, and return by the
most direct route to its point of departure from said designated route. The motor vehicle operator shall provide sufficient proof upon request by a police
officer to ascertain whether the driver has satisfied the requirements of this subsection.
C. Employer's Responsibility: The owner or any other person, employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
D. Exempt Vehicles: This section does not prohibit the following:
1. Emergency Vehicles: The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street within the City.
2. Public Utilities: The operation of trucks owned or operated by the City, public utilities, or any contractor hired by the City or public utility while
engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, public improvements or street utilities in the City.
3. Buses: The operation of any school bus or public bus upon any street in the City.
4. Waste Removal Vehicles: The operation of trucks upon any street in the city for purposes of removing solid waste, yard waste, or recycling from
businesses and residences located within the city.
5. Recreational Vehicles: The operation of any recreational vehicles and vans used for private, noncommercial transport and recreational activities.
6. Detoured Trucks: The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such trucks could lawfully operate upon the street
for which such detour is established.
E. Clerk Maintains Maps: The city clerk or designee shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is
permitted; the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk or designee and shall be available to the public.
F. Signs Posted: Signs shall be posted along all truck routes showing the direction thereof and to notify motor vehicle operators of the use, approach, and
entrance of such truck routes.
G. Weigh In: When the gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating of a motor vehicle cannot be immediately determined, the city's
police officers shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any motor vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over
which truck traffic is permitted, to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this section has
been violated, if the police officer has a reasonable and articulable basis to believe that the actual weight of the vehicle in question exceeds fourteen
thousand (14,000) pounds. The city shall not be required to prove the actual weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles, including attached
trailers, in question if it has been determined that the gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating exceeds fourteen thousand
(14,000) pounds.
H. Special Permit: Any driver or owner of any motor vehicle prohibited from traveling or traversing any street other than a designated truck route that
wishes to be granted a limited waiver of the requirements detailed in subsections A and B of this section, and which does not qualify as an exempt
vehicle as provided in this section, may seek to obtain a special permit from the city public works department director or designee to use a street not
Street From To
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 334/687
designated as a truck route within the city. The public works department director or designee may grant such permit imposing terms, conditions, and
restrictions as the department director or designee deems appropriate.
I. Violation And Penalty: It is unlawful for any driver or owner of a motor vehicle to violate the provisions of this section. Violations of this section are
declared to be municipal infractions and may be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Police officers shall also be authorized to issue
citation-complaints. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for each violation where a citation-complaint has been issued. Any
driver or owner of a motor vehicle traveling in violation of this section may be subject to a municipal infraction and/or a citation-complaint. (Ord. 2105, 7-
27-2015)
6-9-13: LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES:
The following loading and unloading zones are hereby designated:
Location
From
To
Maximum
Time
Hours Affected
City parking lot South 3 parking stalls along rear lot line of lot 11, block
11 Valley Junction plat
10 minutes
5:00 P.M. to
10:00 P.M.
Prospect Street
(south side)
145 feet east of centerline of Thirteenth Street 47 feet east of centerline of
Thirteenth Street
30 minutes
24 hours
(1993 Code)
6-9-14: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be punished not in excess of a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) fine or in excess of thirty (30) days' imprisonment. (Ord. 1381, 7-26-1999)
Chapter 10
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
6-10-1: SNOWMOBILE DEFINED:
For use in this chapter, the term "snowmobile" shall mean any self-propelled vehicle weighing less than one thousand (1,000) pounds which utilizes
wheels with low pressure tires and is designed to operate on land or ice or is equipped with sled type runners or skis, endless belt type tread, or any
combination thereof, and is designed for travel upon snow, land or ice, except any vehicle registered as a motor vehicle under state law. (1985 Code §2.1-
6.01)
6-10-2: PLACES OF OPERATION:
The operators of snowmobiles shall observe the following limitations as to where snowmobiles may be operated:
A. Unplowed Streets: Snowmobiles may be operated upon streets which have not been plowed during the snow season.
B. Other Streets: Snowmobiles may be operated on any street within the city for the sole and exclusive purpose of using the most direct roadway for the
ingress to and egress from the city. No snowmobile shall be driven on any roadway solely for entertainment or pleasure.
C. Parks And Other Public Land: Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any city park, playground or upon any other publicly owned property except with
the express permission of the governing body thereof.
D. Private Property: No snowmobile shall be operated upon private property without the express consent of the owner thereof.
E. Sidewalk Or Parking: No snowmobiles shall be operated upon the public sidewalk, nor shall they be operated upon that portion of the street located
between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the "parking" except for purposes of crossing the same to a public
street upon which operation is authorized by this chapter. (1985 Code §2.1-6.02)
6-10-3: MANNER OF OPERATION:
No person shall operate a snowmobile in the city except as hereafter provided:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 335/687
A. Registration: No snowmobile shall be operated in the city unless registered pursuant to state law and unless the identifying number set forth in the
registration is displayed on each side of the snowmobile.
B. Equipment: All snowmobiles shall be equipped with muffling devices, lights and other equipment required by state law or regulation.
C. Traffic Code: Snowmobile operators shall observe all state and local traffic control regulations and devices.
D. Speed: Snowmobiles shall not be operated on streets at a speed in excess of that posted nor at any time at a rate of speed greater than reasonable
and proper under all existing circumstances.
E. Careless Operation: No person shall operate a snowmobile in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of
another or to cause injury or damage thereto.
F. Intoxicated: No person shall operate a snowmobile while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics or habit forming drugs.
G. Lights: No person shall operate a snowmobile without a lighted headlight and taillight when required for safety.
H. Unattended: No operator or owner shall leave or allow a snowmobile to be or remain unattended on public property while the motor is running or with
keys in the ignition switch.
I. Flag: No snowmobile shall be operated upon a street without displaying a flag with an area of not less than six inches by nine inches (6" x 9") of
fluorescent orange color on a staff holder to put such flag at least five feet (5') above the surface of the street.
J. Direct Crossing: A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street or highway provided:
1. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing; and
2. The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveling way of the street or highway;
3. The driver yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.
K. Hours Of Operation Limited: No snowmobile shall be operated in the city between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. except for emergency situations or for loading and unloading from a transport trailer.
L. Thaw Ban: Snowmobiles shall not be operated during a publicized thaw ban in areas posted to prohibit such operation.
M. Single File: Snowmobiles shall be driven in a single file manner in the proper lane of traffic as close to the curb or edge of roadway as is possible under
existing conditions.
N. Towing: No item shall be towed by a snowmobile unless coupled to said snowmobile by a rigid towbar. (1985 Code §2.1-6.03; amd. 1993 Code)
6-10-4: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A person shall not operate an all-terrain vehicle as defined in Iowa Code section 321I.1(1) within residentially zoned areas of the city, nor shall a property
owner or tenant knowingly allow operation of such vehicles on property owned or leased by said owner or tenant in a residentially zoned area of the city,
unless at least one of the following circumstances applies:
A. The all-terrain vehicle is being used for property maintenance including mowing, spraying, hauling or similar tasks.
B. The operation of the all-terrain vehicle does not cause dirt or dust to be deposited on adjoining private properties, public land or public rights of way and
the operation of the all-terrain vehicle is not audible from adjoining private properties.
Violation of this section is a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1585, 7-19-2004)
Chapter 11
BICYCLES
6-11-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public multiuse trail, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 336/687
6-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
BICYCLE: Either of the following:
A. A device having up to four (4) wheels and having at least one saddle or seat for the use of a rider which is propelled by human power.
B. A device having up to four (4) wheels with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of one horsepower or less.
MULTIUSE TRAIL: A way or place, the use of which is controlled by the city as an owner of real property, designated by the multiuse trail maps, as
approved by resolution by the city council, and no multiuse trail shall be considered as a street or highway. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-3: ALTERATION OF SERIAL FRAME NUMBER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the manufacturer's serial frame number of any bicycle. (Ord.
1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-4: APPLICABILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS:
Every person operating a bicycle upon the city streets, highways, or park roads shall be entitled to all of the rights and be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle by the laws of this city and state, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except as to those provisions
of ordinances and statutes which by their nature have no application to the operation of a bicycle. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-5: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
A. Control With Hands On Handlebars: The operator of a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse trail shall keep the bicycle under
control at all times and at all times during operation shall have one or both hands upon the handlebars and the feet engaged with the braking device if
the braking device is designed to be actuated by the feet.
B. Emerging From Alley Or Driveway: The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and
upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
C. Carrying Packages: No person operating a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse trail shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
D. Operation On Sidewalk: Bicycles may be operated upon the public sidewalks in a careful and prudent manner except in accordance herewith:
1. Business District: No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
2. Other Locations: No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk where signs are erected to prohibit riding on the sidewalk.
3. Yield Right Of Way: Every person lawfully operating a bicycle upon a public sidewalk, shall yield the right of way when approaching a pedestrian and
shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
E. Clinging To Other Vehicles: No person riding upon any bicycle on a street, sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse trail shall attach the bicycle or
himself or herself to any moving vehicle by tow rope, hand grip or otherwise.
F. Following Emergency Vehicles: No person riding a bicycle shall follow closer than five hundred feet (500') of an emergency vehicle as defined by Iowa
Code section 321.1 which has emergency lights and/or siren activated, and shall not stop, park, or leave a bicycle within five hundred feet (500') of an
emergency vehicle stopped in response to an emergency.
G. Reckless Operation: No person shall operate a bicycle with wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
H. Parking: No person shall leave a bicycle lying on its side on any sidewalk, or shall park a bicycle on a sidewalk in any other position, so that there is not
an adequate path for pedestrian traffic. Local authorities may, by ordinance or resolution, prohibit bicycle parking in designated areas of the public
highway, provided that appropriate signs are erected.
I. Interstate: No person shall ride or drive any bicycle upon any interstate within the city.
J. Improper Riding: A person propelling a bicycle on any street, sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse trail, shall not ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle and shall not use a bicycle to carry more persons at one time than the number of persons for which
the bicycle is designed and equipped. This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade or special event authorized by the city. (Ord. 1941,
12-27-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 337/687
6-11-6: LAMPS AND REFLECTORS:
Every person operating a bicycle upon the city streets, highways, park roads, or multiuse trails shall be responsible for providing and using equipment as
provided herein:
A. Every bicycle ridden at any time from sunset to sunrise and at such other times when conditions such as fog, snow, sleet, or rain provide insufficient
lighting to render the bicycle clearly discernible to persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of three hundred feet (300') ahead shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') to the front.
B. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of three hundred feet (300') to the rear; except that
a red reflector may be used in lieu of a rear light.
C. Equivalent equipment such as headlamps and red light attachments to the arm or leg may be used in lieu of a lamp on the front and a red light on the
rear of the bicycle.
D. A peace officer riding a police bicycle is not required to use either front or rear lamps if duty so requires. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-7: STOPPING:
Every bicycle used upon the city streets, sidewalks, highways, park roads or multiuse trails shall be able to come to a complete stop within a safe distance.
(Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-8: SIRENS AND WHISTLES PROHIBITED:
A bicycle shall not be equipped with and a person shall not use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. This section shall not apply to bicycles ridden by peace
officers in the line of duty. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-9: OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS:
Every person operating a bicycle upon the city streets, highways, or park roads shall obey the directions of official traffic signals, signs and other control
devices applicable to motor vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, and shall obey direction signs relative to turns permitted. Every person
operating a bicycle on a multiuse trail shall obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians and the requirements provided for in sections 6-11-5, 6-11-6, 6-
11-7, and 6-11-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-10: BICYCLE LANES:
A. Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any person operating a bicycle upon the roadway moving in the same direction may ride
within the bicycle lane.
B. Any person operating a bicycle within a bicycle lane may move out of the lane when overtaking and passing another bicycle, vehicle, or pedestrian
within the lane or about to enter the lane if such overtaking and passing cannot be done safely within the lane.
C. No person operating a bicycle shall leave a bicycle lane until the movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving an
appropriate signal.
D. No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a bicycle lane established on a roadway except as follows:
1. To park where parking is permitted.
2. To enter or leave the roadway.
3. To prepare for a turn within a distance of two hundred feet (200') from the intersection. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-11: ANIMALS OR ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES:
A person riding an animal or driving an animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway is subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of this title which by their nature can have no application. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-12: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; BICYCLE SAFETY FLAG REQUIRED:
All-terrain vehicles shall be operated on a highway only between sunrise and sunset and only when the operation on the highway is incidental to the
vehicle's use for agricultural purposes. A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a highway shall have a valid motor vehicle license and the vehicle shall
be operated at speeds of less than thirty (30) miles per hour. When operated on a highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall have a bicycle safety flag which
extends not less than five feet (5') above the ground attached to the rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 338/687
not less than thirty (30) square inches, be Day-Glo in color, and shall be in lieu of the reflective equipment required by Iowa Code section 321.383. (Ord.
1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-13: SPECIAL PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the standard penalty provided for violations of this code, suffer his bicycle to be
impounded by the city for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a second offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense. (Ord.
1941, 12-27-2011)
Chapter 12
EQUIPMENT
6-12-1: LIGHTING EQUIPMENT:
A. Lighted Lamps Required1:
1. Every motor vehicle upon a highway within the city, at any time from sunset to sunrise, and at such other times when conditions such as fog, snow,
sleet or rain provide insufficient lighting to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred feet (500')
ahead, shall display lighted headlamps as provided in this section, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles as hereinafter stated.
2. Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the distance from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which
such lamps or devices shall be visible, said provisions shall apply during the times stated in subsection A1 of this section upon a straight level
unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different time or condition is expressly stated.
B. Headlamps On Motor Vehicles And Motorized Bicycles2:
1. Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle shall be equipped with at least two (2) headlamps with at least one on each side of
the front of the motor vehicle, which headlamps shall comply with the requirements and limitations set forth in this section.
2. Every motorcycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two (2) headlamps which shall comply with the
requirements and limitations of this chapter.
C. Rearlamps3: Every motor vehicle and every vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with a lighted rearlamp,
exhibiting a red light plainly visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear.
D. Illuminating Plates4: Either the rearlamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration
plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet (50') to the rear. When the rear registration plate is illuminated by an electric lamp other
than the required rearlamp, the two (2) lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control switch at all times when headlamps are lighted.
E. Lamps On Parked Vehicles; Exception5:
1. Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, outside of a business district whether attended or
unattended during the times mentioned in subsection A of this section, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a
white or amber light on the roadway side visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle and a red light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear, except that local authorities may provide by ordinance or resolution that no lights need be displayed
upon any such vehicle when stopped or parked in accordance with the local parking regulations upon a highway where there is sufficient light to
reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred feet (500') upon such highway. Lamps on parked or stopped vehicles, except trucks,
trailers or semitrailers, as required to be exhibited by this section, but not including running lights, shall not be lighted at any time when the vehicle is
being driven on the highway unless the headlamps are also lighted. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
2. Subsection E1 of this section shall not apply when an accident extinguishes said light and renders a vehicle incapable of use, and when the person
in control of the vehicle erects, at the earliest opportunity after the accident, such proper light at or near the vehicle as will give warning of the
presence of said vehicle.
F. Flashing Lights6:
1. Definitions: As used in this subsection, unless the context otherwise requires:
ADVANCED EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE PROVIDER: As defined in Iowa Code.
BASIC EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE PROVIDER: As defined in Iowa Code.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: A paid or volunteer fire protection service provided by the city.
HAZARD LIGHTS: Lights which flash yellow or amber to the front of the vehicle and red to the rear of the vehicle simultaneously.
MEMBER: A person who is a member in good standing of the fire department or a person who is an advanced or basic emergency medical care
provider employed by an ambulance, rescue or first responder service.
2. Prohibited Lights: A flashing light on or in a motor vehicle is prohibited except as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 339/687
a. On an authorized emergency vehicle.
b. On a vehicle as a means of indicating a right or left turn, a mechanical failure, or an emergency stop or intent to stop.
c. On a motor vehicle used by a rural mail carrier when stopping or stopped on or near a highway in the process of delivering mail, if such a light is
any shade of color between white and amber and if it is mounted as a dome light on the roof of the vehicle.
d. On a vehicle being operated under an excess size permit issued under Iowa Code.
e. A flashing blue light on a vehicle upon which a blue light is permitted pursuant to subsection F3 of this section.
f. A flashing white light, used in conjunction with hazard lights, is permitted on a vehicle pursuant to subsection F7 of this section.
g. A white flashing strobe light mounted on a school bus as permitted under Iowa Code.
3. Blue Light: A blue light shall not be used on any vehicle except:
a. A vehicle owned or exclusively operated by the fire department; or
b. A vehicle authorized by the state when:
(1) The vehicle is owned by a member of the fire department.
(2) The request for authorization is made by the member on forms provided by the state.
(3) Necessity for authorization is demonstrated in the request.
(4) The chief of the fire department certifies that the member is in good standing with the fire department and recommends that the authorization
be granted.
4. Expiration Of Authority: The authorization shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on December 31 five (5) years from the year in which it was
issued, or when the vehicle is no longer owned by the member, or when the member has ceased to be an active member of the fire department or of
an ambulance, rescue or first responder service or when the member has used the blue or white light beyond the scope of its authorized use.
5. When Used: The certificate of authorization shall be carried at all times with the certificate of registration of the authorized vehicle and the operator of
the vehicle shall not illuminate the blue or white light except in any of the following circumstances:
a. When the member is en route to the scene of a fire or is responding to an emergency in the line of duty requiring the services of the member.
b. When the authorized vehicle is transporting a person requiring emergency care.
c. When the authorized vehicle is at the scene of an emergency.
d. The use of the blue or white light in or on a private motor vehicle shall be for identification purposes only.
6. Amber Flashing Light: A farm tractor, farm tractor with towed equipment, self-propelled implement of husbandry, road construction or maintenance
vehicle, road grader or other vehicle principally designed for use off the highway which, when operated on a primary or secondary road, is operated
at a speed of twenty five (25) miles an hour or less, shall be equipped with and display an amber flashing light visible from the rear at any time from
sunset to sunrise. All vehicles specified in this subsection which are manufactured for sale or sold in this state shall be equipped with an amber
flashing light. The type, number, dimensions and method of mounting of the lights shall be determined by the state. The state, when approving the
light, shall be guided as far as practicable by the standards of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
7. Flashing White Light: Except as provided in Iowa Code and subsection F2c of this section, a flashing white light shall only be used on a vehicle when
used in conjunction with hazard lights and a flashing white light shall not be used on a vehicle except in any of the following circumstances:
a. On a vehicle owned or exclusively operated by an ambulance, rescue or first responder service.
b. On a vehicle authorized by the state when all of the following apply:
(1) The vehicle is owned by a member of an ambulance, rescue or first responder service.
(2) The request for authorization is made by the member on forms provided by the Iowa department of public health.
(3) Necessity for authorization is demonstrated in the request.
(4) The head of an ambulance, rescue or first responder service certifies that the member is in good standing and recommends that the
authorization is granted.
c. On an authorized emergency vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-12-2: HORNS, SIRENS AND BELLS:
A. Horns And Warning Devices7: Every motor vehicle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of
emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'), but no horn or other warning device shall emit
an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give
audible warning with the horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a highway.
B. Sirens And Bells Prohibited8: No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise
permitted in this subsection. It is permissible but not required that any commercial vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so
arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or
bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') and of a type approved by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 340/687
state, but such siren shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual
or suspected violator of the law, in which said latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound said siren when necessary to warn pedestrians and
other drivers of the approach thereof. (1993 Code)
6-12-3: MUFFLERS, PREVENTION OF NOISE9:
Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. (1993 Code)
6-12-4: MIRRORS10:
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least two hundred feet
(200') to the rear of such vehicle. Any motor vehicle so loaded, or towing another vehicle in such manner, as to obstruct the view in a rearview mirror
located in the driver's compartment shall be equipped with a side mirror so located that the view to the rear will not be obstructed; however, when such
vehicle is not loaded or towing another vehicle the side mirrors shall be retracted or removed. All van or van type motor vehicles shall be equipped with
outside mirrors of unit magnification, each with not less than 19.5 square inches of reflective surface, installed with stable supports on both sides of the
vehicle, located so as to provide the driver a view to the rear along both sides of the vehicle, and adjustable in both the horizontal and vertical directions to
view the rearward scene. (1993 Code)
6-12-5: WINDSHIELD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Windshields And Windows:
1. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle equipped with a windshield, side wings, or side or rear windows which do not permit clear vision.
2. A person shall not operate on the highway a motor vehicle equipped with a front windshield, a side window to the immediate right or left of the driver,
or a side wing forward of and to the left or right of the driver which is excessively dark or reflective so that it is difficult for a person outside the motor
vehicle to see into the motor vehicle through the windshield, window, or side wing. The minimum measurable standard of transparency established
by the state of Iowa and the Iowa department of transportation is adopted by this reference and shall apply to violations of this subsection.
B. Windshield Wipers: The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the
windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. (Ord. 1753, 5-21-2007)
6-12-6: ENGINE AND COMPRESSION BRAKES:
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use or operate within the city any engine brake, compression brake, dynamic braking device, or
mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of the vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise from
such vehicle, unless such use is necessary to avoid imminent danger. Violations of this section shall be considered to be equipment violations.
Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the application of this section.
B. The use of an engine brake, compression brake, dynamic braking device, or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration
of any motor vehicle in such a manner so as to be audible at a distance of three hundred feet (300') from the vehicle shall constitute evidence of a
prima facie violation of this section. (Ord. 1782, 10-22-2007)
Chapter 13
PANHANDLING
6-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of West Des Moines and the general public by restricting
panhandling in inherently dangerous and high traffic areas where motor vehicles typically prepare to accelerate or decelerate within a relatively short
distance with or without the direction of traffic control devices as drivers exit or enter the interstate highway interchanges in West Des Moines. This chapter
also regulates the manner of panhandling to promote the health, safety, and welfare of all involved persons. (Ord. 2062, 11-3-2014)
6-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
EXIT AND ENTRANCE POINTS TO INTERSTATE HIGHWAY INTERCHANGES IN WEST DES MOINES: For purposes of this chapter, exit and entrance
points to interstate highway interchanges in West Des Moines means: a) the entire paved surfaces for the interstate highway exit and entrance ramps, plus
an additional sixteen feet (16') in any direction from the edge of such paved surfaces; and b) the entire paved surfaces of adjacent public streets or
highways within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the interstate highway exit and entrance ramps, plus an additional twelve feet (12') in any direction from the
edge of such paved surfaces. Exit and entrance points to interstate highway interchanges in West Des Moines include any and all locations within the city
where there is an exit or entrance to Interstate Highway 35, 80, or 235.
PANHANDLING: For purposes of this chapter, panhandling is any request made in person, with or without initiating or attempting to initiate personal
contact, seeking an immediate donation of money or other thing of value, including, but not limited to, food, beverage, or employment. Panhandling
includes the purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the
purchase is in substance a donation. Panhandling may include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that a person is seeking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 341/687
donations. Panhandling is allowed within the city as long as said individual refrains from doing so within the areas set forth in the definition of "exit and
entrance points to interstate highway interchanges in West Des Moines" provided herein, and as long as said individual does not violate any other
provisions contained within this chapter. (Ord. 2062, 11-3-2014)
6-13-3: PLACE OF PANHANDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any individual to panhandle when the person solicited is in any of the following places within the city:
A. In any vehicle on the traveled portions of the "exit and entrance points to interstate highway interchanges in West Des Moines" area, as defined in this
chapter.
B. On public property in the "exit and entrance points to interstate highway interchanges in West Des Moines" area, as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 2062,
11-3-2014)
6-13-4: MANNER OF PANHANDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any individual to panhandle in any of the following manners at any location within the city:
A. By standing, sitting, or otherwise being present in or on the travel portion of a public or private street or highway; the entire width of the roadway shall be
deemed the travel portion of a public or private street or highway, including the edge or curb of the roadway and any median or island that separates
directional traffic on the street or highway;
B. By using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal;
C. While under the influence of alcohol or any illegal narcotic or controlled substance; or
D. By any statement, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be offensive or
a threat. (Ord. 2062, 11-3-2014)
6-13-5: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged with a simple misdemeanor criminal offense, pursuant to section 5-2-1 of
this code, or receive a municipal infraction civil citation, pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The city shall have the discretion to enforce this chapter
either as a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction. (Ord. 2062, 11-3-2014)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2339 - SMALL CELL BROADBAND INFRASTRUCTURE. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS
7-1-1: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS RESTRICTED:
A. Use Of Streets For Business Purposes: It shall be unlawful to park, store or place any vehicle, equipment, machinery, or any goods, wares, and
merchandise of any kind upon any public street or right-of-way, or Municipally owned property for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering
same for sale, except in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code and other applicable City regulations or policies as approved by the City
Council.
B. Obstruction Of Public Ways: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed over, into or upon any of the public streets and sidewalks
of the City any obstruction whatsoever, including any building, fence, structure, projection, awnings, canopies, marquees, signs, flags, lumber, timber,
brick, stone or other material, coal, wood, goods, wares or merchandise, decorations, planters, rubbish, debris, produce or other commodities, except
for the purpose of immediate transfer, or for immediate construction or lawful repair of such street or sidewalk, or except as may be excepted in this
chapter or in other ordinances of the City.
C. Certain Commercial Use Of Public Sidewalks: Due to minimal setbacks of buildings from the public right-of-way and in an effort to encourage a lively,
viable, pedestrian oriented street culture in the Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District, the use of the public sidewalks may be allowed in
accordance with the following provisions:
1. Storing Of Goods On Sidewalks Restricted: Nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting the long term or permanent storing of goods on
sidewalks. No person shall leave upon any sidewalk in front of his/her place of business any goods, wares or merchandise which may be left there
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 342/687
by the person delivering or receiving the goods to or from the owner or occupant of any place of business for a longer period than six (6) hours.
2. Display Of Goods: Any proprietor of an establishment in the Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District may apply for an annual sidewalk
encroachment permit to use a maximum of three feet (3') in width of the public sidewalk next to and in front of his/her building or business for the
purpose of displaying samples of goods kept by him/her for sale, provided that the sidewalk is not less than eight feet (8') in width and a minimum of
five feet (5') of unobstructed public sidewalk is maintained for the free passage of pedestrian traffic on the public sidewalk. The City may, in granting
a permit under this subsection, require more than five feet (5') of unobstructed public sidewalk clearance if, in the reasonable determination of the
City, such additional clearance is necessary in the interests of public safety, health, or welfare, in light of the particular circumstances involved with
the specific permit application, or the physical characteristics of the public sidewalk area in question.
Nothing shall be used or set out on the sidewalk for such purposes which might endanger or injure the person or the apparel of anyone who might
pass on the sidewalk.
An annual permit and fee for encroachment into the public-right-of-way for the use of the public sidewalk area shall be submitted on a form furnished
by the City and obtained through the City Clerk's Office. Proof of insurance, along with a hold harmless and indemnification agreement to the benefit
of the City on a form furnished by the City in accordance with subsection C6 of this section and obtained through the City Clerk's Office, shall also be
provided in conjunction with the permit application.
3. Tables, Chairs, Planters, Benches And Other Privately Owned Street Furniture: With the exception of a sidewalk cafe as described elsewhere in this
section, any proprietor of an establishment in the Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District may use that portion of the public sidewalk that is
immediately adjacent to and that lies in between the front or side property lines, extended to the curb, for the purpose of providing tables, chairs
and/or benches, for the convenience of and use by such proprietor's customers and others, with the following restrictions:
a. Such proprietor and the proprietor's employees shall not at any time serve any food or beverages to customers or others seated at such tables,
chairs and/or benches, unless approved and in compliance with the provisions for sidewalk cafes as outlined in this section or elsewhere within
this Code.
b. A minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed public sidewalk must be provided adjacent to any tables, chairs, benches, merchandise and any street
furniture (public and private), in order to allow for the free passage of pedestrian traffic on the public sidewalk. The City may, in granting a permit
under this subsection, require more than five feet (5') of unobstructed public sidewalk clearance if, in the reasonable determination of the City, such
additional clearance is necessary in the interests of public safety, health, or welfare, in light of the particular circumstances involved with the permit
application, and/or due to the physical characteristics of the public sidewalk area in question.
c. No tables, chairs and/or benches shall be attached in any manner to the public sidewalk or to any public fixtures located on the public sidewalk
without specific written approval of the City. The proprietor shall be responsible for any damage to the public sidewalk or to any public fixtures
located on the public sidewalk by said tables, chairs and/or benches.
d. Each night within thirty (30) minutes of the closing time of the establishment, all tables, chairs and/or benches shall either:
(1) Be removed from the public right-of-way restoring the sidewalk to its normal condition as a pedestrian walkway; or
(2) Be moved to a location on the public sidewalk that directly abuts the front of the building in which such establishment is located, stacked neatly,
and secured by means of chains and locks or some other secure means approved by the City so that they cannot be used to cause damage to
persons or property during the hours such establishment is closed. Tables, chairs, display structure, merchandise and/or benches shall not be
attached in any manner to the public sidewalk or to any public fixtures located on the public sidewalk. If the proprietor selects this alternative, the
proprietor shall be responsible for insuring that such items do not cause damage to persons or property during the hours such establishment is
closed.
e. Before a proprietor of such an establishment may lawfully place any tables, chairs, benches or any other street furniture on the public sidewalk in
front of such establishment, the proprietor shall file an application for a sidewalk encroachment permit and pay a non-refundable permit fee in such
amount as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Each year, the proprietor of the establishment shall be required
to file proof of insurance in accordance with subsection C6 of this section; however, a new permit fee and a new hold harmless and indemnification
agreement shall not be required unless there is a change of ownership.
4. Sign Encroachments: Due to the minimal building setbacks of the buildings in the Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District, the following
exceptions shall apply:
a. For any permanent sign or structure that projects over the public right-of-way from the building, the property owner shall provide proof of
insurance, along with a hold harmless and indemnification agreement to the benefit of the City on a form furnished by the City in accordance with
subsection C6 of this section and obtained through the City Clerk's Office.
b. Temporary movable signs on public sidewalks. Any proprietor of an establishment in the VJHB District, may file an annual sidewalk encroachment
permit application and fee, to use a portion of the public sidewalk that is immediately adjacent to and that lies in between the side property lines, as
extended to the curb, for the purpose of displaying one (1) temporary movable sign for said establishment.
c. The portion of the public sidewalk that may be used by the proprietor of such establishment for the display of such signs is the area of the public
sidewalk that extends from the storefront of the establishment to the adjacent street curb and between the side property lines of the building in
which the establishment is located, as such side property lines are extended to the adjacent street curb.
d. All such temporary signs must at all times maintain at least a two foot (2') setback from the outside edge of said sign to the inside edge of the
street curb.
e. In order to allow for the free passage of pedestrian traffic on the public sidewalk, a minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed public sidewalk must
be provided at all times. That unobstructed area may be between the storefront and the edge of the sign closest to the storefront, or the sign and
any other obstruction to the free movement on the public sidewalk, including but not limited to, private street furniture, public street furniture, light
pole, tree wells, and car overhang over the sidewalk. However, the City may, in granting a permit under this subsection, require more than five feet
(5') of unobstructed public sidewalk clearance if, in the reasonable determination of the City, such additional clearance is necessary in the interest
of public safety, health, or welfare, in light of the particular circumstances involved with the physical characteristics of the public sidewalk area in
question.
f. No such temporary movable sign shall be attached in any manner to the public sidewalk, or to any public fixtures within the right-of-way, including
but not limited to, light poles, traffic signs, tables, chairs, or other fixtures, or on top of any temporary elevations such as fill material or snowbanks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 343/687
g. No such temporary sign shall exceed two and one-half feet (21/2') in width and three and one-half feet (31/2') in height as measured to the outer
frame measurements and height measured from the natural grade of the sidewalk surface adjacent to such establishment.
h. No more than one (1) such sign may be placed in front of any single store-front.
i. All such signs must be well-maintained and kept in good repair.
j. By the closing time of such establishment each day, such sign shall be moved inside the building and restore the public sidewalk to its normal
condition as a pedestrian walkway.
k. Before the proprietor of any establishment may lawfully place any temporary sign on the public sidewalk, the proprietor shall file an application for
a sidewalk encroachment permit with the City Clerk, on a form furnished by the City, and shall pay a non-refundable annual permit fee in such
amount as shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. The application and an accompanying diagram or site plan shall show:
(1) The dimensions, including the length and width, of the public sidewalk that is adjacent to said establishment, as described in this subsection;
(2) The five foot (5') area of unobstructed public sidewalk which is to be reserved for pedestrian use;
(3) The two foot (2') setback from the outside edge of said sign to the inside edge of the street curb;
(4) The approximate location where the sign shall be positioned;
(5) The size of said sign to its outer dimensions; and
(6) Other information and documentation as the City may require in order to demonstrate that the proprietor complies with the requirements of this
subsection.
The application shall also be accompanied by:
(1) Written consent to the filing of said application from the owner of the building in which such establishment is located, if the applicant is not the
owner of the building; and
(2) Proof of insurance, along with a hold harmless and indemnification agreement to the benefit of the City on a form furnished by the City in
accordance with subsection C6 of this section and obtained through the City Clerk's Office.
The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the application, to the Development Review Team (DRT) for evaluation of compliance with the
requirements of this subsection, and compliance with the interest of public safety, health, or welfare. The Development Review Team may
approve, approve with conditions, deny the application or refer to the City Council for further direction.
l. Any permit issued under this subsection shall be applicable for the calendar year in which it is issued, and may be renewed with the filing of an
application by the proprietor for following years with the payment of the required annual fee and proof of insurance. The application for renewal
shall state whether or not any of the contents of the original application are being revised, failing which, the contents of the application for renewal
shall be deemed to be the same as contained in the original application.
m. In the event that ownership of the establishment holding the permit is sold, conveyed or transferred to another person or entity, the permit shall
not thereby be transferred. The new owner shall be required to file a new and separate application for such a permit, as provided in this
subsection.
n. The City reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued under this subsection if necessary to maintain adequate pedestrian flow, to permit
adequate access to building entrances, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the surrounding area, or for
any other valid public purpose. The City reserves the right to either deny an application which otherwise meets the requirements of this subsection,
or to require the proprietor to meet additional terms and conditions for issuance of a permit beyond the requirements set forth in this subsection if,
in the reasonable determination of the City, either granting the permit, or granting it without such additional terms and conditions, would not
adequately protect and preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City or its residents, or would not adequately protect or preserve the
peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort or convenience of the City's residents.
o. The City may order the immediate removal of any such temporary sign in the event such sign is causing a hazard to public safety, health or
welfare; is interfering with the unobstructed passage of pedestrians; is unsightly in appearance; is interfering with the removal of ice and snow from
the public sidewalks; or for any other reason affecting public safety, health or welfare.
p. A permit issued under this subsection may be revoked by the City if the proprietor holding the permit does any of the following:
(1) Fails to move the sign inside the building by closing time of the establishment as required in this subsection;
(2) Fails to pay the fee for issuance or renewal of the permit;
(3) Fails to operate in strict compliance with all of the provisions of this subsection, of all other City ordinances, and of State law;
(4) Creates or allows to exist a safety hazard in connection with the placement of the sign; or
(5) Fails to maintain insurance coverage as required.
q. Upon the occurrence of any of the events described, the City Clerk shall give the proprietor of such establishment written notice of revocation of
the permit, and the permit holder shall thereupon immediately cease to place the sign on the public sidewalk adjacent to the proprietor's
establishment. The permit holder may file an appeal to the revocation of the permit within ten (10) days of the date of notice of revocation in
accordance with subsection C7 of this section.
ILLUSTRATION 7-1-1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 344/687
5. Sidewalk Cafes On The Public Right-Of-Way: In the Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District, the use of the public sidewalks for sidewalk
cafes and outdoor service areas may be allowed in accordance with the following provisions:
a. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in matters related and regulated in this subsection, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words and phrases used in this chapter are defined by
State law, such definitions shall apply to the use of such words and phrases in this chapter and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so
adopted that are further defined or are reiterated in this section shall have the meanings set out in this section.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume including alcoholic liquor, wine, and
beer.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any public street, alley, roadway, sidewalk, walkway, right-of-way or public way designed for vehicular, bicycle, or
pedestrian travel that is dedicated to public use and/or publicly owned.
PUBLIC SIDEWALK: The improved portion of the public right-of-way lying between the traveled portion of the street and the private property line or
building line, which is paved and intended primarily for pedestrian use.
RESTAURANT: A business that serves food to customers and has more than fifty percent (50%) of their sales from food.
SIDEWALK CAFE: An outdoor area meeting the requirements of this subsection that is temporarily situated on a public sidewalk and which is
adjacent to and contiguous with any side of a building in which a restaurant is located, and in which food and beverages are served for
consumption by persons sitting or standing at tables within such area. Sidewalk cafes must be situated on the same level as the adjacent sidewalk
lying outside the sidewalk cafe.
SIDEWALK CAFE ELEMENTS: All tables, chairs, fencing, planters and plants, and any other privately owned property comprising the sidewalk
cafe, which are approved for use in a sidewalk cafe by this section or in a sidewalk cafe permit.
SIDEWALK CAFE PERMIT: A sidewalk encroachment permit issued by the City for operation of a sidewalk cafe within the public right-of-way or on
public property which meets all of the requirements of this division and all other applicable ordinances of the City and all State laws.
b. Use of public sidewalks for sidewalk cafes shall only be permitted in those areas of the City which meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Are within the public right-of-way of the City;
(2) Are within those areas of the City that are zoned Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District;
(3) Are within an area of the public sidewalk where the public right-of-way directly abuts a private building line; and
(4) Meet all of the other requirements of this section.
c. The sidewalk cafe area must be adjacent to and contiguous with one (1) side of the building it serves, and in which a restaurant is located and
operating, and may not extend beyond the property lines of the parcel containing the building when extended perpendicularly to the adjacent
street. No sidewalk cafe shall be located within ten feet (10') of any public alley.
d. A minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed public sidewalk must be provided between the boundary of the sidewalk cafe area and any other
obstruction to the free movement on the public sidewalk, including, but not limited to, private street furniture, public street furniture, light pole, tree
wells, and car overhang over the sidewalk. The City may, in granting the sidewalk cafe permit, require more than five feet (5') of unobstructed
public sidewalk clearance for any sidewalk cafe if, in the reasonable determination of the City, such additional clearance is necessary in the
interests of public safety, health, or welfare, in light of the particular circumstances involved with the specific cafe permit application, the
configuration of the proposed sidewalk cafe, and/or due to the physical characteristics of the public sidewalk, parking areas and streets adjacent
thereto.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 345/687
e. A minimum two feet (2') of unobstructed clearance must be maintained on each side of any doorway leading from the building onto the public
sidewalk.
f. Sidewalk cafes that serve alcoholic beverages must be in compliance with all other local, County and State requirements for outdoor alcohol sales.
g. The boundary of the sidewalk cafe area shall be delineated by, and the sidewalk cafe elements divided from, that portion of the adjacent public
sidewalk lying outside of the sidewalk cafe area, by a barrier at least three feet (3') in height, consisting of:
(1) Fencing or other rigid structure; or
(2) Ropes of a design or type approved by the City.
h. Each night within thirty (30) minutes of the closing time of the sidewalk cafe, all sidewalk cafe elements must either:
(1) Be removed from the public right-of-way restoring the sidewalk cafe to its normal condition as a pedestrian walkway; or
(2) Be moved to a location on the public sidewalk that directly abuts the front of the building in which such establishment is located, stacked neatly,
and secured by means of chains and locks or some other secure means approved by the City so that they cannot be used to cause damage to
persons or property during the hours such establishment is closed. If the proprietor attaches any sidewalk cafe elements to approved public
property, the proprietor shall be responsible for restoring such property to its original condition or condition of suitable agreement with the City,
such as use of seasonal plugs, whenever the elements are removed. Upon completion of the repairs, the City will inspect for compliance.
The proprietor may select either of the above alternatives, provided that, if the proprietor selects the alternative which leaves the sidewalk cafe
elements on the public sidewalk, the proprietor shall be responsible for insuring that such sidewalk cafe elements do not cause damage to
persons or property and do not inhibit or obstruct regular sidewalk maintenance including, but not limited to ordinary repair and snow removal.
i. Except as expressly provided for in subsection C5h(2) of this section, no property shall be stored on the public right-of-way.
j. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C5h(2) of this section, if the proprietor elects to close the sidewalk cafe during certain times of the
year, as provided for in this section, then all sidewalk cafe elements shall be removed from the public right-of-way.
k. Sidewalk cafe elements may consist of tables, chairs, fencing, planters and plants, and umbrellas and awnings and similar fixtures if approved by
the City as part of the sidewalk encroachment permit process.
l. A sidewalk cafe may not use or incorporate into the sidewalk cafe area any public fixtures such as benches, seats, planters, trash receptacles,
lampposts, or any other publicly owned structures located in any part of the public right-of-way, unless approved by the City as a part of the
sidewalk encroachment permit process.
m. Except as otherwise expressly provided in subsection C5h(2) of this section, stacking of chairs or tables in the sidewalk cafe area is not permitted
at any time.
n. Outdoor heaters are allowed if approved by the City as part of the sidewalk encroachment permit process and is in compliance with Fire Code as
adopted by the City.
o. No advertising or signage shall be permitted in a sidewalk cafe area except that the name of the establishment may be printed on chairs, tables,
umbrellas or other amenities for identification purposes as approved by the City.
p. In the event of any damage to the surface of any part of the public sidewalk lying within or immediately adjacent to the confines or boundaries of
the sidewalk cafe area, the proprietor of the sidewalk cafe shall repair the damage to the specifications of the Director of Public Services. If the
proprietor fails or refuses to repair such damage within thirty (30) days after written notice from the City to do so, the Director of Public Services, or
their designee, shall cause the work to be done and billed to the proprietor and/or property owner. All costs, including administration and City staff
time shall be computed and will be invoiced as part of the project. Any failure of the proprietor and/or property owner to reimburse the City for the
cost of such work shall be grounds for termination of the proprietor's sidewalk cafe permit. Any such costs shall be deducted from the proprietor's
cash deposit provided to the City, and the balance may be collected from the proprietor and/or property owner by legal proceedings instituted by
the City, including placing a lien on the property.
q. The sidewalk cafe shall be equipped with an inside or outside water source to clean the sidewalk cafe area, as provided within this section.
r. The City reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued for sidewalk cafes if necessary to maintain adequate pedestrian flow, to permit
adequate access to building entrances, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the surrounding area, or for
any other valid public purpose.
s. Operation of sidewalk cafes shall comply with all of the following provisions:
(1) If alcoholic beverages are served in the sidewalk cafe area, the proprietor of the sidewalk cafe shall obtain the necessary liquor control license
or wine or beer permit which covers the sidewalk cafe area from the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division, and shall otherwise comply with all
requirements of the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, chapter 123, Code of Iowa, and title 3, chapter 2, "Beer And Liquor Control", of this
Code.
(2) A sidewalk cafe serving alcoholic beverages shall have an employee who shall monitor the sidewalk cafe area at all times during the hours
alcoholic beverages are served or are available for service and/or consumption to prevent underage consumption and any alcoholic beverages
from leaving the approved service area.
(3) The sidewalk cafe, as a part of a restaurant, must be licensed by the State and/or County Health Departments and comply with all
requirements of laws applicable to establishments that sell food to the public for consumption on the premises.
(4) Sidewalk cafes may be installed no earlier than April 1, and all components thereof shall be removed from the public passageway on or before
November 15 of each year.
(5) The hours of operation for sidewalk cafes shall be from no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to no later than ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.,
Sunday through Thursday, and no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday and
Saturdays. The sidewalk cafe area shall be restored to its normal condition as a pedestrian walkway at all other times, including during certain
times of the year that the sidewalk cafe is not open for business, as provided within this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 346/687
(6) Food and beverages, other than alcoholic beverages, must be available for service to and consumption by patrons in a sidewalk cafe during all
hours of operation.
(7) The sidewalk cafe area shall be served by waiters or restaurant staff at all times during all hours of operation.
(8) Sidewalk cafes shall not play or allow the playing of music, whether live or recorded, that involves the use of sound amplification equipment,
and no speakers, microphones, or other sound amplification equipment shall be used in conjunction with televisions, radios or other audio or
video devices in a sidewalk cafe area at any time during the hours of operation, unless a sound permit has been issued for the use.
(9) Lighting of the sidewalk cafe area shall not unreasonably reflect onto adjacent properties or cause disturbance to residential quarters located
above or nearby.
(10) The proprietor of the sidewalk cafe area and the restaurant with which it is affiliated, or its employees or agents, shall clean the sidewalk cafe
area on a daily basis, including cleaning of tables, chairs, trash receptacles, and the surface of the sidewalk within the sidewalk cafe area. All
garbage, trash, litter and other debris shall be picked up and collected whenever the trash receptacles appear to be full. All garbage, trash and
other debris located on the public sidewalk adjacent to the sidewalk cafe area, and extending for ten feet (10') on any side thereof, shall be the
responsibility of the sidewalk cafe proprietor, or its employees or agents, to pick up and dispose of properly, during all hours of operation and
before closing. No trash receptacles or sidewalk cafe elements shall be hosed down in the sidewalk cafe area or in any part of the public
sidewalk at any time. The sidewalk within or adjacent to the sidewalk cafe shall not be hosed down during cold weather, when ice could form
thereon.
(11) The City may require additional restroom capacity in the restaurant located within the building adjacent to the sidewalk cafe area in order to
comply with the requirements of City or State Building, Fire or other applicable codes.
(12) Occupancy limits, including the occupancy load of the sidewalk cafe area, shall comply with all applicable City or State Building, Fire, or other
applicable codes.
(13) No entrances or exits to the adjacent building shall be blocked or obstructed by any sidewalk cafe elements or other materials or property.
(14) Entrance into or exit out of a sidewalk cafe area shall be through the adjacent building, unless such entrance or exit to the sidewalk cafe is
located at and adjacent to the main entrance to the building in which the restaurant is located. The Fire Marshal shall have authority to
determine emergency exiting needs and pathways.
(15) The operation of each sidewalk cafe shall be in entire conformity with all applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations, including all
applicable Fire Code requirements.
(16) Patrons of the sidewalk cafe shall wear shirts and shoes at all times, or they shall not be admitted to or served in the sidewalk cafe area.
(17) The sidewalk cafe and the adjacent restaurant shall be subject to inspection by any City employee or agent of the City at any time during
business hours.
t. Before a restaurant may lawfully establish a sidewalk cafe on the public sidewalk adjacent to its building, or a business may utilize a portion of the
public sidewalk adjacent to its building, the proprietor of the restaurant or business shall file an application with the City Clerk for a sidewalk
encroachment permit on a form furnished by the Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by each of the following items:
(1) Proof of insurance, along with a hold harmless and indemnification agreement to the benefit of the City on a form furnished by the City in
accordance with subsection C6 of this section and obtained through the City Clerk's Office.
(2) Written consent from the owner of the building in which the restaurant or business is located, if the applicant is not the owner of the building.
(3) A significantly detailed, accurate site plan showing:
(A) The dimensions of the proposed use area, including the length and width of the area of the public sidewalk that is adjacent to said
establishment;
(B) The five foot (5') area of unobstructed public sidewalk which is to be reserved for pedestrian use;
(C) The location where the tables, chairs, benches, planters, fencing, roping or barrier will be placed during the hours of operation, and the size
and number of other sidewalk furniture associated with the use;
(D) The location where the tables, chairs and/or benches shall be stored during the hours when such establishment is closed;
(E) In the event the establishment elects not to move said items inside the establishment each night, the means by which such tables, chairs,
benches, etc., shall be secured;
(F) The distance between the boundaries of the use area and all adjacent street curbs, buildings, property lines, street intersections, alleys, and
fixtures in the public sidewalk;
(G) An illustration of compliance with the provision of a minimum two foot (2') clearance between any such tables, chairs and/or benches and
each side of any doorway leading from the establishment onto the public sidewalk; and
(H) Such other information and documentation as the City may require in order to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
subsection and show that the proposed sidewalk encroachment shall not unreasonably interfere with:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 347/687
(i) Adequate pedestrian flow;
(ii) Access to building entrances;
(iii) Pedestrian and traffic safety; and
(iv) The aesthetic quality of the surrounding area.
(4) A non-refundable annual permit fee in such amount as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(5) A cash deposit in the sum acceptable to the City to cover any damage to the public sidewalk included within the use area. If the fencing or
other items are permanently affixed to public property, the property owner will furnish the City with a cost estimate during the application process
that provides a detailed summary of the repairs and costs to repair the items in public property. The cash deposit shall be refunded by the City
Clerk upon expiration, non-renewal or other termination of the sidewalk encroachment permit, if there is no damage to the public sidewalk after
removal of the use from the public right-of-way.
(6) If applicable, proof that the applicant holds a valid liquor control license or wine or beer permit for the restaurant which is adjacent to the
proposed sidewalk cafe and proof that the applicant has applied to the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division for approval to extend the "premises"
covered by such license or permit to include the entire sidewalk cafe area, if the applicant is applying for authority to serve alcoholic beverages
in the sidewalk cafe area. No sidewalk encroachment permit for a cafe to serve alcohol shall be issued by the City Clerk until such liquor control
license or wine or beer permit has actually been issued as provided in this subsection.
(7) A listing of the effective dates during the calendar year that the proprietor intends to use the area of the sidewalk or operate the sidewalk cafe.
Sidewalk cafes may be installed no earlier than April 1, and all components thereof shall be removed from the public passageway on or before
November 15 of each year. The proprietor shall specify the beginning and ending dates during the calendar year that the sidewalk cafe will be
open. The proprietor may revise the effective dates of operation by written notice to the City no more often than once during each permit year;
however, may revise such effective dates at the time the permit is renewed each year.
u. The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the proprietor's application, together with all other information and documentation required in connection
with said application, to the Special Event Permit Review Team for evaluation of compliance with the requirements of this subsection, the interests
of public safety, health or welfare, and preservation of the aesthetics of the area.
(1) If the application is approved as being in compliance with the requirements of this subsection, the City Clerk shall issue a permit.
(2) If the application is not approved by the City Clerk, he/she shall notify the applicant of the reason or reasons the application was not approved.
The applicant shall be afforded a period of thirty (30) days from the date of the City Clerk's notice, within which to revise the application in an
effort to comply with the requirements of this subsection and to correct the reasons for denial thereof. The applicant may appeal a denial of the
permit within ten (10) days of the date of notice of denial in accordance with subsection C7 of this section.
(3) Any permit issued under this subsection shall be issued for a period to the end of the calendar year, and may be renewed upon the filing of an
application for renewal by the proprietor for following years upon payment of the required annual fee, submittal of proof of insurance, and
indemnification and hold harmless agreements in accordance with subsection C6 of this section. The application for renewal shall state whether
or not any of the contents of the original application is being revised, or modified from the previous year. Failure to identify any changes from the
previous/original application as part of a renewal application shall be deemed as a continuation of the same as that contained in the prior/original
application.
(4) In the event that ownership of the establishment holding the permit is sold, conveyed or transferred to another person or entity, the permit shall
not thereby be transferred. The new owner shall be required to file a new and separate application for such a permit, as provided in this
subsection.
(5) The City reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued under this subsection if necessary to maintain adequate pedestrian flow, to
permit adequate access to building entrances, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the surrounding
area, or for any other valid public purpose.
(6) The City reserves the right to either deny an application which otherwise meets the requirements of this subsection, or to require the proprietor
to meet additional terms and conditions for issuance of a permit beyond the requirements set forth in this subsection if, in the reasonable
determination of the City, either granting the permit, or granting it without such additional terms and conditions, would not adequately protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City or of its residents, or would not adequately protect or preserve the peace, safety, health,
welfare, comfort or convenience of the City's residents.
(7) The City may order the immediate removal of any or all of a permit holder's tables, chairs, benches and any other private street furniture in the
event such items are causing a hazard to public safety, health or welfare, are interfering with the unobstructed passage of pedestrians, are
unsightly in appearance or unsanitary in condition, are interfering with removal of ice and snow from the public sidewalks, will interfere with
scheduled repairs or maintenance of public infrastructure within the area, or for any other reason affecting public safety, health or welfare.
(8) A permit issued under this subsection shall be revoked if the proprietor holding the permit does any of the following:
(A) Fails to maintain a valid license or permit, if applicable, covering the establishment adjacent to where the tables, chairs, benches and other
street furniture are located;
(B) Fails to either move the tables, chairs and/or benches inside the establishment, or fails to secure them, as required above in this subsection;
(C) Fails to pay the fee for issuance or renewal of the permit;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 348/687
(D) Fails to operate in strict compliance with all of the provisions of this subsection, of all other City ordinances, and of State law; or
(E) In connection with the placement or use of the tables, chairs, benches or other street furniture creates or allows to exist a safety hazard,
health hazard, or public nuisance under State law or City ordinance.
(F) Upon the occurrence of any of the events described above, the City Clerk shall give the proprietor of such establishment written notice of
revocation of the permit, and the permit holder shall thereupon immediately cease activities on the public sidewalk adjacent to the proprietor's
establishment. The permit holder may file an appeal to the revocation of the permit within ten (10) days of the date of notice of revocation in
accordance with subsection C7 of this section.
(G) A permit shall not be issued under this subsection unless the applicant, at the time of filing of an application for issuance or renewal of a
permit, furnishes to the City with proof of insurance, along with a hold harmless and indemnification agreement to the benefit of the City on a
form furnished by the City in accordance with subsection C6 of this section and obtained through the City Clerk's Office.
6. Insurance, Hold Harmless And Indemnification Requirements: No application for a sidewalk encroachment permit shall be issued under this
subsection unless the applicant, at the time of filing an application for issuance or renewal of a permit, furnishes proof of insurance, and executes a
hold harmless and indemnification agreement in favor of the City that meets the following requirements:
a. Commercial general liability insurance coverage in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate for bodily injury and property damage, with the City to be named as an additional insured on the policy, with an
endorsement to be issued as part of the insurance policy, evidencing compliance with this requirement; and
b. A hold harmless and indemnification agreement on a form furnished by the City, under which the proprietor agrees to indemnify and hold the City
harmless from any liability for damages arising out of the placement of items in the public right-of-way.
7. Revocation And Appeal Process: Upon the occurrence of any of the events described above that cause the revocation of a sidewalk encroachment
permit, the City Clerk shall give the proprietor of such establishment written notice of the revocation of the sidewalk encroachment permit, and the
permit holder shall thereupon immediately cease to place any signs, displays or merchandise, tables, chairs, benches and other street furniture on
the public sidewalk adjacent to the proprietor's establishment. The permit holder may appeal the revocation of the permit by written notice of appeal
mailed or delivered to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of notice of revocation. An appeal of a revocation shall be heard by the Municipal
Code Hearing Officer.
8. Right To Terminate: The City shall retain the right to terminate any permit granted under this subsection upon seven (7) days' written notice, and may
require the removal of all signs, displays and merchandise, tables, chairs, benches, and other street furniture from the public sidewalk adjacent to an
establishment, if the City Council, after due consideration, determines that there is a reasonable and substantial need for the use of the public rightof-
way being occupied by such items for a valid public purpose. The determination of the City Council shall be final, and there shall be no right of
appeal from such decision.
9. Violation: Any person violating any provision of this section upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2210,
4-17-2017)
7-1-2: DEFINITION:
For use in this chapter the following term is defined:
SIDEWALK: All permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban areas. (1985 Code §8-2.01)
7-1-3: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Injuring Public Road: It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any public road in any manner. (1985 Code §8-1.0102)
B. Defacing: It shall be unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or writing on any sidewalk. (1985 Code §8-2.11)
C. Debris On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash,
garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle. (1985 Code §8-2.12)
D. Fires On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk. (1985 Code §8-2.09)
E. Fuel On Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful for a person to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk. (1985 Code §8-2.10)
F. Removal Of Warning Devices: It shall be unlawful for a person to wilfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any highway, street, alley,
avenue or bridge any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the
purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said highway, street, alley, avenue or bridge without the consent of the person in
control thereof. (1985 Code §8-1.0101)
G. Placing Debris On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash,
garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle. (1985 Code §8-1.0103)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 349/687
H. Playing In Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets or highways, except in the areas blocked off by the Chief
of Police for such purposes. (1985 Code §8-1.0104)
I. Traveling On Barricaded Street Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or public way temporarily
closed by barricades, lights, signs or flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer or member of the Fire
Department. (1985 Code §8-1.0105)
J. Washing Vehicle On Streets Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk or street for the purpose of washing or cleaning
any automobile, truck equipment or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This shall not be construed to prevent
any person from washing or cleaning his own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street. (1985 Code §8-1.0108)
K. Burning Prohibited: No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced
street. (1985 Code §8-1.0109)
7-1-4: ENCROACHMENTS:
A. Encroaching Steps: It shall be unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without
permission by resolution of the council. (1985 Code §8-2.07)
B. Openings And Enclosures: It shall be unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs And Railings: Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the council.
2. Openings: Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the
public.
3. Protect Openings: Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or within six feet (6') of any sidewalk. (1985 Code §8-2.08)
C. Dumping Of Snow: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, push or place or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private
property, sidewalks or driveways onto the traveled way of streets so as to obstruct gutters or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or to
create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to
move the snow onto the streets temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner or his agent, and only after first
making arrangements for such prompt removal at the owner's cost of the accumulation within a reasonably short time. (1985 Code §8-1.0110)
7-1-5: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE ACCUMULATIONS:
A. Intent Of Section: Snow and ice accumulation on sidewalks pose a threat to pedestrian traffic. It is the city's policy to place the responsibility for removal
of snow and/or ice from sidewalks on the abutting property owner and in instances where the abutting property owner fails to properly remove and/or
treat snow and/or ice accumulations, the city may take appropriate action at the owner's expense to secure the removal of snow and ice. It is the intent
of this section to provide for certain procedures relative to the removal of snow and ice from sidewalks and for certain penalties for failure to act
hereunder. (Ord. 1026, 8-31-1992)
B. Enforcement Of Section: The director of public works, the director of community development, or the police chief or their designated representative shall
enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1605, 10-25-2004)
C. Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall have the meanings given in
this subsection:
ACCUMULATIONS: Snow and/or ice deposits.
PERSON: Includes an individual or group or association of individuals; a firm or any member thereof; a corporation, or any executive officer, manager,
person in charge or employee thereof; and the use of a pronoun specifying one gender shall include both genders.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record titleholder or the contract purchaser of record, if any.
SNOW SEASON: The period beginning October 1 and ending May 1.
D. Obligation Of Property Owner:
1. The owner of any property abutting a public sidewalk with the exception of bike paths and combination bike paths/pedestrian walkways maintained
by the city, shall remove snow, ice and accumulations from sidewalks within a reasonable time but in no case more than twenty four (24) hours
following the cessation of the weather or other event by which they were deposited, provided, however, that in extraordinary weather circumstances
the director of public works or their designated representative may extend the period of time provided herein. In those situations the director of public
works or their designated representative will deliver to representative news media a statement indicating the amount of additional time the property
owners shall have to remove accumulations from sidewalks. (Ord. 1026, 8-31-1992)
2. If accumulations are not removed as required above, including any extraordinary weather circumstances, or required treatment pursuant to
subsection E of this section is not completed and maintained, the director of community development or their designated representative may give to
the property owner a notice entitled "Official Notice - Failure to Remove Snow or Ice Accumulation on Sidewalk and/or Failure to Treat Snow and/or
Ice Accumulation on Sidewalk" on a form approved by the city setting forth the location/address of the violation and to whom the notice is directed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 350/687
with the explanation of the violations. This notice shall be personally served upon an adult person residing at the address of the party being served. If
personal service is not possible, written notice of such violation shall be affixed to the front door of the premises and the garage if they are
accessible. The owner of the property in violation shall have twenty four (24) hours from the time of service or posting of this notice in which to take
corrective action and bring the sidewalk into compliance with this code. The existence of extraordinary weather conditions as determined by the
director of public works, pursuant to this subsection, shall extend the twenty four (24) hours until such extraordinary weather conditions have
dissipated. Upon notification by the public works director of the end of extraordinary weather conditions the twenty four (24) hours will start. If the
accumulations are not timely removed or the required treatment pursuant to subsection E of this section is not completed and maintained, the
director of community development or their designated representative is authorized to issue a civil citation pursuant to section 364.22 of the code of
Iowa. (Ord. 1605, 10-25-2004)
3. A second subsequent violation of this section shall not be considered a repeat offense pursuant to section 364.22(1), code of Iowa, for the purposes
of increasing the civil penalty provided in said code section, unless the prior or preceding offenses have occurred within the current snow season.
E. Treatment Of Unremovable Snow And/Or Ice: When accumulations have formed upon any sidewalk so that it cannot be reasonably removed, the
abutting property owner shall within the period set forth in subsection D of this section keep and maintain such accumulations sprinkled with fine
cinders, sand or deicing chemicals in such manner as to provide traction and prevent the sidewalk from being dangerous to persons using the same.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to be a substitute for the removal of accumulations, as required in subsection D of this section. This
subsection shall only apply when accumulations cannot be reasonably removed, however, all accumulations shall be removed as soon as practical.
F. Unlawful Deposit Of Snow And/Or Ice: No person shall remove, or cause to be removed, accumulations from private premises and deposit the same or
cause the same to be deposited upon any public street, avenue, alley, public square or traveled area within the city.
The director of community development or their designated representative is authorized to issue a civil citation pursuant to section 364.22(4) of the
code of Iowa to anyone violating this subsection indicating said person is in violation of this subsection and is subject to the penalties provided for in
section 364.22, the code of Iowa.
G. Alternative Relief: In any proceeding seeking a civil penalty for violations of the provisions of this section the director of community development or their
designated representative may seek additional alternative relief appropriate to the condition to be abated, including relief set forth in subsection H of
this section.
H. Removal By The City Of West Des Moines: Whenever accumulations have remained on any sidewalk in violation of subsection D of this section and/or
whenever unremovable accumulations have formed on any sidewalk in violation of subsection E of this section, and the time for the property owner to
take action after service of the notice has expired, the city may cause such accumulations to be removed and/or treatment of unremovable
accumulations either by use of city personnel and equipment or by contracting for the work to be undertaken.
I. Right To Assess: When the city removes or causes to be removed accumulations and/or treats accumulations, the city may assess the actual cost plus
any administrative costs of removing such accumulations from the abutting property owners' sidewalks and/or treatment of unremovable
accumulations, in addition to taking any other action provided for in this section. (Ord. 1026, 8-31-1992)
J. Assessment Of Costs: The actual cost, including any administrative costs, as determined by the finance director or their designated representative in
removing accumulations or treatment of accumulations from sidewalks abutting private property, shall be paid by the owner of the property abutting
thereon.
The property owner shall be sent a bill by the finance director for said costs to permit voluntary payment thereof by the property owner. The bill shall be
sent within thirty (30) days of the city's action as set forth in subsection H of this section. Failure to pay said bill within thirty (30) days after mailing of bill
will cause the action to appear on a schedule of assessments to be forwarded to the city clerk for consideration by the city council. (Ord. 1026, 8-31-
1992; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
K. Schedule Of Assessments: Whenever any accumulations have been removed from any sidewalks or treatment of the sidewalks for unremovable
accumulations by the city as provided in this section, and the right to assess provided for in subsection I of this section is invoked, the city shall cause
to be prepared a schedule giving the name of the owner, so far as known, a description of the property, the date when the work was done, and the
amount charged to each lot, and for what work and materials the charge was made. As soon thereafter as practicable the schedule shall be filed with
the city clerk for consideration by the city council.
L. Adoption Of Assessment Schedule: The city council shall consider all objections to the schedule of assessments for the removal of accumulations from
sidewalks, duly filed, and shall by resolution approve a schedule of assessments.
M. Certification For Collection: Upon adoption and approval by the city council of the schedule of assessments and certification by the city clerk, the city
clerk shall file said assessments with the county treasurer for collection in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 1026, 8-31-1992)
7-1-6: MAINTENANCE OF PARKING TERRACE AND SIDEWALKS:
A. Responsibility Of Property Owner: It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and property lines
and inside the curb lines upon the public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood
on the publicly owned property or right of way.
B. Failure To Maintain Parking On Terrace: If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the above section within a reasonable
time, the city may perform the required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 351/687
C. Responsibility For Sidewalk Maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owners to maintain in a safe and hazard free condition
any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or travelled portion of the public street.
D. Failure To Maintain Sidewalks; Personal Injuries: If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required and action is brought against
the city for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the city may notify in writing any person by whose negligence it claims the
injury was caused. The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the action is
pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the city believes the person notified is liable to it for any judgment
rendered against the city, and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the city against
any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the city to the plaintiff in the first
named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The city may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount of the
judgment together with all the expenses incurred by the city in the suit.
E. City May Order Repairs: If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the city may serve notice on such owner, by certified
mail to the abutting property owner as shown by the records maintained by the county, requiring the abutting property owner to repair, replace or
reconstruct the affected sidewalks within a reasonable time. If the certified mailing has been unclaimed or returned to the city, the city may also attempt
to serve the notice by regular mail to the abutting property owner. Unclaimed or returned mail shall not constitute improper notification if the city has
mailed the notice(s) to the address of record for the abutting property owner. If such action is not completed by the abutting property owner within the
time stated in the certified mail notice, the city may perform the required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax, following the assessment procedures detailed in section 7-1-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2086, 3-9-2015)
7-1-7: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
Sidewalks shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with the following:
A. Permit Required: No sidewalk shall be constructed or reconstructed without first receiving a permit therefor from the city.
B. Permit Fee: The permit fee for sidewalk construction shall be as follows:
New construction $10.00
Reconstruction (less than
20 linear feet)
3.00
C. Standard Specifications: All sidewalk construction or reconstruction shall conform with standard specifications for such work on file in the office of the
city engineer.
D. Location: Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge nearest the abutting private property) one foot (1') from the property line
unless the council shall establish a different distance due to circumstances. (1985 Code §8-2.05)
7-1-8: STREET NAMES:
A. Naming New Streets: New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the West Des Moines roadway naming and addressing guidelines. The
naming of private roadways shall follow the same naming and addressing guidelines as public roadways.
B. Changing Name Of Street: The council may, by ordinance, change the name of a street. (Ord. 1999, 8-19-2013)
C. Recording Street Names: Following adoption of an ordinance naming or changing the name of a street, the mayor and clerk shall certify and file a copy
thereof with the county recorder and county auditor. (1985 Code §8-1.0403)
D. Official Street Name Map: Streets within the city are named as shown on the official street name map which is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this section. The official street name map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, and bearing the seal of the city
under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 7-1-8D of the City Code of West Des Moines, Iowa".
Said map shall remain in the custody of the city engineer. (1985 Code §8-1.0404)
E. Revision Of Street Name Map: If in accordance with the provisions of this section, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered
on the official street name map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the council with an entry on the official street name map as to
ordinance number and date of adoption. (1985 Code §8-1.0405)
7-1-9: STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES:
A. Established Grades: The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks which have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified
and established as official grades. (1985 Code §8-1.0601)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 352/687
B. Record Maintained: The clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request. (1985
Code §8-1.0602)
7-1-10: VACATION AND DISPOSAL:
A. Power To Vacate: When, in the judgment of the council, it would be in the best interest of the city to vacate a street or alley or portion thereof, they may
do so in accordance with the provisions of this section. (1985 Code §8-1.0501)
B. Plan Commission: Any proposal to vacate a street or alley shall be referred by the council to the planning commission for its study and recommendation
prior to further consideration by the council. The planning commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the council within
thirty (30) days of the date the proposed vacation was referred to it. (1985 Code §8-1.0502)
C. Notice Of Vacation Hearing: The council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing at which time the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
(1985 Code §8-1.0503)
D. Findings Required: No street or alley, or portion thereof, shall be vacated unless the council finds that:
1. Public Use: The street or alley proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefor, its maintenance at public expense is no
longer justified.
2. Abutting Property: The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property. (1985
Code §8-1.0504)
E. Disposal Of Streets Or Alleys: When in the judgment of the council it would be in the best interest of the city to dispose of a vacated street or alley, or
portion thereof, they may do so by resolution following notice and hearing. (1985 Code §8-1.0505)
F. Disposal By Gift Limited: The city may not dispose of a vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, by gift except to a governmental body for a public
purpose. (1985 Code §8-1.0506)
7-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction as established in subsection 1-4-1B of this code. (Ord. 954,
7-8-1991)
ARTICLE A. CONTROLLED-ACCESS FACILITIES
7-1A-1: ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED:
There are hereby fixed and established controlled-access facilities within the City described as follows:
A. Project No. I-80-3(18)125: On the primary road system extension improvement, Project No. I-80-3(18)125, within the City of West Des Moines,
described as follows:
On I-80, beginning at the west City limits easterly to Station 1358+60 including all ramps (A,B,C,D) at the I-35, 80, 235 interchange, regulating access
to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. I-80-3(18)125, on file
in the office of the Clerk.
B. Project No. I-235-2(17)73: On the primary road system extension improvement, Project No. I-235-2(17)73, within the City of West Des Moines,
described as follows:
On I-235, beginning at Station 1358+60 east to Station 147432.53 = Station 181+59.13 to Station 198+72.99 at the east City limits. Also on 35th Street
from Station 6391+50 (a point 757' south of I-235) north to Station 6406+50 (a point 743' north of I-235). Also on 22nd Street from Station 8435+50 (a
point 659' south from I-235) north to Station 8448+50 (a point 641' north from the I-235). Also all ramps on 35th, 22nd Street and Rancho Grade
Boulevard Interchanges within the corporation limits, regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the
plans for such improvement identified as Project No. I-235-2(17)73, on file in the office of the Clerk. (1985 Code §8-1.0204; 1993 Code)
7-1A-2: DEFINITION:
The term "controlled-access facility" shall mean a highway or street especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants
of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that
their property abuts upon such controlled-access facility or for any other reason. (1985 Code §8-1.0202)
7-1A-3: RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 353/687
No person shall have any right of ingress or egress to, from or across any controlled-access facility except at such points as may be permitted by the Iowa
Department of Transportation and designated by ordinance. (1985 Code §8-1.0203)
7-1A-4: UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED-ACCESS FACILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Cross Dividing Line: Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central dividing section or other separation or dividing line on such controlled-access
facilities.
B. Turns: Make a left turn or a semi-circular or U-turn except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or line.
C. Use of Lanes: Drive any vehicle except in the proper land provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing
curb, separation section or line.
D. Enter Facility: Drive any vehicle into the controlled-access facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the
dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which separates such service road from the controlled-access facility property. (1985 Code §8-1.0205)
7-1A-5: PARKING:
Parking of any nature shall be prohibited on any portion of I-80 and I-235 and all ramps from Station 1293+13.6 (west city limits) east to Station 198+72.99
(east city limits), also on 22nd Street from Station 8433+00 (a point 909' southerly from the I-235) northerly to Station 8451+75 (a point 966' northerly from
the I-235), also on 35th Street from Station 6388+50 (a point 1057' southerly from the I-235) northerly to Station 6405+50 (a point 643' northerly from the I-
235). (1985 Code §8-1.0206)
7-1A-6: EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER:
This Article shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and for the promotion of the general welfare. (1985 Code §8-1.0201)
ARTICLE B. STREET EXCAVATIONS
7-1B-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the STREET EXCAVATION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA. (1985 Code §8-
1.0701)
7-1B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not consistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The City of West Des Moines or its duly appointed representative.
EXCAVATION: Any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface
of a public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the
public place. Excavation shall include any tunneling under the surface of any public place in the City.
FACILITY: Pipe, sewer, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor,
cable, junction box, transformer or any other material, structure, or object of any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be
lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under or over any public place.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, including private or public utility.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square, plaza or any other similar public property owned or controlled by the City and
dedicated to public use.
SUBSTRUCTURE: Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable or wire, or any other similar structure located below the surface of any
public place.
UTILITY: A private company and/or corporation or Municipal department engaged in providing a particular service to the general public. (1985 Code §8-
1.0702)
7-1B-3: PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 354/687
A. Excavation Permit:1 No person shall make any excavation or fill any excavation in any public place without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City
except as otherwise provided in this Article. No permit to make an excavation in a public place shall be issued except as provided in this Article. No
permit is required to place utility poles. (1985 Code §8-1.0703)
B. Tunneling Permit: No person shall tunnel under the surface of any public place in the City for the purpose of making any gas, sewer, water, steam
heating pipe or underground electric connection without first obtaining a permit required herein. (1985 Code §8-1.0704)
C. Application: No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application (on a form provided by the City) for the issuance of an excavation permit
is submitted to the City. The written application shall state the name and address and principal place of business of the applicant, the authority of
applicant to occupy the public place for which the permit is sought, appropriate indemnifying bond or insurance certificate, the location and dimensions
of the installation or removal and the approximate size of the excavation to be made, the purpose of the facility and the approximate time which will be
required to complete such work, including backfilling said excavation and removing all obstructions, material and debris. An extension of time may be
granted by the City for good and sufficient reasons. The application when approved and signed by the City, shall constitute a permit. (1985 Code §8-
1.0705)
7-1B-4: EXCAVATION PERMIT FEES:
A permit fee shall be charged by the City for the issuance of an excavation permit. The fee for each permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). Permit fee is
not required by utilities holding a franchise from the City. (1985 Code §8-1.0706)
7-1B-5: BOND, CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE AND DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Indemnifying Bond or Certificate of Insurance: Before an excavation permit, as herein provided, is issued the applicant shall deposit with the City an
indemnifying bond payable to the city or present and file a certificate of insurance in favor of the city in such amounts of not less than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one person killed or injured, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for total liability for all persons killed
or injured in one accident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any property damage, incurred as a result of an accident.
The indemnifying bond or certificate of insurance shall indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, employees, and its political subdivisions
against any and all damages, claims, losses, demands, judgments, actions or causes of actions, including payments made under the workmen's
compensation laws and any costs including attorney fees arising out of or in connection with the excavation or tunneling and other works covered by
the excavation permit or for which the city, city council, or any city officer or employee including its political subdivision may be held liable by reason of
any accident or injury to any person, including permittee, its agents or employees, or any property through the fault of the permittee, its agents or
employees, either in not properly guarding the excavation or the maintenance of the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence,
wrongful acts, faults or misconduct on the part of the permittee, its agents or employees.
Permittee agrees to indemnify the city or its political subdivision for any damages or injuries to any of the improvements, structures or facilities of the
city or its political subdivision in the performance of any excavation work or resulting from such excavation.
The city, its agents, employees or political subdivisions shall not be liable nor share any cost incident to the removal, reconstruction or relocation of any
structure or facility of any permittee or any person or of any utility placed in any public place, public right of way or public easement, in the exercise of
any power the city or political subdivision now has or which may hereafter be authorized or permitted by the laws of the state. In addition, if the city or
its political subdivision elects to alter or change the grade of any street, alley, or public way, permittee shall, upon reasonable notice by the city or its
political subdivision, remove, or relocate any substructure or facility at permittee's expense.
An annual indemnifying bond or certificate of insurance for a specified period given under this provision shall remain in full force and effect during the
period specified in the application to cover all excavation work in public places.
Utilities operated under the supervision of the utilities division, Iowa department of commerce, utilities holding a franchise from the city, city
departments and other governmental agencies, may be relieved of the obligation of submitting an indemnifying bond or certificate of insurance in favor
of the city or its political subdivision, but the relief granted hereunder, shall not be construed to exonerate said utilities from the indemnification and
liabilities set forth under this section. (1985 Code §8-1.0707; amd. 1993 Code)
B. Cash Deposits: Cash deposits shall be required as follows: (1985 Code §8-1.0708; amd. 1993 Code)
1. Special Deposits: The application for an excavation permit to perform excavation work under this article shall be accompanied with a two hundred
dollar ($200.00) cash deposit made to the city for deposit with the finance director. The city may use any or all of such deposit to pay the cost of any
work the city performs to restore or maintain the public place as herein provided in the event the permittee fails to perform such work, in which event
the permittee will not be issued any more permits until the special deposit is again reinstated. (1985 Code §8-1.0708; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-
23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
2. Refund Of Special Deposits: Upon application by the permittee, all special deposits shall be refunded by the city to the permittee upon the expiration
of twenty four (24) month period dated from completion of last excavation.
3. Utility Companies: Where excavations or tunneling are made by utility companies operating under a franchise issued by the city or under the
supervision of the utilities division, Iowa department of commerce or utilities operated by governmental agencies, a permit may be granted without
making such deposit. In such cases, the utilities shall be liable for the actual cost of any work required to be done by the city in restoring the area
covered by such excavations in as good a condition as the same was before such work was done. Further provided, however, the city may in the
future require such deposit from any such utility if a bill rendered in accordance with this section remains unpaid thirty (30) days after date of billing.
(1985 Code §8-1.0708; amd. 1993 Code)
7-1B-6: MAINTENANCE OF DRAWINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 355/687
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in substructures or facilities, under, upon, along, over and across the surface of any public
place used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication impulse, water, steam, ammonia or oil in the city, shall file with the
city within one hundred twenty (120) days after April 6, 1972, a map or set of maps each drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to two hundred feet
(1" = 200'), scale showing in detail the plan location, size and kind of installation, if known, of all substructures, except service lines designed to serve
single properties beneath the surface of the public place belonging to, used by or under the control of such person having any interest, and shall file with
the city annually at a time specified by the city, a corrected map or set of maps each drawn to said scale, including all installations made during the
previous year to and including the last day of such year; provided, however, that a public utility owner may in lieu of the above provide locations of any
utility upon request and locate same for city. (1985 Code §8-1.0730)
7-1B-7: MANNER OF EXCAVATION:
A. Breaking Through Pavement: The following shall apply when breaking through any paving within the City.
1. Paving Broken: Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the City when the use endangers existing substructures or other property.
2. Portland Cement Concrete Paving: Saw cutting of Portland cement concrete shall be required by the City when the nature of the work or the
condition of the street warrants. The depth of the cut shall be not less than one inch (1") in depth; however, depths greater than one inch (1") may be
required by the City when circumstances warrant. Saw cutting may be required by the City outside of the limits of the excavation over cave-outs,
overbreaks and small floating sections.
3. Bituminous Paving: Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavations may be required by the City to confine pavement
damage to the limits of the trench.
4. Sidewalk: Sections of sidewalk shall be removed to the nearest score line or joint.
5. Unstable Pavement: Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
6. Pavement Edges: Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the center line of the trench.
7. Outside Trench Lines: Cut-outs outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line.
8. New Pavement: Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be required by the City.
9. Existing Damage: The permittee shall not be required to repair pavement damage existing prior to excavation unless his cut results in small floating
sections that may be unstable, in which case permittee shall remove and pave the area. (1985 Code §8-1.0719)
B. Depth of Structures: No person shall, without written permission of the City, install any substructure, except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts
and catch basins at a vertical distance less than:
1. Streets: Twenty four inches (24") below the established flow line of the nearest gutter. If said flow line is not established, then the depth shall be at a
minimum of twenty four inches (24") below the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the travelled portion of the street.
2. Parkway: The minimum depth of any substructure shall be sixteen inches (16") below established gutter grade when said substructure parallels the
parkway. However, the City may permit lesser depths on special application. The minimum depth of any substructure shall be twelve inches (12")
below the top of the established sidewalk or curb when such substructure is at right angles to the parkway. However, the City may permit lesser
depths on special application.
3. Other Public Places: The minimum depth of any substructure in any other public place shall be twelve inches (12") below the surface; provided,
however, that the City may permit a lesser depth in special cases.
4. Exceptions: Nothing in this Section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to maintain said specifications as required herein upon subsequent
changes of grade in the surface unless the grade in said substructure interferes with the maintenance of, or travel on, a public street. (1985 Code §8-
1.0720)
C. Care of Excavated Material: All materials excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such
manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to
those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material
beside the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the City shall have authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to
a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission
and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites. All trench and tunnel excavations and construction shall conform with
the safety requirements for shoring, bracing and ladders in trenches in accordance with State of Iowa, laws on trench and tunnel safety, as they now or
may hereafter exist. All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience
as reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified by the City. Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to
abate the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be required by the City to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes. (1985 Code §8-1.0716)
D. Protection of Adjoining Property: The permittee shall at all times at his or its own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by
providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon
private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protecting measures, the permittee shall obtain a license from the owner of such private property
for such purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during
the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure to
properly protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area said area shall be reseeded
or the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as required in this article. All construction and maintenance
work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which
existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas without first
obtaining the consent of the appropriate city department or city official having control of such property. (1985 Code §8-1.0715)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 356/687
E. Clearance For Vital Structures: The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations,
fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures and all other vital equipment. (1985 Code §8-1.0711)
F. Protection Of Traffic: The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two (2) lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe
crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred feet (300'). If an excavation is made across any public street, alley or sidewalk,
adequate crossings shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using
part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least one-half (1/2) of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line. (1985 Code §8-
1.0712)
G. Trenches In Pipe Laying: The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in accordance with existing ordinances or regulations or
as may be specified by the city and no greater length shall be open for pavement removal, excavation, construction, backfilling, patching and all other
operations without the written permission of the city. (1985 Code §8-1.0723)
H. Prompt Completion Of Work: After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work
covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, so as not
to obstruct the public place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary. (1985 Code §8-1.0724)
I. Noise, Dust And Debris: Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and
annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take the appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest
extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the city or in case of an emergency as herein otherwise provided,
any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. (1985
Code §8-1.0727)
J. Protection Of Watercourses: The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot
(1') in width from the face of such curb at the gutterline. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and
at all times maintained. The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, salt, slickings or other runoff pumped from
excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide. (1985 Code
§8-1.0718)
K. Cleanup: As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from
such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to
the satisfaction of the city. From time to time, as may be ordered by the city and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee
shall, at his or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so
within twenty four (24) hours after having been notified to do so by the city said work may be done by the city and the cost thereof charged to the
permittee and the same may be deducted from the cash deposits made to the city by the permittee. (1985 Code §8-1.0717)
7-1B-8: BARRIERS AND WARNING DEVICES:
A. Protective Measures And Routing Of Traffic: It shall be the duty of every person permitted to cut or make an excavation in or upon the public place, to
place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for safety of the general public.
B. Placement Of Warning Devices: Warning signs, markers, and other devices shall be placed far enough in advance of the construction operation to alert
traffic within a public street and cones and other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with the most current official edition
of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD).
C. Inconvenience Minimized: The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic
conditions as near normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and
to the general public.
D. Rerouting Traffic: When traffic conditions permit the city may by written approval, allow the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time if
it is necessary. The written approval of the city may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public, the
cost thereof to be borne by the permittee. In such cases, such written approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. (Ord. 1950, 5-29-2012)
7-1B-9: RESTORATION OF EXCAVATED SITE:
A. Restoration Of Surface: Street surface damaged by excavation shall be restored in the following manner:
1. By Permittee: Upon completion of the backfilling, resurfacing of an excavation within a public place for the installation or removal of substructures or
facilities the city shall require the permittee to resurface that portion of the street surface damaged by the permittee's excavation, resurfacing shall be
done in a manner and under specifications prescribed by the city and subject to the inspection of the city and shall be completed within a period of
sixty (60) days after such authorization to complete final resurfacing, or sooner upon notification by the city.
2. By City: Permanent resurfacing of excavation may, at its option, be made by the city. The top surface of the backfill shall be covered with one inch
(1") of bituminous temporary resurfacing material, by the permittee. Such temporary paving material shall be cold mix, except that the permittee may
use or the city may require hot mix. All temporary paving material shall conform closely enough to the level of the adjoining paving surface and shall
be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for pedestrian travel over it as well as for vehicular traffic to pass safely over it
at a legal rate of speed. The permittee shall maintain temporary paving for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days after all backfilling is completed,
unless additional time is required by the city, and shall keep same safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the excavation has been resurfaced
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 357/687
with permanent paving by the city, except that if it is not possible to maintain the surface of the temporary paving in a safe condition for pedestrian
travel or vehicular traffic, then the permittee shall maintain barriers and lights where required herein. Cost of resurfacing to be charged to the
permittee. (1985 Code §8-1.0722)
B. Backfilling: Fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from the soil shall be thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the
upper level of such substructure. Above the upper level of the substructure, backfill material shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts
consistent with the type of soil involved and the degree of consolidation specified by the city. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris
shall not be used in the backfill. The number and size of each lift shall be dependent upon the type of soil involved. Such backfill shall be done in a
manner that will permit the restoration of the surface to a density condition not less than that existing prior to excavation unless otherwise specified by
the city. The city may require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional engineer specializing in soil
mechanics when, in its opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such tests
must show that the backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the city. All expense of such tests shall be borne by the
permittee. (1985 Code §8-1.0721)
7-1B-10: EMERGENCY EXCAVATION WORK:
A. Urgent Work: When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work be
performed as emergency work the city shall have full power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be
employed by the permittee twenty four (24) hours a day to the end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible. (1985 Code §8-
1.0725)
B. Emergency Action: Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the making of such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life
or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided that the person making such excavation shall apply to the city
for such a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced. (1985 Code §8-1.0726)
7-1B-11: PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS:
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a
permanent survey bench mark within the city, shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in
writing from the city to do so. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that
the person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of this monument by the city. (1985 Code §8-1.0728)
7-1B-12: RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITY:
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without the written consent of the city and the owner of the facility. If it becomes necessary to
relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner. No facility, either owned by the city or a person or utility, shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee or unless other arrangements are so made. The permittee shall support and protect, by
timbers or otherwise, all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything
necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. The permittee shall secure approval of the method of support and
protection from the owner of the facility. In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or apparatus or any substructures or facility should be damaged,
including any pipe coating or other encasement or devices, the permittee shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by
the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this section that the permittee shall
assume all liability for damage to facilities or substructures and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such facility or substructure damage
and such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where damage is exclusively due to
the negligence of the owning utility. The city shall not be made a party to any action because of this section. The permittee shall inform itself as to the
existence and location of all underground facilities and substructures and protect the same against damage. (1985 Code §8-1.0713)
7-1B-13: ABANDONMENT OF SUBSTRUCTURES:
Whenever the use of a substructure or facility is abandoned, except the abandonment of service lines designed to serve single properties, the person
owning, using, controlling, or having an interest therein, shall within thirty (30) days after such abandonment file with the city a statement in writing giving in
detail the location of the substructure or facility so abandoned. If such abandoned substructure or facility is in the way, or subsequently becomes in the
way, of an installation of the city or any other public body, the owner shall remove such abandoned substructure or facility or pay the cost of its removal
during the course of excavation for construction of the facility or substructure by the city or any other public body. (1985 Code §8-1.0714)
7-1B-14: INSPECTIONS:
The city shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this article. The city shall have the authority to promulgate and
cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. (1985 Code §8-1.0729)
7-1B-15: LIABILITY OF CITY:
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee or political subdivision any liability or responsibility for damages to
any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the city or any official or
employee or political subdivision thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder,
the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work. (1985 Code §8-1.0731)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 358/687
ARTICLE C. RESERVED
(Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
ARTICLE D. RESIDENTIAL BLOCK PARTIES
7-1D-1: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to residential block party applications submitted to the city. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
These regulations prescribe the conditions through which residential block parties of limited duration may be permitted to occur on local public streets
within the city that involve a request to conduct an event open to a specific, defined neighborhood or area once per calendar year, where no admission fee
will be charged for attendance, where alcoholic beverages will not be sold or where no entrance fee or admission will be charged for service of alcoholic
beverages, where a local public street closure, if necessary, will not exceed six (6) hours, and where the use of portable restroom facilities will not be
necessary. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-3: APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
A residential block party permit shall be required for all events that relate to the stated purpose and intent of this article. A residential block party permit
must be timely applied for and issued by the city prior to the commencement of the event. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage, sponsor, or
participate in any event described herein without having first applied for and obtained a permit in accordance with this article. Receiving approval of a
residential block party permit from the city shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the applicant's responsibility to obtain any additional
permits, licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. The city reserves the right to impose special guidelines and
restrictions for any residential block party based upon the nature of the proposed event, the proposed location of the event, and the anticipated attendance
of the event. City staff shall be responsible for the issuance of residential block party permits because these events only involve local public streets and not
arterial or collector streets, as those streets have been classified in the current comprehensive plan, within the city. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-4: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
For any residential block party defined or described within this article, the following information shall be submitted with the application to the city:
A. A written application for a residential block party permit shall be submitted to the city on a form provided by the city. The application must set forth, at a
minimum, the following information regarding the proposed event:
1. The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the applicant(s) of the event and contact person(s).
2. The date and duration of time for the proposed event, specifically identifying the date and duration of time for which the requested use of city
property or right of way would occur.
3. An accurate description of that portion of the city property or right of way proposed to be used, including a detailed map. The detailed map should
depict the requested location of any activities, tents, barricades, traffic control devices and personnel, signage, and trash collection necessary for the
proposed event.
4. The estimated number of participants or attendees.
5. Whether the applicant has obtained or will obtain required permits for any of the following: tents or inflatables and amplified sound.
B. After the initial filing of the application, city staff may request additional information from the applicant to determine whether a residential block party
permit should be issued.
C. Applications must be submitted not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the proposed start date of the event, unless the city decides to waive the
deadline. The city reserves the right to reject any applications that have not been timely submitted to the city. Sixty percent (60%) of the residents
within the directly affected area, including any listing agent with a home for sale within the area, must be in favor of and approve of the request before
the city would issue a residential block party permit. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-5: PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS:
A. City staff shall review applications, identify potential issues and concerns, and work with the applicant to propose possible solutions to resolve those
identified issues and concerns. The city staff review shall include the city clerk or designee, and may include representatives of the police, fire,
emergency medical services, public works, and development services departments. Additional city staff from other departments may assist with the
review depending upon the details of the proposed event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 359/687
B. City staff shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria in reviewing the residential block party permit application. City staff reserves the right to
consider additional criteria in its review as deemed necessary.
1. Whether the applicant has supplied all of the requested information to city staff.
2. Whether the applicant has obtained necessary permits involving tents or inflatables and amplified sound.
3. Whether the concentration of persons or the closure of a local public street or other public property at the event would unduly interfere with proper
fire and police protection of, or other emergency service through, the event or to areas adjacent to the event's location.
4. Whether the date, time, size, or location of the event would substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
in the vicinity of the event's location.
5. Whether negative police or other reports of past activities held or sponsored by the applicant or in the same general location merit a
recommendation of denial.
6. Whether the applicant, including event participants, have violated city code provisions or city policies at past events.
7. Whether the applicant has timely paid the city all fees due and owing under any city code provision or city policy.
8. Whether the applicant has obtained sixty percent (60%) approval of the proposed event from affected residents and submitted that information to the
city in acceptable form.
9. Whether any item or exhibit requested to be placed within the closed local public street or right of way would prevent or limit the access of
emergency vehicles.
10. Whether the applicant has obtained barricades approved by the city in terms of size, number, and color to completely close the local public street
during the event, and whether the barricades will have lights added after sunset.
11. Whether the local public street closing will be from cross intersection to cross intersection to prohibit traffic from traveling onto the closed street.
12. Whether the applicant has designated a person or persons to monitor and maintain the proper position of the barricades during the event, and to
remove the barricades from the local public street immediately following the conclusion of the event.
13. Whether the applicant has provided certification to the city that the applicant has attempted to contact all affected residents. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-
2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-6: FEES REQUIRED:
A. The applicant for a residential block party permit shall pay the applicable nonrefundable application fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees the city
council has adopted by resolution. The application fee must be paid at the time of submittal of the application.
B. If the permitted event will require the use of any city equipment, facilities, or services, the applicant shall pay the estimated costs for the use of the city
equipment, facilities, or services in advance of the event if the city requests such advanced payment be made, or the city may direct the applicant to
pay the actual costs for the use of the city equipment, facilities, or services following the event within thirty (30) calendar days of billing by the city. (Ord.
2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-7: HOLD HARMLESS AND INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
The applicant must sign a hold harmless and indemnification agreement with the city, representing that the applicant possesses legal authority to enter into
this agreement on behalf of all of the event participants, in which the applicant and the event participants hold the city harmless and indemnify the city for
any negligent, reckless, or intentional act attributable to the applicant or the event participants. The petition indicating that there is at least sixty percent
(60%) support for the proposed event should include language providing an acknowledgment that those persons participating in the event agree to hold
the city harmless and indemnify the city for any injuries or damages sustained during the event, which includes the time associated with preparation before
the event and cleanup or removal after the event. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-8: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. City staff's decision to approve or deny a residential block party permit may be appealed to the city council by making a written request to the city clerk.
The appeal will be placed on the agenda for the next available city council meeting.
B. After receiving the appeal and considering any submitted comments, the city council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of city staff. The
decision of the city council shall be the final determination as to whether or not the city approves the residential block party permit. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-
2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-9: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A residential block party permit for any event in progress may be revoked and the event terminated by the chief of police or the fire chief, or their
respective designees, if the safety of the public is imminently endangered by activities generated during the event, the participants or attendees engage in
violent or destructive behavior causing injury to persons or damage to property, or if there is a major violation of the conditions of the permit such that the
standards of issuance have not been satisfied. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 360/687
7-1D-10: VIOLATIONS:
No person shall violate any of the provisions of this article, and specifically shall not commit any of the following unlawful acts:
A. No person shall hold, sponsor, or be in charge of any activity for which a residential block party permit is required without possessing a valid residential
block party permit.
B. No person shall violate any condition placed upon a residential block party permit.
C. No person shall provide false or inaccurate information on a written application for a residential block party permit. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-
2014)
7-1D-11: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article may be charged with a simple misdemeanor criminal offense, pursuant to section 5-2-1 of this
code, or receive a municipal infraction civil citation, pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The city shall have the discretion to enforce this article either
as a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
ARTICLE E. SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
7-1E-1: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to special event permit applications submitted to the city. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
These regulations prescribe the conditions through which special events of limited duration may be permitted to occur within the city that involve a request
from an individual or organization to use city property or right of way in the conduct or promotion of the event, thereby creating an anticipated significant
impact to city property or right of way, such as increased vehicle or pedestrian traffic or the closure of a public street, and it is advisable or necessary to
include city staff in the preparation, planning, coordination, and approval of the requested special event to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the
general public and of the event participants or attendees. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-3: APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
A special event permit shall be required for all events that relate to the stated purpose and intent of this article. A special event permit must be timely
applied for and issued by the city prior to the commencement of the event. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage, sponsor, or
participate in any event described herein without having first applied for and obtained a permit in accordance with this article. Receiving approval of a
special event permit from the city shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the applicant's responsibility to obtain any additional permits,
licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. The city reserves the right to impose special guidelines and restrictions for
any special event based upon the nature of the proposed event, the proposed location of the event, and the anticipated attendance of the event. The city
also reserves the right to temporarily suspend other city code requirements for any special event based upon the particular event details. City staff shall be
responsible for the issuance of special event permits that only involve local public streets or do not involve lane closure(s) of arterial or collector streets, as
those streets have been classified in the current comprehensive plan, within the city. The city council shall decide whether to issue special event permits
that do involve lane closure(s) of arterial or collector streets, as those streets have been classified in the current comprehensive plan, within the city,
following receipt of a recommendation from city staff. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-4: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
For any special event defined or described within this article, the following information, at a minimum, shall be submitted with the application to the city:
A. A written application for a special event permit shall be submitted to the city on a form provided by the city. The application must set forth the following
information regarding the proposed special event:
1. The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the applicant(s) and sponsor(s) of the event and contact person(s).
2. If the proposed special event would be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing responsible heads of such organization.
3. The date(s) and duration of time for the proposed special event, specifically identifying the date(s) and duration of time for which the requested use
of the city property or right of way would occur.
4. An accurate description of that portion of the city property or right of way proposed to be used, including a detailed map. The detailed map should
depict the requested location of any activities, structures, tents, barricades, parking, traffic control devices and personnel, signage, trash collection,
and portable restroom facilities necessary for the proposed event.
5. The estimated number of participants or attendees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 361/687
6. The proposed type of special event, described in detail, including a description of the planned activities and the proposed location.
7. Whether the applicant has obtained or will obtain required permits for any of the following: the sale of alcoholic beverages, tents or inflatables,
amplified sound, fireworks, temporary signs, and any applicable building permits.
B. After the initial filing of the application, city staff may request additional information from the applicant to determine whether a special event permit
should be issued, including, but not limited to, a crowd control plan.
C. Applications that impact or include a commercially zoned district must be submitted not less than ninety (90) calendar days prior to the proposed start
date of the special event, unless the city decides to waive the deadline. The city reserves the right to reject any applications that have not been timely
submitted to the city.
D. All other applications must be submitted not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the proposed start date of the special event, unless the city
decides to waive the deadline. The city reserves the right to reject any applications that have not been timely submitted to the city.
E. If the proposed event would be held in a residentially zoned area, sixty percent (60%) of the residents within the area directly affected, including any
listing agent with a home for sale within the area, must be in favor of and approve of the request before the city would issue a special event permit. The
city reserves the right to waive this requirement as it deems necessary.
F. If the proposed event would be held within the Valley Junction historic business district (VJHB), seventy five percent (75%) of the businesses within the
area directly affected must be in favor of and approve of the request before the city would issue a special event permit. For any special event that
would involve the closure of 5th Street between the 100 and 300 blocks, at least seventy five percent (75%) of the businesses located within the 100
and 300 blocks of 5th Street, and any businesses located on the immediate side streets off of 5th Street within the 100 and 300 blocks, must be in
favor of and approve of the request. The city reserves the right to waive these requirements as it deems necessary. Iowa nonprofit organizations that
sponsor or organize at least thirty (30) events each calendar year within the VJHB for the benefit and promotion of the VJHB shall be exempt from the
seventy five percent (75%) approval requirement.
G. Before the city decides to approve the special event permit, the city may require the applicant to provide notice of the proposed event to all affected
neighboring property owners and known tenants. The city may also require the applicant to petition or canvass affected neighboring property owners
and known tenants to ascertain whether there is sufficient support for the proposed event. Alternatively, the city may elect to provide the notification to
the affected neighboring property owners and known tenants itself and the applicant shall then be responsible for reimbursing the city for the incurred
costs. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-5: PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS:
A. City staff shall review applications, identify potential issues and concerns, and work with the applicant to propose possible solutions to resolve those
identified issues and concerns. The city staff review shall include the city clerk or designee, and representatives of the police, fire, emergency medical
services, public works, parks and recreation, and development services departments. Additional city staff from other departments may assist with the
review depending upon the details of the proposed event.
B. The parks and recreation department shall review special event permit applications for events held exclusively within a city park or greenway in
accordance with city park policies, rules, and regulations that do not require city staff from multiple departments as part of the planning or execution of
the event and do not cause anticipated significant impact to nearby public streets or other city property.
C. City staff shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria in reviewing the special event permit application. City staff reserves the right to consider
additional criteria in its review as deemed necessary.
1. Whether the applicant has supplied all of the requested information to city staff.
2. Whether the applicant has obtained necessary permits involving the sale of alcoholic beverages, tents or inflatables, amplified sound, fireworks,
temporary signs, and any applicable building permits.
3. Whether the applicant has previously held events of similar size and scope within the city.
4. Whether the date, time, size, or location of the event would substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
in the vicinity of the event's location.
5. Whether the concentration of persons or the closure of a public street at the event would unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or
other emergency service through, the event or to areas adjacent to the event's location.
6. Whether the estimated number of participants or attendees or the size or type of event equipment is sufficient to close a public street, or if there is an
alternative available to closing a public street.
7. Whether another special event permit has already been granted for substantially the same date, time, or location within the city.
8. Whether the size or time of the event would require so great a diversion of the city police department as to prevent normal police protection at
another previously scheduled event in the city.
9. Whether city personnel necessary to regulate and monitor the event can reasonably be made available.
10. Whether the event is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property and if there is adequate planning for crowd control of participants or
attendees.
11. Whether adequate sanitation or other health facilities will be available at the event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 362/687
12. Whether there is a sufficient number of parking places within a reasonable distance to accommodate the number of vehicles expected.
13. Whether the time, size, or nature of the event is compatible with the normal activity at that location.
14. Whether the proposed use or event will likely have a significant adverse environmental impact.
15. Whether negative police or other reports of past activities held or sponsored by the applicant or in the same location merit a recommendation of
denial.
16. Whether the applicant, including its employees, agents, and volunteers, have violated city code provisions or city policies at past events.
17. Whether the applicant has timely paid the city all fees due and owing under any city code provision or city policy.
18. If required, whether the applicant has obtained sixty percent (60%) approval of the proposed event from affected neighboring residents and
submitted that information to the city in acceptable form.
19. If required, whether the applicant has obtained seventy five percent (75%) approval of the proposed event from affected neighboring businesses
within the VJHB and submitted that information to the city in acceptable form. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-6: FEES REQUIRED:
A. The applicant for a special event permit shall pay the applicable nonrefundable application fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees the city council
has adopted by resolution. The application fee must be paid at the time of submittal of the application.
B. If the permitted event will require the use of any city equipment, facilities, or services, the applicant shall pay the estimated costs for the use of the city
equipment, facilities, or services in advance of the event if the city requests such advanced payment be made, or the city may direct the applicant to
pay the actual costs for the use of the city equipment, facilities, or services following the event within thirty (30) calendar days of billing by the city. (Ord.
2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-7: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
A. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining insurance coverage for the special event, in types and amounts as determined by the city. The applicant
shall also provide the city with a certificate of insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, sufficiently in advance of the scheduled event.
B. The applicant must also sign a hold harmless and indemnification agreement with the city in which the applicant holds the city harmless and indemnifies
the city for any negligent, reckless, or intentional act attributable to the applicant or the applicant's officials, employees, agents, or volunteers. (Ord.
2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-8: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. City staff's decision to approve or deny a special event permit may be appealed to the city council by making a written request to the city clerk. The
appeal will be placed on the agenda for the next available city council meeting.
B. After receiving the appeal and considering any submitted comments, the city council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of city staff. The
decision of the city council shall be the final determination as to whether or not the city approves the special event permit. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff.
1-1-2014)
7-1E-9: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A special event permit for any event in progress may be revoked and the event terminated by the chief of police or the fire chief, or their respective
designees, if the safety of the public is imminently endangered by activities generated during the event, the participants or attendees engage in violent or
destructive behavior causing injury to persons or damage to property, or if there is a major violation of the conditions of the permit such that the standards
of issuance have not been satisfied. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-10: VIOLATIONS:
No person shall violate any of the provisions of this article, and specifically shall not commit any of the following unlawful acts:
A. No person shall hold, sponsor, or be in charge of any activity for which a special event permit is required without possessing a valid special event
permit.
B. No person shall violate any condition placed upon a special event permit.
C. No person shall provide false or inaccurate information on a written application for a special event permit. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-11: PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 363/687
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article may be charged with a simple misdemeanor criminal offense, pursuant to section 5-2-1 of this
code, or receive a municipal infraction civil citation, pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The city shall have the discretion to enforce this article either
as a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
Chapter 2
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings in this section:
CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, or his or her designee.
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: Any telephone or telegraph system or any other system of cables, wires or conduits, and any related equipment, facilities,
manholes or overhead poles, operated and maintained for communication purposes.
CUSTOMER: Any person who purchases any services provided by a communications system.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The director of public works of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, or his or her designee.
FINANCE DIRECTOR: The finance director of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, or his or her designee.
LICENSEE: The person who is issued a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
LOCAL EXCHANGE AREA: An area, as established under regulations of the state of Iowa, in which intra-area communications service is provided by a
carrier subject to regulation by the state of Iowa.
LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER: The operator of a local exchange system in a local exchange area.
LOCAL EXCHANGE SYSTEM: A communications system furnishing communications services between stations all located within a local exchange area.
LONG DISTANCE CARRIER: The operator of a long distance system.
LONG DISTANCE SYSTEM: A communications system furnishing communications services between stations located in different local exchange areas.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any public street, highway, avenue, alley, bridge or sidewalk within the city. Also, any public utility easement. (Ord. 969, 9-30-
1991; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
7-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall install, construct, reconstruct, repair or operate a communications system upon, under, over or within any public right of way in the city
unless and until a written license is obtained from the director of public works pursuant to this chapter. All such licenses shall be nonexclusive. (Ord. 969,
9-30-1991)
7-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license shall be filed with the director of public works upon a form provided by the director of public works for that purpose, shall be in
conformance with any adopted city utility accommodation policy, and shall include as a minimum the following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the communications
system.
C. An engineering site plan showing the proposed location of the communications system, including any manholes, the size, type and proposed depth of
any conduit or other enclosures, and the relationship of the communications system to all existing streets, sidewalks, poles, utilities and other
improvements within the public right of way.
D. Any additional information which the director of public works in his or her discretion may reasonably require. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-4: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
All licenses required by this chapter shall be granted by the director of public works. The director of public works shall review each application and shall
grant each license which he or she determines to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable legal requirements. In
granting a license, the director of public works may change the proposed location of the communications system where necessary to avoid interference
with other cables, wires, conduits, pipes, sewers or other facilities placed within the public right of way. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 364/687
7-2-5: AMENDMENT TO LICENSE:
In the event that a licensee with a current license proposes to expand, reduce, relocate or modify any portion of its communications system within public
right of way, the licensee shall file an application for an amendment to its current license with the director of public works. An application for an amendment
to a current license shall include relevant new information of the type required in connection with the initial application for a license, and it shall be
considered and granted by the director of public works in the same manner as the original license application. However, if the amendment involves only
one or more new hook-on connections to the main licensed communications system, and if the new connections will be made entirely through existing
underground utility conduit or ducts so as not to require any excavation in the public right of way, or by means of overhead wires or cables between
existing utility poles, then the licensee shall not be required to pay an additional administrative fee as a part of the application for amendment. (Ord. 969, 9-
30-1991)
7-2-6: REGULATIONS:
A. No license required under this chapter, or amendment to such license, shall be granted for any communications system until the required fees have
been paid, and until a complete application has been filed with and approved by the director of public works.
B. The system shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the terms of the license granted by the director of public works.
C. Once the system is constructed, the licensee shall, within sixty (60) calendar days, file with the director of public works an as built survey specifying the
actual location of the system, including any manholes, and the licensee shall provide such signs or other economically feasible means of locating the
system as may be reasonably required by the director of public works, including, a requirement that the licensee contract with a one call locating
service or similar locating service for inclusion of the system by the service.
D. If it becomes necessary to dig into, excavate in or in any manner break up any public right of way in connection with the installation, construction or
reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or removal of the system, the licensee shall first obtain a permit from the city to do so in accordance
with chapter 1, article B of this title.
E. All technical standards governing installation, construction, reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection and removal of a communications system
licensed hereunder shall be in accordance with all applicable federal communications commission and other federal, state and city laws and
regulations.
F. The licensee shall maintain all parts of the system in good condition, order and repair.
G. The licensee shall be responsible for repairing or reimbursing any public or private party for any damage to their property caused by negligence of the
licensee, or its agents, employees or contractors, in connections with the installation, construction, reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or
removal of the licensee's communication system.
H. Any license required under this chapter shall not be granted to authorize placement of a communications system in any space which is required for
public use.
I. Failure by the licensee to comply with any of the requirements of the license or this chapter shall constitute grounds for termination of the license by the
city. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-7: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL WHEN REQUIRED BY PUBLIC NEEDS:
A. The licensee shall, upon forty eight (48) hours' notice from the city and at no cost to the city, protect or support any or all of its communications system
when required to do so by the city because of street or other public excavation, construction, repair, grading or regrading; traffic conditions; installation
of sewers, drains, water pipes or city owned power or signal lines; installation or construction of any other type of structure by the city or any other
public agency; or any other type of improvement which promotes the public health, safety or welfare.
B. The licensee shall, upon sixty (60) calendar days' notice from the city and at no cost to the city, temporarily or permanently disconnect, relocate within
the same or other public right of way, or remove any or all of its communications system when required to do so by the city because of street or other
public excavation, construction, repair, grading or regrading; traffic conditions; installation of sewers, drains, water pipes or city owned power or signal
lines; vacation or relocation of public right of way; installation or construction of any other type of structure by the city or any other public agency; or any
other type of improvement which promotes the public health, safety or welfare. If sixty (60) calendar days' notice is not adequate to fulfill the conditions
of this subsection, the licensee may petition the director of public works for an additional specified time period which may be granted at the discretion of
said director. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-8: LICENSE FEES:
A. It shall be a term and condition of any license issued pursuant to this chapter that, as part of the consideration supporting the issuance of such license
and the city's permission thereby to occupy and use the public right of way of the city, the licensee shall pay to the city fees computed as follows: (Ord.
969, 9-30-1991)
1. An administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be due and payable to the city at the time of filing of the initial license application and at
the time of filing of each proposed amendment to the license, subject to the exemption provided in section 7-2-5 of this chapter. The city council may,
by resolution, change the amount of said administrative fee. (Ord. 1930, 8-22-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 365/687
B. The following communications systems shall be exempt from the use fee requirements:
1. Local exchange systems either operated pursuant to authority granted by the state or operated in competition with another local exchange system,
provided the other system is operated pursuant to authority granted by the state. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "competition" shall
have the meaning ascribed to the term in section 476.1 1985, code of Iowa.
2. Long distance systems.
3. Communications systems franchised by the city or used for a purpose accessory and subordinate to the conduct of a utility franchised by the city.
(Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
C. Upon receipt of payment of any of the fees required under this chapter, and recording the same in his or her files, the director of public works shall
deliver same to the finance director who shall deposit the same into the city's general fund.
D. The acceptance of any fee payment by the city shall not be construed as an acknowledgment that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall
acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the city may have for additional sums due and payable. All fee payments shall be
subject to audit by the finance director and assessment or refund if the payment is found to be in error. In the event that such audit results in an
assessment by an additional payment to the city, such additional payment shall be due and payable immediately. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991; amd. Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
E. The licensee shall pay interest at a rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum on any overdue fees calculated from the due date for the fee.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the liability of the licensee for all applicable federal, state and local taxes.
G. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city council from exercising the right of the city to change the amount of any of the fees
required by this section. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-9: HOLD HARMLESS; INSURANCE; BOND:
It shall be a term and condition of any license issued pursuant to this chapter that, as part of the consideration supporting the issuance of such license and
the city's permission thereby to occupy and use the public right of way of the city, the licensee shall assume the following obligations:
A. The licensee shall indemnify, protect, save and hold harmless and defend the city, its officers and employees from and against any and all liability,
losses, judgments, awards, damages and injury to property, or bodily injury or death to any person, including payments made under workers'
compensation laws, which the city may suffer or incur or a third party may suffer or incur arising out of or in any way connected with the installation,
construction, reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or removal or the licensee's licensed communications system. The licensee shall pay all
reasonable expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to any of the aforementioned claims, including, but not limited to, all costs such
as attorney fees and the value of any services rendered by the city attorney or any other officers or employees of the city. If any litigation on account of
any such claims shall be commenced against the city, and upon receipt by the licensee of written notice of such litigation from the city, the licensee
shall defend the same at its own cost and expense. The record of any judgment rendered against the city on account of such claims shall be conclusive
as against the licensee and shall entitle the city to recover the full amount thereof with interest and costs and attorney fees incurred by the city. The
right of action therefor shall accrue to the city as soon as judgment shall have been rendered. The city shall fully cooperate with the licensee's defense
of any such claim or action. Nothing herein shall be construed to require licensee to indemnify, protect, save and hold harmless the city for the
negligent act or wilful act of the city, its employees or its contractors. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
B. Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee shall purchase such general liability insurance as is required by the finance director in
conformity with such written standards relative to the amount of insurance coverage and deductible, the type of insurance policy and the qualifications
of the insurer as shall be promulgated, and as may be amended from time to time, by the finance director with the approval of the city attorney. The
amount of insurance shall be a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with a maximum deductible of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The
licensee shall maintain such insurance coverage for as long as the licensed communications system remains in place within public right of way. The
city shall be named as an additional insured on the insurance policy, and the policy shall provide on its face that it may not be canceled except after at
least thirty (30) days' written notice to the city. Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee shall file with the director of public works
and the finance director certificate of insurance which clearly discloses on its face coverage in conformity with all of the foregoing requirements, and if
requested by the finance director, the licensee shall additionally submit a certified copy of the policy. The licensee may petition the finance director to
approve a certificate of self-insurance and documentation to assure said director of the financial responsibility imposed upon licensee by the insurance
requirements of this subsection in lieu of general liability insurance requirements. The finance director may approve said petition at the discretion of
said director.
C. Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee shall file with the finance director such bond and surety as is required by the finance
director in conformity with such written standards relative to the amount of the bond and the qualifications of the surety as shall be promulgated by the
finance director. In lieu thereof, the finance director may permit licensee to provide documentation necessary to assure the said director of the financial
responsibility imposed upon licensee by these bonds and surety requirements. The purpose of such bond shall be to protect the city from any and all
damages and costs suffered or incurred by the city from any failure by the licensee to restore all public right of way and other public property affected
by the installation, construction, reconstruction, repair, operation or removal of the licensed communications system to its proper condition in
accordance with city standards. Such bond shall be maintained by the licensee for as long as the system remains in place within public right of way and
thereafter until the licensee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to the city which arise out of or pertain to the licensed communications
system. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
7-2-10: FAILURE TO SECURE, RENEW OR COMPLY WITH LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 366/687
A. Any person who fails to secure the license required under this chapter or any licensee who fails to comply with the requirements of the license or this
chapter or with any other applicable legal requirements shall, upon notification of such violation by the director of public works, immediately act either to
abate the violation or to cause the licensee's communications system either to be removed or to be disconnected and rendered inoperative.
B. The city reserves the right either to remove or disconnect and render inoperative any communications system used or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-11: TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS:
The licensee shall not transfer or assign all or any portion of its interest granted pursuant to this chapter without prior written authorization of the director of
public works, which authorization shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, delayed or denied. For purposes of this section, a merger or corporate
reorganization shall not be deemed a transfer or assignment. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-12: NOTICE OF ACTION; APPEAL:
A. The director of public works shall promptly send by certified mail with return receipt a written notice advising each prospective licensee or licensee of
any of the following: action by the director of public works in granting or denying an application for a license pursuant to section 7-2-4 of this chapter,
action required of the licensee by the city pursuant to section 7-2-7 of this chapter, and notification of failure to secure or comply with a license pursuant
to section 7-2-10 of this chapter.
B. An aggrieved prospective licensee or licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city council by filing, within seven (7) calendar days after
receipt of any such notice from the director of public works, a written appeal with the director of public works specifying the reasons therefor. At least
ten (10) days prior to the date of the city council hearing, the director of public works shall send written notice of same to the appellant by certified mail
with return receipt. At the city council hearing, the appellant may be represented by legal counsel, may call witnesses, and present evidence on his or
her behalf, and may cross examine witnesses against him or her. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-13: CABLES AND WIRES:
A. Underground: All cables, wires and conduits in connection with any communications systems shall be placed underground, except as provided in
subsection B of this section.
B. Overhead Permitted: Cables, wires and conduits in connection with a communications system may be placed overhead in the following circumstances:
1. Areas of the city with an industrial zoning classification and where existing poles of a franchised utility are to be used.
2. Where aboveground connection to buildings or other locations above ground is reasonably necessary. Such aboveground connection shall be by
means of poles located, as far as reasonably practicable, outside of street right of way. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-14: CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an acquiescence in, or ratification of, the occupation of any of the public right of way or public places of the
city by any person now occupying the same without legal right, nor shall this chapter be construed as conferring the right to occupy any of the public right
of way or public places of the city upon any such person now illegally or without authority occupying the same. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-15: POLICE REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter are subject to such reasonable regulations and ordinances of a police nature as the city council may, from time to time,
deem necessary to adopt, not destructive of the rights which may accrue to any person under this chapter. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-16: ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
The city is hereby authorized to rent, lease, or convey an interest in public property to an individual or entity for purposes of locating cellular antennas,
communication towers, or any other enterprises or activities which confer a public benefit upon the city. (Ord. 1235, 3-24-1997, eff. retroactive to 10-1-
1996)
Chapter 3
RAILROADS
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
OPERATOR: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 367/687
RAILROAD TRAIN: Any steam, electric or other motor-driven engine and the cars, if any, coupled to the engine operated on rails, but does not include
inter-urbans and street cars. (1985 Code §8-3.01)
7-3-2: WARNING SIGNALS:
Operators shall sound a horn at least one thousand feet (1,000') before a street crossing is reached and after sounding the horn, shall ring the bell
continuously until the crossing is passed. Operators shall also sound a whistle at least one hundred feet (100') before reaching every intersection of the
track and street, sidewalk, alley or similar public crossing within the City limits. (1985 Code §8-3.02)
7-3-3: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
A railroad corporation or its employees shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period
of time in excess of ten (10) minutes except:
A. Comply with Signals: When necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of the movement of trains.
B. Avoid Striking: When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the track.
C. Disabled: When the train is disabled.
D. Safety Regulations: When necessary to comply with governmental safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
E. In Motion: When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching operations.
F. No Traffic: When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing.
Any officer or employee of a railroad corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. An employee shall not be guilty of
such violation if his action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a railroad corporation or its supervisors. Such guilt shall then be
with the railroad corporation. (1985 Code §8-3.03)
7-3-4: CROSSING MAINTENANCE:
Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient and safe crossings over any street traversed by their rails. (1985 Code §8-3.04)
Chapter 4
PUBLIC BENCHES
(Rep. by Ord. 2017, 12-30-2013)
Chapter 5
NEWSRACKS
(Rep. by Ord. 2010, 10-14-2013)
Chapter 6
CEMETERY
7-6-1: TRANSFER TO CITY:
By mutual agreement between the Jordan Cemetery board of trustees and the city council of the city, the said board has relinquished all cemetery
property, both real and personal under trusteeship, to the city for complete responsibility and control. (1985 Code §3-5.01)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 368/687
7-6-2: JORDAN CEMETERY:
It is herewith declared that Jordan Cemetery as now constituted or hereafter enlarged or changed, shall be a municipal cemetery under the provisions of
chapters 566.20_566.27 of the code of Iowa, as amended, together with city responsibility for its care and operation. (1985 Code §3-5.02; amd. Ord. 1474,
4-15-2002)
7-6-3: DIRECTOR:
The director of parks and recreation shall be responsible for the operation of the cemetery. The director or their designee shall operate the cemetery in
accordance with the rules and regulations therefor, and under the direction of the city manager. (1474, 4-15-2002)
7-6-4: ADDITIONAL EMPLOYEES:
The director of parks and recreation or their designee may retain or employ additional help for care and maintenance of the cemetery, subject to approval
of the city manager, and all such persons shall be under the supervision of the said director. The director or their designee shall also arrange for the
opening of all graves and may also retain additional help to assist as deemed necessary. (Ord. 1474, 4-15-2002)
7-6-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Rules and regulations for municipal cemeteries in the city shall be established by the city manager. Said rules and regulations may be changed or
amended from time to time by the city manager and shall at all times be on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 1474, 4-15-2002)
7-6-6: RATES AND CHARGES:
Interment charges, rates and sale of lots or spaces and other charges in connection with the municipal cemetery shall be established by resolution of the
council and may be amended from time to time. (1985 Code §3-5.04)
7-6-7: VIOLATION OF RULES:
Any violation of the rules and regulations shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Pursuant to subsection 1-4-1B of this code, any violation of the rules
and regulations adopted in accordance with this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction. (Ord. 1474, 4-15-2002)
Chapter 7
AIRPORT AUTHORITY
(Rep. by Ord. 2011, 10-14-2013)
Chapter 8
SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-8A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. (1985 Code §3-3.0101)
7-8A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Article, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined:
BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20o) centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
BUILDING SEWER STUB: That portion of the building sewer within the City right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 369/687
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three feet (3') (1.0 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
CITY: The City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CONTRIBUTOR: Any person responsible for the production of domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the
public sewer system.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT: A dwelling unit which is not attached to any other unit and is intended for the occupancy of one family.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Works of the City or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Sewage having a suspended solids content not to exceed four hundred (400) mg/l and a BOD not to exceed four hundred (400)
mg/l and which does not contain substances, materials or wastes set out in Sections 7-8B-2 or 7-8B-3 of this Chapter.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are intended or designed to be occupied by one family with facilities for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: Solid, liquid or gaseous substances from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment, or process, or
from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource which any person discharges or allows to be discharged into the public sewer, but
shall not include any wastes from a building used exclusively for residential purposes which contains eight (8) dwelling or rooming units, or less.
INSPECTOR: The person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public
sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PARTS PER MILLION (ppm): A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts-per-million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water, and for the purposes of this Article it shall mean the same as milligrams per liter (mg/l).
PAUNCH MANURE: Any material found in the stomachs or paunches of livestock.
PRIVATE SEWER: A sanitary building drain and sewer privately owned and not directly controlled by public authority.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or under the jurisdiction of the City. It shall include all sewers outside the City which serve one or more persons and
ultimately discharge into the sewers under the jurisdiction of the City.
RESIDENTIAL: Any building which is used as a single-family attached or detached dwelling unit or apartment building.
SANITARY SEWAGE: Sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories
or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial waste.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS OR SEWAGE SYSTEM: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER RENTAL: Any and all charges, rates, fees, or rentals levied against and payable by contributors, as consideration for the servicing of said
contributors by said sewer system.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water, Sewage, And Industrial Wastes", published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the
Water Pollution Control Federation.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR LIQUIDS: Any water or liquid containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; substances that may impart
taste and odor or color characteristics; volatile, explosive, toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; explosive, odorous or
otherwise obnoxious gases. Such water or liquids shall not contain more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) of suspended solids, and not more
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 370/687
than twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) of BOD.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (1985 Code §3-3.0102; amd. Ord. 903, 4-16-1990; 1993
Code)
7-8A-3: SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED:
The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer is hereby required to
install, at such owner's expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, and to
maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of this article, such compliance to be completed within sixty (60) days after date of official notice
from the city to do so provided that said public sewer is located within four hundred feet (400') of the property line of such owner and is of such design as
to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to it. Such connection shall be made in full compliance with state and local plumbing
codes. (1985 Code §3-3.0105; amd. Ord. 1509, 2-3-2003)
7-8A-4: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The director of public works shall be appointed by the council and exercise the following powers and duties:
A. Operation And Maintenance: He shall operate and maintain the city sewage system.
B. Inspection And Tests: He shall conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure compliance with the provisions of this article. (1985 Code §3-3.0103;
amd. 1993 Code)
7-8A-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
A. Damage Sewer System: Maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
B. Downspouts: Connect a roof downspout, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer
or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
C. Manholes: Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by authority of the director.
D. Objectionable Wastes: Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
E. Septic Tanks: Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as
provided in this article.
F. Untreated Discharge: Discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. (1985 Code §3-3.0104;
amd. 1993 Code)
7-8A-6: SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY:
The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions stipulated by resolution of the Council. (1985 Code §3-3.0106)
7-8A-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Article. The Director or his
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. (1985 Code §3-
3.0107; 1993 Code)
7-8A-8: OWNER'S LIABILITY LIMITED:
While performing the necessary work on private property, the Director or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the owner or occupant and the owner or occupant shall be held harmless for injury or death to City employees and the City
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 371/687
shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the owner or occupant and growing out of any gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused
by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions. (1985 Code §2-2.0108; 1993 Code)
7-8A-9: USE OF EASEMENTS:
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair
and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in
full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (1985 Code §3-3.0109; 1993 Code)
7-8A-10: SPECIAL PENALTIES:
The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of this Article:
A. Notice of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this Article except subsections A, C and D of Section 7-8A-4, shall be served by
the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Continuing Violations: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A hereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which
any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Injunctions: In addition to any other remedies provided by law, when there has been a violation of the provisions of any section of this Article, the
Director may request the corporation counsel to bring suit in the District Court of Polk County, Iowa to prevent further violation of any provisions of this
Article, or to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
D. Liability Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned
the City by reason of such violation. (1985 Code §3-3.0110; 1993 Code)
ARTICLE B. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
7-8B-1: DISCHARGE OF EFFLUENT:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water runoff, surface or ground water, roof runoff or subsurface drainage by a direct or
indirect connection into the sanitary sewer system for any new construction within the area served by the City. Prohibited subsurface drainage shall include
both interior and exterior foundation drains into the sanitary sewer system. No contributor shall discharge or cause to be discharged any cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process water into any sanitary sewer. (1985 Code §3-3.0201)
7-8B-2: PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
A. Flammable or Explosive Material: Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, petroleum products or derivatives, mineral oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
B. Toxic or Poisonous Materials: Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l as
CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
C. Corrosive Wastes: Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. Free acids and alkalis of such wastes must be neutralized to within
the range of pH between five and five-tenths (5.5) and nine and five-tenths (9.5).
D. Solid or Viscous Substances: Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues,
paint or ink residues, culinary wastes, tannery wastes, bulk solids and paper dishes, cups, mild containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
E. Excessive BOD, Solids or Flow: Any waters or wastes having 1) a five (5) day BOD greater than three hundred (300) parts per million by weight, or 2)
containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or 3) having an average daily flow greater than two
percent (2%) of the average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the Director. Where necessary in the opinion of the Director, the
owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to 1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 372/687
(300) parts per million by weight, or 2) reduce the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight, or 3) control the quantities
and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Director and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained
in writing. (1985 Code §3-3.0203; 1993 Code)
7-8B-3: RESTRICTED DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
A. High Temperature: Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees (150o) Fahrenheit (65o centigrade).
B. Fat, Oil, Grease: Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or six hundred
(600) mg/l of dispersed or other soluble matter.
C. Viscous Substances: Water or wastes containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees and
one hundred fifty degrees (32o - 150o) Fahrenheit (0o and 65o centigrade).
D. Garbage: Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of threefourths
(3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director.
E. Acids: Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
F. Toxic or Objectionable Wastes: Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Director for such materials.
G. Toxic or Poisonous Wastes: Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance or of high chlorine demand in sufficient quantity to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to animals or humans, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the effluent of
the sewage treatment plant. Materials such as copper, zinc, chromium, or similar toxic substances shall be limited to the following average quantities in
the sewage as it arrives at the treatment plant and at no time shall the hourly concentration at the sewage treatment plant exceed three (3) times the
average concentration.
Iron as Fe 15 parts per million
Chromium as Cr
(hexavalent)
5 parts per million
Copper as Cu 3 parts per million
Zinc as Zn 2 parts per million
Chlorine demand 30 parts per million
H. Odor or Taste: Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, Federal, or other public
agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
I. Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
J. Excess Acidity: Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths (9.5). Free acids and alkalis of such wastes must be neutralized to
within the range of pH between five and five-tenths (5.5) and nine and nine-tenths (9.5).
K. Unusual Wastes: Materials which exert or cause:
1. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
2. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
3. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
4. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 373/687
L. Noxious or Malodorous Gases: Any noxious or malodorous gas or other substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
M. Damaging Substances: Any waters, wastes, materials or substances which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
N. Untreatable Wastes: Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (1985 Code §3-3.0204; 1993 Code)
7-8B-4: SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION:
Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Director where such
discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to
the best interests of the sewer system. (1985 Code §3-3.0202; 1993 Code)
7-8B-5: GREASE TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED:
Grease traps and oil/sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease, flammable wastes, sand, solids, acid or
alkaline substances or other ingredients harmful to the building drainage system, the public or private sewer or to public or private sewage disposal as
provided by the City Plumbing Code.1
A. Design and Location: All grease traps and oil/sand interceptors shall be of a type and capacity as provided by the City Plumbing Code, and shall be
located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
B. Maintenance: All grease traps and oil/sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his expense in a continuously efficient manner at all times.
C. Liability Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned
by the City by reason of such violation. (Ord. 855, 7-11-88)
7-8B-6: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR:
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section 7-8B-3 of this Article, and which in the judgment of the Director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director may:
A. Rejection: Reject the wastes;
B. Pretreatment: Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
C. Controls Imposed: Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
D. Special Charges: Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charged under
the provisions of Article 8C of this Title. (1985 Code §3-3.0205; 1993 Code)
7-8B-7: SPECIAL FACILITIES:
If the Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Director and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(1985 Code §3-3.0206; 1993 Code)
7-8B-8: CONTROL MANHOLES; INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
When required by the Director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.
Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (1985 Code §3-
3.0207; 1993 Code)
7-8B-9: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 374/687
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended
solids analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. (1985 Code
§3-3.0208)
Footnote 1: See Title 8, Chapter 2, Article C of this Code.
ARTICLE C. SANITARY SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
7-8C-1: CHARGES REQUIRED:
Every contributor whose premises is serviced by a connection with the sanitary sewer system of the City, either directly or indirectly, shall pay to the City,
rents, rates or charges as hereinafter established.
Funds derived from such charges shall be credited to a separate Sewer Revenue Enterprise Fund to be expended for sewer maintenance, rehabilitation
and expansion projects which may incorporate the West Des Moines system, such portions of the ICA system (including plant) as West Des Moines may
participate in and/or for which West Des Moines may be charged, and for the purpose of retiring principal and interest on bond issues, warrants and
pledge orders issued in connection therewith. (Ord. 965, 8-19-1991)
7-8C-2: AVAILABILITY CHARGE:
Each contributor whose premises is serviced by a connection with the sanitary sewer system of the City shall pay to the City, through its collection agent,
West Des Moines Water Works, at the same time as payment for water service, a monthly sanitary sewer availability charge as follows:
$3.40 effective July 1, 2017
3.50 effective July 1, 2018
3.59 effective July 1, 2019
3.68 effective July 1, 2020
3.77 effective July 1, 2021
with the above noted charges being made on all bills mailed by West Des Moines Water Works on and after the effective date noted herein.
Any connection to the system occurring before the fifteenth of any month shall be treated as an entire month for the purpose of charges levied herein. Any
connection occurring on or after the fifteenth of any month, up to and including the last day of any calendar month, shall be prorated and charged as onehalf
(1/2) month for purposes of this article. Any termination of service occurring before the fifteenth of any month shall be prorated and charged as onehalf
(1/2) month for purposes of this article. Any termination of service occurring on or after the fifteenth of any calendar month shall be treated as an entire
month for the purpose of charges levied herein. No charges shall be prorated in any increment of less than one-half (1/2) month. (Ord. 2273, 1-22-2018,
eff. 7-1-2018)
7-8C-3: BASIC RATE:
Each contributor whose property lies within the corporate limits of the City shall pay to the City, through its collection agent, West Des Moines Water
Works, at the same time as payment for water service, a sanitary sewer service charge computed on water consumption, which charge shall be made at
the following rate:
Rate Per
1,000 Gallons Effective
$5.80 October 1, 2017
5.90 July 1, 2018
6.05 July 1, 2019
6.20 July 1, 2020
6.35 July 1, 2021
with the above noted charges being made on all bills mailed by West Des Moines Water Works on and after the effective date noted herein. (Ord. 2273, 1-
22-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 375/687
7-8C-4: SURCHARGE RATE:
The foregoing rate shall apply if the sewage meets the standard domestic and commercial sewage as follows:
Suspended solids: Not to exceed four hundred (400) ppm.
Biochemical oxygen demand: Not to exceed four hundred (400) ppm.
If sewage is contributed which does not meet the above standards, there will be a surcharge where suspended solids and BOD are in excess of four
hundred (400) ppm. The surcharge shall be computed at the rate of ten and one-half cents ($0.105) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of such sewage
contributed. (Ord. 965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-5: PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS:
Contributors whose premises is served by a private water system shall pay sanitary sewer service charges based upon the water used as determined by
the general manager of the West Des Moines Water Works either by an estimate agreed to by the contributor or by metering the water system at the
contributor's expense. (Ord. 965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-6: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
A. All service charges shall be due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment for water service from the West Des Moines
Water Works, except that the provision of section 7-8C-8 of this article shall be used to enforce collection of delinquent sanitary sewer service charges.
Questions concerning sanitary service charges shall, to the extent possible, be handled administratively by staff members of West Des Moines
waterworks and the city who have oversight responsibility for such charges.
B. A sanitary sewer service charge credit, equal to the cost of service as set forth in section 7-8C-3 of this article, may be granted to the owner or tenant of
any property taxed as residential, when water consumption is in excess of ten thousand (10,000) gallons per regular billing period of the West Des
Moines waterworks.
1. For newly constructed residences for which an occupancy permit has been granted during the current calendar year, the credit period shall begin
with the regular billing period during which water consumption exceeds ten thousand (10,000) gallons.
2. For preexisting residences, the credit period shall begin with the regular billing period during which an application for such credit is approved, as set
forth below.
3. Credit periods shall end on the day when a water meter reading for a regular billing period is obtained, or scheduled to be obtained, in December of
the same calendar year.
4. No credit shall be granted when water consumption is less than ten thousand (10,000) gallons during a regular billing period.
C. The sanitary sewer service charge credit, in the amount described above, may be granted to any owner or tenant of any property taxed as residential, in
accordance with the following procedure:
1. For newly constructed residences, such credit shall be administratively granted when water consumption exceeds ten thousand (10,000) gallons per
regular billing period, without further action by the owner or the tenant.
2. For preexisting residences, written application shall be submitted to the West Des Moines waterworks by the owner or tenant, setting forth the
following information:
a. Owner or tenant's name, address and telephone number;
b. A description of the improvements which occurred in the yard area; and
c. Area calculations demonstrating that at least fifty one percent (51%) of the yard area has been replanted or resodded.
3. A credit may be administratively granted to apply retroactively to the regular billing period immediately prior to the billing period during which an
application is approved.
D. The city manager, in his sole discretion, may authorize sanitary sewer service charge credits in unique situations, on a case by case basis.
E. Any person aggrieved by any decision regarding the application of this article may appeal to the mayor and city council, utilizing the appeals procedure
set forth in section 8-2G-9 of this code. (Ord. 1413, 5-30-2000; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-7: LIABILITY:
The owner of the premises serviced and the occupant thereof and the user of the sanitary sewer service shall be jointly and severally liable for the sewer
service provided to said premises. (Ord. 965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-8: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
Each delinquent account which is transmitted to the finance department by the West Des Moines waterworks shall thereafter be processed for imposition
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 376/687
of a lien upon the contributor's property as provided by section 384.84 of the Iowa Code, in the amount of the delinquent account, plus a county
administrative fee for each lien certified as provided in section 384.84 of the Iowa Code, plus a city delinquency fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) to
recoup the city's administrative processing costs and lost investment on the unpaid amount. The lien herein provided shall apply only to that property or
those properties for which the contributor's account is delinquent. (Ord. 1083, 3-28-1994, eff. 7-1-1994; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010,
eff. 9-17-2010)
7-8C-9: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED:
No statement in this article shall be construed as preventing a special agreement, arrangement or contract between the council and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the council;
provided further, such rates and agreement shall not be in violation of any law, or any outside contract between the city and any other corporate entity.
(Ord. 965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-10: ANNUAL REVISION OF RATES:
The city will review the user charge system at least yearly and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate
revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance (including replacement and debt service), and that the system continues to provide for the
proportional distribution of operation, maintenance and expansion (including replacement and debt service) among users and user classes. Liability to pay
user charges as set out above shall not be contingent upon such review or revision, however. (Ord. 965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-11: SEWER CAPITAL CHARGE:
Except as hereinafter noted, every new contributor whose premises or property is or will be served by a connection with the sewer system of the city,
either directly or indirectly, shall pay to the city charges hereinafter established and specified for the purpose of contributing for the capital cost of
construction for improvements completed by the wastewater reclamation authority for the direct benefit of the city, and for interceptor, trunk and collection
system improvements, except for costs funded by a connection fee. (Ord. 1870, 6-1-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
7-8C-12: CHARGES FOR RESIDENTIAL PLATS:
Each owner of property, which lies within the corporate limits of the city, who shall file a final plat shall pay to the city, prior to the release of the plat for
recording at the county recorder's office, a sewer capital charge computed as follows:
For each lot of record located in a residential zoning district which provides for one detached single-family unit (e.g., single-family house, detached singlefamily
townhome, or similar detached single-family residential living unit) per lot of record, the sum of eight hundred fifty five dollars ($855.00) per
residential development lot. The fee shall be adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year, rounded to the nearest whole dollar, based on a positive change in
the ENR construction cost index for the one year period ending in April of the calendar year in which the adjustment is made. The finance director shall
determine the applicable connection fees for each established connection fee district and the development services department shall maintain on file the
fees effective July 1 of each calendar year.
Such charge shall be in addition to those specified in sections 7-8C-3 and 7-8C-4 of this article.
This section shall be applicable to all final plats filed after the effective date hereof. This section shall also be applicable to all final plats filed before the
effective date hereof unless the public improvements within the plat are accepted by the city prior to September 1, 1990. (Ord. 1909, 2-22-2011)
7-8C-13: BUILDING CHARGES:
A. Residential Building Charge: Each applicant for a building permit for a dwelling unit within the corporate limits of the city, which premises will be served
by a connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city, shall make a payment to the sewer capital charge as a part of the building permit fee as
follows:
Four hundred eighty four dollars ($484.00) per dwelling unit. The fee shall be adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year, rounded to the nearest whole
dollar, based on a positive change in the ENR construction cost index for the one year period ending in April of the calendar year in which the
adjustment is made. The finance director shall determine the applicable connection fees for each established connection fee district and the
development services department shall maintain on file the fees effective July 1 of each calendar year.
Such a charge shall not be applicable for any lot on which the dwelling unit would be located which has paid a sewer capital charge as specified in
section 7-8C-12 of this article.
This subsection shall not be applicable to remodeling, reconstruction or additions to existing single-family residential dwelling units, or remodeling or
reconstruction of multiple-family residential dwelling units.
Such charge under this subsection shall be in addition to those specified in sections 7-8C-3 and 7-8C-4 of this article.
B. Nonresidential Building Charges: Each applicant for a building permit for construction of a nonresidential building within the corporate limits of the city,
whose building is served by a connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city, shall make a payment to the sewer capital charge as a part of the
building permit fee as follows:
Sixteen dollars ten cents ($16.10) per fixture unit connected to the sanitary sewer system. The fee shall be adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year,
rounded to the nearest five cents ($0.05), based on a positive change in the ENR construction cost index for the one year period ending in April of the
calendar year in which the adjustment is made. The finance director shall determine the applicable connection fees for each established connection fee
district and the development services department shall maintain on file the fees effective July 1 of each calendar year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 377/687
For a new building which replaces an existing nonresidential building demolished within the previous twelve (12) months, the total fixture units
connected will be reduced by the number of fixture units in the demolished building.
Fixture unit shall be computed from the table on file in the office of the city clerk.
Such charges shall be in addition to those specified in sections 7-8C-3 and 7-8C-4 of this article.
C. Nonresidential Building Modification Charge: Each applicant for a building permit for the remodeling, additions to existing buildings or construction of
additional buildings on the same commercial or industrial site shall pay a charge as a part of the building permit as specified in subsection B of this
section for the number of fixture units connected to the sanitary sewer system increased through the remodeling, additions to existing buildings or
construction of additional buildings on the same site.
D. Connection Of Existing Buildings: Each owner of an existing building which connects to the sewage system of the city shall pay the sewer capital
charge as specified in subsection A or B of this section. (Ord. 1909, 2-22-2011)
7-8C-14: CONNECTION FEE DISTRICTS:
A. The city has determined the necessity of establishing a policy and a procedure to be utilized to recover the cost of designing and constructing major
sanitary sewer facilities in those instances in which a significant number of the properties to be benefited by such facilities are not sufficiently developed
to permit the recovery of those costs through the special assessment process as provided in chapter 384, division IV of the Iowa Code. The city hereby
declares its intent to utilize connection fees, as herein provided, to recover the costs of designing and constructing such major sanitary sewer facilities
from property owners who connect to such facilities subsequent to their construction.
It is the intent of this section to set forth the method of recovery of proportional cost shares from those property owners who connect their properties to
major sanitary sewer facilities subsequent to their construction, so that in the event that all property, other than street and road right of way, which lies
within the benefited district is connected to the major sanitary sewer facilities during their expected useful life, then those properties shall bear, in the
aggregate, up to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of designing and constructing such facilities, including legal and administrative expenses
associated therewith. (Ord. 1337, 11-2-1998; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
B. The connection fee ordinance may provide, at the city council's discretion, that single-family residences within the benefited district and located within
the corporate limits of the city are eligible for connection to the major sanitary sewer facility. The applicable connection fee for a single-family residence
shall be:
1. That the owners of residences on parcels of less than one acre in size located within the city may connect such residences to the major sanitary
sewer facility upon approval of their application for connection, payment of the connection fee for the parcel as determined by the per acre fee
multiplied by the area of the lot of record on which such residence is located and construction, at the owner's expense, of appropriate connection
structures, as determined necessary by the city engineer.
2. That the owners of residences on parcels in excess of one acre in size located within the city may connect such residences to the major sanitary
sewer facility upon approval of their application for connection, designation in writing of a one acre single residence parcel and a remainder parcel,
payment of the connection fee for the area of the one acre residence parcel, and construction at the owner's expense, of appropriate connection
structures, as determined necessary by the city engineer. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised application for
connection and payment of the appropriate connection fee.
The connection fee ordinance may also provide, at the city council's discretion, that sanitary sewer service can be provided to recreational and park
facilities in the same manner and under the same procedures as set forth in this section for single-family residences within the benefited district.
All other property located within the corporate limits of the city and within a benefited district shall be eligible for connection to the major sanitary
sewer facility upon approval of an application for connection by the owner thereof as hereafter provided, and payment of the connection fee for such
property, provided such property has been appropriately subdivided for development, and, where applicable, all sanitary sewer improvements
necessary to serve said property have been constructed, at the owner's expense, and accepted by the city. The area for payment of the connection
fee shall be determined by the total area subdivided, less the area of any property to be conveyed to the city as a public park. For buildable lots of
record within the subdivision with an area greater than one acre the fees shall be determined for one acre of each lot of record. (Ord. 1895, 12-13-
2010)
C. At the public hearing, the owners of property within the proposed benefited district shall be heard and may offer comments or objections as to:
1. The necessity for the project;
2. The calculation of the area benefited by the proposed major sanitary sewer facilities;
3. The estimated cost of the proposed facilities; and
4. The proposed per acre connection fee.
Upon concluding the hearing, the city council shall rule upon the objections presented during the hearing and may consider the adoption of the
proposed connection fee ordinance. Upon consideration of the proposed connection fee ordinance, the council may:
1. Adopt the ordinance as proposed;
2. Delete elements or portions of the proposed major sanitary sewer facilities from the proposed project and the properties served thereby from the
benefited district proposed; or
3. Amend the ordinance to revise the connection fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 378/687
D. The connection fee ordinance may provide, at the city council's discretion, that single-family residences within the benefited district, in existence or
under construction upon the effective date of the ordinance, and located within the corporate limits of the city, are eligible for connection to the major
sanitary sewer facility. In that event, the ordinance shall include the following provisions:
1. That the owners of residences on parcels of less than one acre in size located within the city may connect such residences to the major sanitary
sewer facility upon approval of their application for connection, payment of the connection fee for the parcel, and construction, at the owner's
expense, of appropriate connection structures, as determined necessary by the city engineer, and
2. That the owners of residences on parcels in excess of one acre in size located within the city may connect such residences to the major sanitary
sewer facility upon approval of their application for connection, subdivision of said parcel into a single residence parcel and an outlot, payment of the
connection fee for the residence parcel, and construction, at the owner's expense, of appropriate connection structures, as determined necessary by
the city engineer. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised application for connection and payment of the appropriate
connection fee.
The connection fee ordinance may also provide, at the city council's discretion, that sanitary sewer service can be provided to recreational and park
facilities in the same manner and under the same procedures set forth in this section for single-family residences within the benefited district.
All other property located within the corporate limits of the city and within a benefited district shall be eligible for connection to the major sanitary
sewer facility upon approval of an application for connection by the owner thereof, as hereafter provided, and payment of the connection fee for such
property, provided such property has been appropriately subdivided for development, and, where applicable, all sanitary sewer improvements
necessary to serve said property have been constructed, at the owner's expense, and accepted by the city.
E. After adoption, publication and recording by the city clerk in each county where property in the benefited district is located, of a connection fee
ordinance for a benefited district, all owners of those properties within the benefited district whose properties are eligible for connection, and who
propose to connect such properties directly or indirectly to the major sanitary sewer facility, shall make application to the city for such connection. The
submittal of construction plans to the city for sanitary sewer improvements on property being subdivided for development shall constitute an application
to the city for purposes of this section. The sewer connection fee shall be due and payable at the time application is made to the city for connection to
the major sanitary sewer facility. No connection shall be made to a major sanitary sewer facility until such application has been approved and until the
required connection fee has been paid. The sewer connection fee required by this section shall be paid before the city will approve the final plat of
property subject to the sewer connection fee. (Ord. 1337, 11-2-1998; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
F. The sewer connection fee shall be in an amount equal to the maximum area of contiguous property or fraction thereof, within the benefited district under
common ownership which can be lawfully served through such proposed connection, multiplied by the per acre connection fee established in the
connection fee ordinance for that benefited district subject to the provisions of this section for determination of the applicable area for calculation of the
connection fee. The connection fee shall be adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year based on the change in the ENR construction cost index for the
one year period ending in April of the calendar year in which the adjustment is made. The finance director shall determine the applicable connection
fees for each established connection fee district and the development services department shall maintain on file the connection fees in each connection
fee district effective July 1 of each calendar year. (Ord. 1895, 12-13-2010)
G. The sewer connection fee required by this section shall be due and payable to the city treasurer.
H. The sewer connection fee required by this section is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fees for connection required under the plumbing code or
other provisions of this code.
I. In the event any property owner connects his or her property within a benefited district to a major sanitary sewer facility without having made application
therefor or without having received approval thereof, or without having paid the required connection fee established by a connection fee ordinance, the
city shall be entitled to disconnect such private sewer connection until such time as the property owner has made and received approval of his or her
application, and/or has paid the required connection fee. (Ord. 1337, 11-2-1998; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-14-1: GRAND AVENUE WEST SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby established, consisting of a tract of land in sections 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34 and 35, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the east line of Section 24, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th Principal Meridian and the north right-ofway
line of Booneville Road;
Thence north along the east line of said Section 24 to the east quarter corner of said Section 24;
Thence westerly to the southeast corner of the Lot 44 Lakeview Heights, an official plat in and forming a part of Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northerly along the east line of said Lot 44 to the northeast corner of said Lot 44;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of said Lot 44 to the northwest corner of said Lot 44;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 51 Lakeview Heights to the northwest corner of said Lot 51;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 52 Lakeview Heights to the northwest corner of said Lot 52;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 59 Lakeview Heights to the northwest corner of said Lot 59;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 60 Lakeview Heights to the northwest corner of said Lot 60, said point also being located on the southerly
line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 24;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 379/687
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 24 to the southwest corner of the northeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 24;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 24 to the southwest corner of Lot 87 Lakeview
Heights;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 87 to the northwest corner of said Lot 87 Lakeview Heights, said corner also being the northwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 24;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 24 to the north quarter corner of said Section 24;
Thence northerly along the east line of the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 78 North, Range 26 West, to the center of said Section 13;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of said Section 13 to the west 1/4 corner of said Section 13;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northeast quarter of Section 14, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the center of Section 14;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of Section 14 to the west quarter corner of Section 14;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 14 to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of Section 14;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 15, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the
southwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 15;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 15 to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the northeast quarter of Section 15;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 10, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the
northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 10;
Thence easterly along the northerly line of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 10 to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of
the southeast quarter of Section 10;
Thence northerly along the east line of the southeast quarter of Section 10 to the east quarter corner of Section 10;
Thence northerly along the easterly line of the northeast quarter of Section 10 to the centerline of Wendover Road;
Thence westerly along the centerline of Wendover Road to a point where the right-of-way of Wendover Road is adjacent to the southerly right-of-way of
Interstate 80;
Thence southwesterly and westerly along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate 80 to the point of intersection with the west line of the southeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 9, Township 78 North, Range 26 West;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 9 to the southwest corner of the southwest quarter of
the southwest quarter of Section 9;
Thence southerly along the easterly line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the
southeast corner of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 16;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 16 to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of Section 16;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 17, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the
southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 17;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 17 to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
the northeast quarter of Section 17;
Thence southerly along the easterly line of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 17 to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of Section 17, said point being the center of Section 17;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 17 to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of Section 17;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17 to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the southwest quarter of Section 17;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17 to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter
of the southwest quarter of Section 17;
Thence easterly along the southerly line of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17 to the southeast corner of the southeast corner of
the southwest quarter of Section 17, said point also being the north quarter corner of Section 20, Township 78 North, Range 26 West;
Thence southerly along the easterly line of the northwest quarter of Section 20 to the center of Section 20;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of Section 20 to the west quarter corner of Section 20;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of Section 20 to the southwest quarter corner of said Section 20;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of Section 29, Township 78 North, Range 26 West, to the southwest quarter corner of said Section 29;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 380/687
Thence southerly along the westerly line of Section 32, Township 78 North, Range 26 West, to the high water mark on the north bank of the Raccoon
River;
Thence easterly along the high water mark on the north bank of the Raccoon River through said Section 27, 34, 35, 26, 25 and 30, to the west right-of-way
line of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence northerly along the west right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 35 to the north line of Section 30, Township 78 North, Range 25 West;
Thence west along the south line of Section 19, Township 78, Range 24 West to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of said Section 19;
Thence west along the south line of said Section 19 to the southwest corner of the east 1/2 of the southwest quarter of said Section 19;
Thence north along the west line of the east 1/2 of the southwest quarter of said Section 19 to a point on the north right-of-way line of Booneville Road;
Thence northwesterly along the north right-of-way line of Booneville Road to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee
district, pursuant to ordinance 13371, at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2011, a connection fee of three thousand six hundred seventy dollars ($3,670.00) per
acre of property served by the sewer facility shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per acre connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each
year according to section 7-8C-14 of this article.
B. Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall also apply to any properties outside the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer
connection fee district which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities constructed for the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection
fee district. The appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is derived by the property.
C. Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any properties within the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection
fee district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district.
D. Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
E. Park Facility: The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit recreational or park facility upon the effective date hereof may apply for
construction upon annexation to the city and payment of a single acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised
application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection fee.
F. Community College: Any parcel for which a proposal of development as a community college campus is under consideration by the city council at the
time of the effective date hereof shall be exempt from payment of any connection fee to serve the college facilities.
G. Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district.
Nothing herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
H. Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct sewers within the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district
as graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary sewers required to
provide sewer service to the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct
under the provisions of the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district. (Ord. 1891, 11-29-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
7-8C-14-2: SOUTH SERVICE AREA SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby established, consisting of a tract of land in sections 14, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35, township 78 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian, Polk County, Iowa, and sections 4, 5 and 6, township 77 north,
range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian, Warren County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of section 26, township 78 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian;
Thence south, along the east line of the northwest quarter of said section 26, to the center of said section 26;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 26, to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of said section 35;
Thence east, along the north line of said section 35, to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 35;
Thence south, along the east line of the west half of the northeast quarter of said section 35, to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the
northeast quarter of said section 35;
Thence south, along the east line of the west half of the southeast quarter of said section 35, to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the
southeast quarter of said section 35;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 35, to the southeast corner of said section 34;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 381/687
Thence west along the south line of said section 34, to the northeast corner of section 4, township 77 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian;
Thence south along the east line of said section 4 to the east quarter corner of said section 4;
Thence south along the east line of the southeast quarter of said section 4 to the southeast corner of the north one-half of the north one-half of the
southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 4 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said section 4 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said section 4;
Thence north along the west line of the southwest quarter of said section 4 to the west quarter corner of said section 4;
Thence west along the north line of the southeast quarter of section 5, township 77 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian to the northwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter to said section 5;
Thence south along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the
northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the
northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southeast corner of the
southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of the
southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the north half of the southeast quarter of section 6, township 77 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian to a
point on the east right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence north along the easterly right-of-way line of Interstate 35; through said sections 61, 31 and 30 to the high water mark on the south bank of the
Raccoon River;
Thence easterly along the high water mark of the south bank of the Raccoon River, through said sections 30, 29, 28, 21, 22, 23 and 14, to the east line of
the southwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 14, to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of said section 23;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of said section 23, to the center of said section 23;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 23, to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee
district, pursuant to ordinance 13372, at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2011, a connection fee of five thousand two hundred sixty dollars ($5,260.00) per acre
of property served by the sewer facility shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per acre connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year
according to section 7-8C-14 of this article.
B. Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall also apply to any properties outside the South Service Area sanitary sewer
connection fee district which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities constructed for the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee
district. The appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is derived by the property.
C. Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any properties within the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection
fee district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district.
D. Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
E. Park Facility: The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit recreational or park facility upon the effective date hereof may apply for
construction upon annexation to the city and payment of a single acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised
application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection fee.
F. Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district.
Nothing herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 382/687
G. Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct sewers within the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district
as graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary sewers required to
provide sewer service to the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct
under the provisions of the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district. (Ord. 1890, 11-29-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
7-8C-14-3: QUAIL PARK/THORNWOOD SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Quail Park/Thornwood sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby established consisting of a tract of land located in sections 20 and 21, township
78 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the east line of the northeast quarter of Section 20, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian with said point
being located a distance of 600 feet north of the east quarter corner of said Section 20;
Thence west along a line parallel to and 600 feet north of the south line of the northeast quarter of said Section 20 to a point on the west line of the east
one-half of the northeast quarter of said Section 20;
Thence south along the west line of the east one-half of the northeast quarter of said Section 20 to the southwest corner of the east one-half of the
northeast quarter of said Section 20, said point being the northeast corner of Lot 28, Quail Park Plat 1;
Thence west along the north line of said Lot 28 to the northwest corner of said Lot 28;
Thence west along the north line of Lot 29, Quail Park Plat 1 to the northwest corner of said Lot 29;
Thence west along the north line of Lot 30, Quail Park Plat 1 to the northwest corner of said Lot 30;
Thence west along the north line of Lot 31, Quail Park Plat 1 to the northwest corner of said Lot 31;
Thence west along the north line of Lot 32, Quail Park Plat 1 to the northwest corner of said Lot 32;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of said Lot 32 to the southwest corner of said Lot 32;
Thence southerly along an extension of the westerly line of said Lot 32 across the right-of-way of Timberwood Drive to a point on the south line of the
right-of-way of Timberwood Drive;
Thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Timberwood Drive to the northwest corner of Lot 24, Quail Park Plat 1;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of said Lot 24 to the southwest corner of said Lot 24;
Thence east along the south line of said Lot 24 to the southeast corner of said Lot 24;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 25, Quail Park Plat 1 to the southwest corner of said Lot 25;
Thence east along the south line of said Lot 25 to the southeast corner of said Lot 25;
Thence east along the south line of Lot 26, Quail Park Plat 1 to the southeast corner of said Lot 26;
Thence east along the south line of Lot 27, Quail Park Plat 1 to the southeast corner of said Lot 27;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 6, Thornwood to the southwest corner of said Lot 6;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 5, Thornwood to the southwest corner of said Lot 5;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 4, Thornwood to the southwest corner of said Lot 4;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 3, Thornwood to the southwest corner of said Lot 3;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 2, Thornwood to the southwest corner of said Lot 2;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 1, Thornwood to the southwest corner of said Lot 1, said point being located on the north right-of-way line of Grand
Avenue;
Thence easterly along the northerly right-of-way of Grand Avenue to the point of intersection with the westerly right-of-way line of South 35th Street;
Thence northerly along the westerly right-of-way line of said South 35th Street to a point 600 feet north of the south line of the northwest quarter of Section
21, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian;
Thence west along a line parallel to and 600 feet north of the south line of the northwest quarter of said Section 21, to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Quail Park/Thornwood sanitary sewer connection fee
district, pursuant to ordinance 13373, at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows: (Ord. 1882, 10-4-2010, eff. 10-
8-2010)
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2012, the connection fee for properties served by the sewer facility shall be:
Category Connection Fee
(Dollars Per
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 383/687
Residential
Dwelling Unit)
1 $10,576.00
2 16,833.00
3 13,468.00
Thereafter, the above noted connection fees shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year according to section 7-8C-14 of this article.
Category 1 shall consist of single-family residences served by a dry sanitary sewer located adjacent to the residential lot.
Category 2 shall consist of single-family residences in the Thornwood Subdivision and unplatted lots located on the west side of South 35th Street
bounded on the west, north and south by the Thornwood Subdivision.
Category 3 shall consist of all other residences in the connection fee district not classified as category 1 or category 2. (Ord. 1928, 8-8-2011)
B. Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any properties within the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer
Connection Fee District which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer
Connection Fee District.
C. Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
D. Single-Family Residence: The connection fee shall be based on each single-family residential dwelling unit. The fee paid shall be applicable only to that
single-family residential unit. Any division of an existing property that results in the creation of additional single-family lots or the construction of
additional single-family residences shall subject such additional lots or residences to the payment of the appropriate connection fee.
E. Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the City Council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District.
Nothing herein is intended to restrict the City Council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
F. Sewers Constructed: The City shall be responsible to design and construct sewers within the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District as graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the Office of the City Clerk. Other sanitary sewers
required to provide sewer service to the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District shall not be the responsibility of the City to
design and construct under the provisions of the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. (Ord. 1882, 10-4-2010, eff. 10-8-2010)
G. Pressured System Grinder Pump Service:
1. The City shall maintain, repair, and replace privately-owned sanitary sewer pressure system grinder pumps and controls installed within the Quail
Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District and located on private property ("premises"). "Maintain" includes examination and
diagnosis if there is a reported problem regarding the grinder pump and controls. "Maintain" does not include regular inspection or service of the
grinder pump and controls.
2. Property owners installing a sanitary sewer pressure system grinder pump shall use a contractor approved by the City to supply and install the
system grinder pump.
3. Property owners who have installed a sanitary sewer pressure system grinder pump shall allow the City and its contractor right of entry and
reasonable access onto the premises for purposes of maintaining, repairing, and replacing the grinder pump and controls. Said right of entry and
access shall run with the land and be binding upon the property owners, as well as their successors and assigns, all upon the terms and conditions
set forth herein.
4. The property owners are responsible for the operation of the grinder pump and controls. The property owners are also responsible for installing,
repairing, and replacing service lines from the residence to the grinder pump station, the service lines from the grinder pump station to the City's low
pressure sewer system in the public right-of-way, including isolation valves and backflow prevention devices, and for the electrical service from the
residence to the grinder pump station.
5. The City is not responsible for any damage to the premises related to sewer backups, damaged service lines, including isolation valves and backflow
prevention devices, or related to faulty electrical service. The City is solely responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of the sanitary
sewer pressure system grinder pump and controls. The City is also not responsible for the cost of any damage, repair, or replacement caused to the
grinder pump attributable to the property owner's negligent, reckless, or intentional actions. "Attributable to the property owner" includes all residents
and guests of the property owner. The City is further not responsible for any cost associated with grinder pump services provided by other entities or
persons if the property owner has elected to retain his or her own contractor to perform these services.
6. If it has been determined that unsuitable debris has been placed into the grinder pump sanitary sewer system, the property owner shall be assessed
all costs associated with such repair or replacement. "Unsuitable debris" shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Grease, oil, gasoline, flammable material, paint, or strong chemicals.
b. Metal, bones, or plastic.
c. Abrasive materials, including, without limitation, sand, rocks, cat litter, glass, seafood shells, or goldfish stone.
d. Feminine hygiene products, personal cleaning wipes, diapers, socks, rags, or cloth.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 384/687
e. Stormwater.
7. Property owners shall not place any structures, landscaping materials, plant materials, or change the grade of the premises in any way, that would
adversely affect access to the grinder pump sanitary sewer system. Property owners shall timely disclose any conditions on the premises that would
restrict the City's or its contractor's ability to maintain, repair, or replace the grinder pumps and controls. (Ord. 2236, 7-24-2017)
7-8C-14-4: RACCOON RIVER BASIN SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Raccoon River Basin Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District is hereby established consisting of a tract of land located in sections 30 and 31,
township 78 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Polk County, Iowa, sections 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36, township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, section 6, township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren
County, Iowa, and sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, township 77 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Madison County, Iowa, more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing at the point of intersection of the high water mark on the south bank of the Raccoon River and the westerly right-of-way line of Interstate
Highway 35; thence southerly along the westerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 35 to a point on the south line of the north one-half of the north
one-half of the southwest quarter, Section 6, Township 77 North, Range 25 West;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said Section 6 to a point on the west line of said Section 6;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of Section 1, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 1;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said Section 1 to a point on the west line of said Section 1;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of Section 2, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 2;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said Section 2 to a point on the west line of said Section 2;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 3;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said Section 3 to a point on the west line of said Section 3;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of Section 4, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 4;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said Section 4 to a point on the west line of said Section 4;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of Section 5, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 5;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said Section 5 to a point on the west line of said Section 5;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the south one-half of Section 6, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west line
of said Section 6;
Thence north along the west line of said Section 6 to the northwest corner of said Section 6;
Thence north along the west line of Section 31, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the northwest corner of said Section 31;
Thence north along the west line of Section 30, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the high water mark on the south bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence easterly along the high water mark on the south bank of the Raccoon River through Sections 30, 31, 32, 33, 28, 34, 27, 35, 26 and 25, Township
78 North, Range 26 West to a point on the east line of said Section 25;
Thence continuing easterly along the high water mark on the south bank of the Raccoon River through Section 30, Township 78 North, Range 25 West to
the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee
district, pursuant to ordinance 13374, at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2011, a connection fee of six thousand nine hundred fifty dollars ($6,950.00) per acre of
property served by the sewer facility shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per acre connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year
according to section 7-8C-14 of this article.
B. Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall also apply to any properties outside the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer
connection fee district which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities constructed for the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection
fee district. The appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is derived by the property.
C. Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any properties within the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection
fee district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee district.
D. Payment: Except as provided in subsection H, "Preliminary Plat Prior To Adoption", of this section the determination that a property is to be connected
to the sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 385/687
of a building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
E. Park Facility: The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit recreational or park facility upon the effective date hereof may apply for
construction upon annexation to the city and payment of a single acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised
application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection fee.
F. Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee district.
Nothing herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
G. Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct sewers within the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee district
as graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary sewers required to
provide sewer service to the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and
construct under the provisions of the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee district.
H. Preliminary Plat Prior To Adoption: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection D, "Payment", of this section, for property that is included in a
preliminary plat approved prior to the effective date hereof the payment for the connection fee for buildable lots of record within the preliminary plat
shall be at the time of the first issuance of a building or plumbing permit for the applicable lot, and payment of the connection fee for areas within the
final plat not included in a buildable lot of record shall be at the time of issuance of the first building permit and subsequent building permits within the
plat shall not be issued until the connection fee service for the areas not included in a buildable lot of record is paid in full. (Ord. 1889, 11-29-2010, eff.
1-1-2011)
7-8C-14-5: MIDDLE CREEK SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby established, consisting of a tract of land located in sections 4, 5, 8 and 9, township 77
north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the southeast corner of the north one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of section 4, township 77 north, range 25 west of
the 5th principal meridian;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 4 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said section 4 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said section 4;
Thence north along the west line of the southwest quarter of said section 4 to the west quarter corner of said section 4;
Thence west along the north line of the southeast quarter of section 5, township 77 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian to the northwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter to said section 5;
Thence south along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the
northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the
northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southeast corner of the
southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence south along the west line of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence east along the south line of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the south quarter corner of said section 5;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of section 8, township 77 north, range 25 west to a point on the east line of the northeast quarter,
said point being the westerly line of the abandoned 100 foot wide railroad right-of-way;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of said 100 foot wide abandoned right-of-way to a point, said point being on a line drawn radially to the original
main line track centerline at a point thereon 1,430 feet northerly of the south line of the northwest quarter of said section 8;
Thence westerly along a line drawn radially to the centerline of the original main line track of the abandoned railroad right-of-way to a point, said point
being a distance of 100 feet from the centerline of the original main line track as measured radially from said centerline;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of the abandoned railroad right-of-way, said line being a distance of 100 feet as measured radially from the
centerline of the original main line track to the south line of the northwest quarter of said section 8;
Thence east along the south line of the northwest quarter of said section 8 to the center of said section 8;
Thence east along the south line of the northeast quarter of said section 8 to a point 703.72 feet west of the east line of said section 8;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 386/687
Thence south to a point 703.72 feet west of the east line of the southeast quarter of said section 8 and 864.00 feet north of the south line of the northeast
quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 8;
Thence east to a point on the east line of said section 8, said point being 864.00 feet north of the south line of the northeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of said section 8;
Thence north along the east line of the southeast quarter of said section 8 to the east quarter corner of said section 8;
Thence east along the south line of the northwest quarter of section 9, township 77 north, range 25 west to the center of said section 9;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of said section 9 to the north quarter corner of said section 9;
Thence east along the south line of the southeast quarter of section 4, township 77 north, range 25 west to the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter
of the southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence north along the west line of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 4 to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the
southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence east along the north line of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 4 to the east line of said section 4;
Thence north along the east line of said section 4 to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district,
pursuant to ordinance 13375, at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2011, a connection fee of one thousand eight hundred eighty dollars ($1,880.00) per
acre of property served by the sewer facility shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per acre connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each
year according to section 7-8C-14 of this article.
B. Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall also apply to any properties outside the Middle Creek sanitary sewer
connection fee district which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities constructed for the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee
district. The appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is derived by the property.
C. Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any properties within the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee
district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district.
D. Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
E. Park Facility: The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit recreational or park facility upon the effective date hereof may apply for
construction upon annexation to the city and payment of a single acre connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised
application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection fee.
F. Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district. Nothing
herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
G. Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct sewers within the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district as
graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary sewers required to
provide sewer service to the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct under
the provisions of the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district. (Ord. 1894, 11-29-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
7-8C-14-6: ASHWORTH ROAD LOW PRESSURE SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby established consisting of a tract of land located in Section 6, Township
78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the Southwest Corner of the southwest fractional 1/4 of Section 6, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian,
Thence east along the south line of the southwest fractional 1/4 of said Section 6 to a point 1,924 feet east of the southwest quarter,
Thence north a distance of 33 feet to the point of beginning;
Thence north a distance of 300 feet,
Thence west a distance of 100 feet,
Thence north a distance of 17 feet,
Thence west a distance of 164 feet,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 387/687
Thence north a distance of 10 feet,
Thence west a distance of 150 feet,
Thence south a distance of 30 feet,
Thence west a distance of 114 feet,
Thence south a distance of 297 feet,
Thence east along a line parallel to and 33 feet north of the south line of the southwest fractional 1/4 of said Section 6 a distance of 528 feet to the Point of
Beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer
connection fee district, pursuant to ordinance 1337 as amended by ordinance 1895 at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer
facilities, as follows:
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2015, the connection fee for properties served by the sewer facility shall be:
Connection Fee
(Dollars Per Residential Dwelling Unit)
$24,856.00 Through September 30, 2014
$25,547.00 October 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015
The per acre connection fee shall be adjusted annually as of July 1 of each year according to the annual adjustment in the ENR construction cost index as
provided in section 7-8C-14 of this article.
B. Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any properties within the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer
connection fee district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities constructed for the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer
connection fee district.
C. Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
D. Single-Family Residence: The connection fee shall be based on each single-family residential dwelling unit. The fee paid shall be applicable only to that
single-family residential unit. Any division of an existing property that results in the creation of additional single-family lots or the construction of an
additional single-family residence shall subject such additional lots or residences to the payment of the appropriate connection fee.
E. Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer connection fee
district. Nothing herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction
costs.
F. Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct sewers within the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer connection fee
district as graphically depicted on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary sewers
required to provide sewer service to the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District shall not be the responsibility of the City
to design and construct under the provisions of the Ashworth Road Low Pressure Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. (Ord. 2045, 7-28-2014, eff.
8-1-2014)
G. Pressured System Grinder Pump Service:
1. The City shall maintain, repair, and replace privately-owned sanitary sewer pressure system grinder pumps and controls installed within the
Ashworth Road Low Pressure Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District and located on private property ("premises"). "Maintain" includes examination
and diagnosis if there is a reported problem regarding the grinder pump and controls. "Maintain" does not include regular inspection or service of the
grinder pump and controls.
2. Property owners installing a sanitary sewer pressure system grinder pump shall use a contractor approved by the City to supply and install the
system grinder pump.
3. Property owners who have installed a sanitary sewer pressure system grinder pump shall allow the City and its contractor right of entry and
reasonable access onto the premises for purposes of maintaining, repairing, and replacing the grinder pump and controls. Said right of entry and
access shall run with the land and be binding upon the property owners, as well as their successors and assigns, all upon the terms and conditions
set forth herein.
4. The property owners are responsible for the operation of the grinder pump and controls. The property owners are also responsible for installing,
repairing, and replacing service lines from the residence to the grinder pump station, the service lines from the grinder pump station to the City's low
pressure sewer system in the public right-of-way, including isolation valves and backflow prevention devices, and for the electrical service from the
residence to the grinder pump station.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 388/687
5. The City is not responsible for any damage to the premises related to sewer backups, damaged service lines, including isolation valves and backflow
prevention devices, or related to faulty electrical service. The City is solely responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of the sanitary
sewer pressure system grinder pump and controls. The City is also not responsible for the cost of any damage, repair, or replacement caused to the
grinder pump attributable to the property owner's negligent, reckless, or intentional actions. "Attributable to the property owner" includes all residents
and guests of the property owner. The City is further not responsible for any cost associated with grinder pump services provided by other entities or
persons if the property owner has elected to retain his or her own contractor to perform these services.
6. If it has been determined that unsuitable debris has been placed into the grinder pump sanitary sewer system, the property owner shall be assessed
all costs associated with such repair or replacement. "Unsuitable debris" shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Grease, oil, gasoline, flammable material, paint, or strong chemicals.
b. Metal, bones, or plastic.
c. Abrasive materials, including, without limitation, sand, rocks, cat litter, glass, seafood shells, or goldfish stone.
d. Feminine hygiene products, personal cleaning wipes, diapers, socks, rags, or cloth.
e. Stormwater.
7. Property owners shall not place any structures, landscaping materials, plant materials, or change the grade of the premises in any way, that would
adversely affect access to the grinder pump sanitary sewer system. Property owners shall timely disclose any conditions on the premises that would
restrict the City's or its contractor's ability to maintain, repair, or replace the grinder pumps and controls. (Ord. 2236, 7-24-2017)
7-8C-14-7: SOUTH SIXTIETH STREET SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The South Sixtieth Street Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District shall consist of a tract of land located in section 24, township 78 north, range 26 west of
the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Starting at the northeast corner Lot 60 Lakeview Heights Plat 1, thence west along the north line of said Lot 60 to the northwest corner of said Lot 60,
thence south along the west line of said Lot 60 to the southwest corner of said Lot 60, thence south along the west line of Lot 59 Lakeview Heights Plat 1
to the southwest corner of said Lot 59, thence south along the west line of Lot 52 Lakeview Heights Plat 1 to the southwest corner of said Lot 52, thence
south along the west line of Lot 51 Lakeview Heights Plat 1 to the southwest corner of said Lot 51, thence east along the south line of said Lot 51 to the
southeast corner of said Lot 51, thence north along the east line of said Lot 51 to the northeast corner of said Lot 51, thence north along the east line of
said Lot 52 to the northeast corner of said Lot 52, thence north along the east line of said Lot 59 to the northeast corner of said Lot 59, thence north along
the east line of said Lot 60 to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the South Sixtieth Street Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District, pursuant to ordinance 1337 as amended by ordinance 1895 at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2017, the connection fee for properties served by the sewer facility shall be:
Connection Fee
(Dollars Per Residential
Dwelling Unit)
$20,300.00
The per acre connection fee shall be adjusted annually as of July 1 of each year according to the annual adjustment in the ENR construction cost index as
provided in section 7-8C-14 of this article.
B. Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid prior
to issuance of a plumbing permit to connect to the sewer or connection to the sewer, whichever occurs first. The connection fee may be paid in
advance of issuance of a plumbing permit or connection based on the applicable fee at the time of payment and no additional connection fee is
charged at the time of issuance of a plumbing permit or connection to the sewer.
C. Single-Family Residence: The connection fee shall be based on each single-family residential dwelling unit. The fee paid shall be applicable only to that
single-family residential unit. Any division of an existing property that results in the creation of additional single-family lots or the construction of any
additional single-family residences shall subject such additional lots or residences to the payment of the appropriate connection fee.
D. Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the City Council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the South Sixtieth Street Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District.
Nothing herein is intended to restrict the City Council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
E. Sewers Constructed: The City shall be responsible to design and construct sewers within the South Sixtieth Street Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District as graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 2150, 5-31-2016,
eff. 6-1-2016)
7-8C-14-8: DIXIE ACRES SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Dixie Acres Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District shall consist of a tract of land located in section 6, township 78 north, range 25 west of the 5th
principal meridian, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 389/687
Starting at the southeast corner of Lot 1 Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence north along the east line of Dixie Acres Plat 1 to the northeast corner of Lot 4 Dixie
Acres Plat 1, thence west along the north line of Lot 4 Dixie Acres Plat 1 to the northwest corner of Lot 4 Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence west across the rightof-
way of 54th Street to the northeast corner of Lot 5 Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence west along the north line of Dixie Acres Plat 1 to the northwest corner of
Lot 5 Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence south along the west line of Dixie Acres Plat 1 to the southwest corner of Lot 8 Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence east along the
south line of Dixie Acres Plat 1 to the Point of Beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Dixie Acres Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District,
pursuant to ordinance 1337 as amended by ordinance 1895 at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2016, the connection fee for properties served by the sewer facility shall be:
Connection Fee
(Dollars Per Residential
Dwelling Unit)
$28,063.00
The per acre connection fee shall be adjusted annually as of July 1 of each year according to the annual adjustment in the ENR construction cost
index as provided in section 7-8C-14 of this article.
B. Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid prior
to issuance of a plumbing permit to connect to the sewer or connection to the sewer, whichever occurs first. The connection fee may be paid in
advance of issuance of a plumbing permit or connection based on the applicable fee at the time of payment and no additional connection fee is
charged at the time of issuance of a plumbing permit or connection to the sewer.
C. Single-Family Residence: The connection fee shall be based on each single-family residential dwelling unit. The fee paid shall be applicable only to that
single-family residential unit. Any division of an existing property that results in the creation of additional single-family lots or the construction of any
additional single-family residences shall subject such additional lots or residences to the payment of the appropriate connection fee.
D. Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the City Council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years for the Dixie Acres Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. Nothing
herein is intended to restrict the City Council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
E. Sewers Constructed: The City shall be responsible to design and construct sewers within the Dixie Acres Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District as
graphically depicted on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 2103, 7-13-2015, eff. 9-1-
2015)
ARTICLE D. PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS
7-8D-1: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (1985 Code §3-3.0301)
7-8D-2: CONNECTION TO PRIVATE SYSTEM:
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 7-8A-3, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage system
complying with the provisions of this Article. (1985 Code §3-3.0302)
7-8D-3: PRIVATE SYSTEMS ABANDONED:
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 7-8A-3, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Article and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. (1985 Code §3-3.0310)
7-8D-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before commencing the construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a permit from the Polk or Dallas County Department
of Health. A copy of the permit shall be filed with the Building Inspection Department of the City. (1985 Code §3-3.0303; 1993 Code)
7-8D-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND COUNTY RULES:
The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of
Environmental Quality and rules, regulations and requirements of the Polk or Dallas County Health Department. (1985 Code §3-3.0305; 1993 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 390/687
7-8D-6: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet. (1985 Code §3-3.0306)
7-8D-7: INSPECTION REQUIRED:
The inspection requirements for a private sewage disposal system shall be in accordance with rules, regulations and requirements of the Polk or Dallas
County Department of Health. (1985 Code §3-3.0304; 1993 Code)
7-8D-8: DISPOSAL OF WASTE:
A. Location of Waste Disposal: It shall be unlawful for any person to place any effluent or waste from cesspools, septic tanks or privy vaults in any other
location in the City except in such location as may be designated by the Director. The rate or charge for receiving such waste shall be determined by
resolution of the Council. (1985 Code §3-3.0311; 1993 Code)
B. Discharge to Natural Outlets Prohibited: No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (1985 Code §3-3.0307)
7-8D-9: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
The owner of private sewage disposal facilities shall operate and maintain the facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the City.
(1985 Code §3-3.0308)
7-8D-10: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any health officer acting in
his official capacity. (1985 Code §3-3.0309)
ARTICLE E. ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
7-8E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of West Des Moines through the regulation of nonstorm
water discharges to the city of West Des Moines' separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable, as required by federal law. This article
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city of West Des Moines' separate storm sewer system in order to comply with
requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined for use in this article, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL CONNECTION: Either of the following:
A. Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain
system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstorm water discharge including sewage, processed wastewater, and
wash water to enter the storm drain system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said
drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstorm water discharge to the city of West Des Moines' separate storm sewer system, except as exempted
in section 7-8E-3 of this article.
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE: Discharges subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying storm water, including inlets,
catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural storm water controls, or other drainage structures which are owned or maintained by the city
of West Des Moines.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) PERMIT: A permit
issued by Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 391/687
NONSTORM WATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects or
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage; wastes and residues that result
from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
POLLUTION: The contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in color, turbidity, or odor of
such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such
waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: One or more persons that control or are in possession of or own property. Responsible parties shall be jointly and severally
responsible for compliance with this article and jointly and severally liable for any illicit discharge from the property controlled, possessed or owned. For
purposes of this article, "property" includes, but is not limited to, real estate, fixtures, facilities and premises of any kind located upon, under or above the
real estate. The definition of responsible party does not include the city when an illicit discharge is caused by a person on a public street or on public
property.
STORM WATER RUNOFF OR STORM WATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation,
and resulting from such precipitation.
STRUCTURAL STORM WATER CONTROL: A structural storm water management facility or device that controls storm water runoff and changes the
characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-3: ALLOWABLE NONSTORM WATER:
A. Discharges from firefighting activities, fire hydrant flushing, potable water sources, waterline flushing, uncontaminated ground water, foundation or
footing drains, springs, riparian habitats, wetlands, irrigation water, air conditioning condensate, exterior building wash water when no detergents or
other surfactants are used and pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred and when no detergents
or other surfactants are used. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-4: DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
A. Any discharge into the city's storm sewer system prohibited by the city's NPDES permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by reference, shall
be deemed an illicit discharge in violation of this article.
B. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection shall constitute a violation of this article. This prohibition expressly
includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-5: INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES:
Any responsible party subject to an industrial NPDES discharge permit issued by the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit. (Ord. 1657, 10-
24-2005)
7-8E-6: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every responsible party owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such responsible party's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property below the elevation of the 100-year flood free of trash, debris, grass clippings or other organic wastes and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly alter the quality of water flowing through the watercourse. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-7: ILLICIT DISCHARGE OR ILLEGAL CONNECTION DETECTION, REPORTING AND INSPECTION:
A. All detection activities permitted under this article shall be conducted by the public works director, or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as the
"inspector".
B. The city shall not be responsible for any direct or indirect consequences affecting responsible party or property as a result of an illicit discharge, or
circumstances which may cause an illicit discharge, whether detected or undetected by the city.
C. Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor conditions on property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit discharges, and to
report to the city any illicit discharges, which the responsible party knows or should have known to occur. Failure to comply with any provision of this
article is a violation of this article.
D. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any responsible party has information of any known or suspected illicit discharge, the
responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such discharge at the responsible
party's sole cost.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 392/687
E. If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the responsible party shall also immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
F. If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years.
G. A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by phone or facsimile or e-mail to the inspector immediately, but in any event within twenty
four (24) hours of the illicit discharge; notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or e-mailed to the
inspector within twenty four (24) hours of the personal or phone notice.
H. Any responsible party shall also report to the city any circumstances which such person or entity reasonably believes pose a risk of an illicit discharge.
I. Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous sections or otherwise coming into possession of information indicating an actual or imminent illicit
discharge or an illegal connection, the inspector shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon as reasonably possible and, if an illicit discharge or
illegal connection is found, the inspector shall thereafter provide to the responsible party(s) for such premises a written notice to abate conditions which
have already caused or may cause an illicit discharge or the presence of an illegal connection. The responsible parties shall immediately commence
corrective action or remediation and shall complete such corrective action or remediation within the time frame specified within the abatement notice.
J. The inspector shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property subject to regulation under this section as often as is necessary to determine
compliance with this section. If a responsible party owning, controlling or possessing a property has security measures that require identification and
clearance before entry to its property, such responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access by the inspector. By way of
specification, but not limitation:
1. A responsible party shall allow the inspector ready access to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying
of records related to a suspected, actual, or imminent illicit discharge, and for the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and
federal law.
2. The inspector shall have the right to set up on any property such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the inspector to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling related to a suspected, actual or imminent illicit discharge.
3. Any temporary or permanent obstruction that obstructs the safe and easy access to property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the responsible party at the written or oral order of the inspector and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the responsible party.
4. An unreasonable delay in allowing the inspector access to a property is a violation of this article.
5. If the inspector has been refused access to any part of the property from which an illegal connection and/or illicit discharge is occurring, suspected or
imminent, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, and welfare of the community, then the inspector may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1657,
10-24-2005)
7-8E-8: ABATEMENT:
A. Contents: The notice to abate shall contain:
1. Description Of Illicit Discharge Or Illegal Connection: A description of what constitutes the illicit discharge or illegal connection.
2. Location Of Illicit Discharge Or Illegal Connection: The location of the illicit discharge or illegal connection.
3. Acts Necessary To Abate: A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the illicit discharge or illegal connection.
4. Reasonable Time: A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
5. Payment Of City's Costs: A statement that if the illicit discharge or illegal connection is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made
within the time prescribed, the city will abate it and invoice the costs to such responsible party.
B. Method Of Service Of Notice To Abate: The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner.
C. Request For Hearing: Any responsible party ordered to abate an illicit discharge or illegal connection or aggrieved by the decision of the city shall have
the right of appeal. The appeal shall follow the process set forth in section 4-4-9 of this code.
D. Failure To Abate: Any responsible party causing or maintaining an illicit discharge or illegal connection who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the
same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this code.
E. Abatement By City: If the responsible party notified to abate an illicit discharge or illegal connection neglects or fails to abate as directed, the city may
perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with the clerk
who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the city.
F. Collection Of Costs: If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or has occurred, the actual administrative costs incurred by the city in the
enforcement of this article shall be recovered from the responsible party. The inspector shall submit an invoice to the responsible party reflecting the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 393/687
actual costs and wages and all other expenses incurred by the city for the enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to pay charges invoiced under this
article within thirty (30) days of billing shall constitute a violation of this article.
G. Abatement In Emergency: If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the illicit discharge or illegal
connection, the city may perform any action which may be required under this article without prior notice. The city shall bill the costs as provided in
subsection F of this section.
H. Abatement On A Public Street Or On Public Property: The person causing an illicit discharge on a public street or on public property shall be
responsible for abatement, as directed by the city, or shall pay all costs of abatement performed by the city. The city shall bill any costs incurred as
provided in subsection F of this section. In addition to paying the costs of abatement, any person causing an illicit discharge on a public street or on
public property shall be subject to a civil penalty in accordance with this article. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-9: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any responsible party violating any provision of this
article or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to the civil penalties set forth in section 4-4-7 of this code. Each day that a
municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
ARTICLE F. INDUSTRIAL WASTE
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2351 - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER, COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER AND HAULED
WAS. Go to new ordinance.
7-8F-1: ADOPTION:
Ordinance 1875, regulating industrial waste, is hereby adopted by reference and on file in the city. (Ord. 1875, 6-28-2010)
ARTICLE G. POSTCONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
7-8G-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A. The U.S. EPA's national pollutant discharge elimination system ("NPDES") permit program ("program") administered by the Iowa department of natural
resources ("IDNR") requires that cities meeting certain demographic and environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the
discharge of storm water from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The city's MS4 permit is on file at the office of the city clerk and is
available for public inspection during regular office hours.
B. As a condition of the city's MS4 permit, the city is obliged to develop, implement, and enforce a program to address storm water runoff from new
construction and reconstruction projects for which state NPDES general permit no. 2 storm water permit coverage is required by adopting a
postconstruction storm water management ordinance designed:
1. To require water quality and quantity components be considered in the design of new construction and implemented when practical; and
2. To prohibit construction activities from commencing until the plans for postconstruction runoff controls have been submitted to the city; and
3. To allow the city to have the ability to access private property for the purpose of enforcement procedures to promote compliance with the state
NPDES general permit no. 2 which require postconstruction compliance by applicants ("applicants").
C. No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the city with inspections, monitoring and/or enforcing the program. Accordingly, the city
shall fund its inspection, monitoring and enforcement responsibilities entirely by fees imposed on the owners of properties which are made subject to
the program by virtue of state and federal law, and/or other sources of funding established by a separate ordinance.
D. Terms used in this article shall have the meanings specified as follows:
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, or entity applying for a permit to develop, grade, or construct within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 1784, 10-8-
2007)
7-8G-2: PROCEDURE FOR POSTCONSTRUCTION:
Each applicant who is required to have coverage under general permit no. 2 for a site shall install postconstruction storm water management facilities as
set forth herein and as approved by the city during site plan, platting, or construction plans.
A. Each applicant or its successor person(s) or entity shall be responsible for maintaining all storm water management facilities as approved by the city.
B. For sites equal to or greater than one acre, each applicant must provide to the city as built plans detailing dimensions and elevations as well as a
certification that storm water management facilities were built as part of the approved development that includes the site. For sites less than one acre
that are part of a common plan of development and for which the applicant establishes that storm water management facilities were or will be built to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 394/687
address all properties (either collectively or individually) within the development, each applicant must provide to the city a copy of the notice of
discontinuation for general permit no. 2 applicable to the property.
C. Each applicant must include in their site design those storm water management facilities that will convey drainage through the property to one or more
detention and/or treatment areas such that no development shall cause downstream property owners, water courses, channels, or conduits to receive
storm water runoff from the proposed development site at a peak flow rate greater than that allowed by the policy or standard in effect at the time of
approval of the development unless such requirements are waived by the city. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the city from changing the
policies or standards in the future, nor from requiring the site to comply with the new requirements.
D. Each applicant shall comply with all other applicable city, state or federal permit requirements as they apply to the city or to the property.
E. At the discretion of the city, the applicant may satisfy the postconstruction storm water management requirements by ensuring the conveyance of the
storm water discharge from the property to a regional detention facility. For purposes of this article, a "regional detention facility" shall be wet or dry
detention basins, which are designed to accept storm water runoff from two (2) or more sites that are required to obtain a state NPDES general permit
no. 2 and that otherwise complies with all city, state or federal permit requirements as they apply to storm water management requirements for those
sites. (Ord. 1784, 10-8-2007)
7-8G-3: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF STORM WATER FACILITIES:
A. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a storm water management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the
site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the storm water management
facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city, or its contractor or agent, to ensure
that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The easement
agreement shall be recorded by the city in the land records.
B. Maintenance of all storm water management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved
by the city and recorded into the land record at the time of final plat approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how
often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the storm water management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic
inspections by the applicant, owner, or assigns to ensure proper performance of the facility.
C. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a storm water management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the
site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the storm water management
facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city, or its contractor or agent, to ensure
that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The easement
agreement shall be recorded by the city in the land records.
D. Maintenance of all storm water management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved
by the city and recorded into the land record at the time of final plat approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how
often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the storm water management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic
inspections by the applicant, owner, or assigns to ensure proper performance of the facility.
E. The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property subject to regulation under this section as often as is necessary to document maintenance
and repair needs and determine compliance with the requirements of this article. If a responsible party owning, controlling or possessing a property has
security measures that require identification and clearance before entry to its property, such responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements
to allow access by the city. By way of specification, but not limitation:
1. A responsible party shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection, examination, and copying of records
related to compliance with this article.
2. Any temporary or permanent obstruction that obstructs the safe and easy access to property to be inspected shall be promptly removed by the
responsible party at the written or oral order of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the responsible
party.
3. An unreasonable delay in allowing the city access to a property is a violation of this article.
F. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a storm water management facility shall make records of the installation and of all
maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least three (3) years. Copies of the as built plans and records of all self-inspections,
maintenance, and repairs shall be kept on site and shall be made available to the city during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times
upon request.
G. In the event that a storm water management facility is found by the city to be noncompliant with the plans as submitted and approved or is found to be
in need of maintenance, the responsible party will be notified in writing of such deficiencies. Upon receipt of such notice, the responsible party shall
have fifteen (15) days to correct such deficiencies. After proper notice, and if the responsible party fails to make the repairs or perform the
maintenance, the city may have such work performed and assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost
of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as
ordinary taxes by the city. (Ord. 1784, 10-8-2007)
7-8G-4: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular provision or section, any responsible party violating any provision of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 395/687
article or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject to the civil penalties set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a
municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. Violation of any provision of this article may also be enforced by
action for injunctive relief. (Ord. 1784, 10-8-2007)
ARTICLE H. MAJOR STORMWATER DRAINAGE FACILITIES CONNECTION FEE
DISTRICTS
7-8H-1: CONNECTION FEE DISTRICTS:
A. The city has determined the necessity of establishing a policy and a procedure to be utilized to recover the cost of designing and constructing certain
major stormwater drainage facilities. In those instances where a significant number of properties benefit by such facilities and are not sufficiently
developed to permit the recovery of those costs through the special assessment process as provided in chapter 384, division IV of the Iowa Code, the
city hereby declares its intent to utilize connection fees, as herein provided, to recover the cost of designing and constructing such major stormwater
drainage facilities from property owners who develop property within the drainage basin where said improvements are located.
It is the intent of this section to set forth the method of recovery of proportional cost shares from those property owners who develop property within the
drainage basin so that in the event all property, other than street and road right of way and parks, which lies within the drainage basin as established by
a benefited connection fee district that those properties shall bear in the aggregate up to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of designing and
constructing such facilities, including legal and administrative expenses associated therewith.
B. Prior to the establishment of a connection fee district the city shall conduct a public hearing as required in chapter 384 of the Iowa Code. At the public
hearing, the owners of property within the proposed benefited district shall be heard and may offer comments or objections as follows:
1. The necessity of the project;
2. The calculation of the area benefited by the proposed major stormwater drainage facilities;
3. The estimated cost of the proposed facilities; and
4. The proposed acre connection fee.
Upon concluding the hearing, the city council shall rule upon the objections presented during the hearing and may consider the adoption of the
proposed connection fee ordinance. Upon consideration of the proposed connection fee ordinance, the city council may:
1. Adopt the ordinance as proposed;
2. Delete elements or portions of the proposed major stormwater drainage facilities from the proposed project and the property served thereby from the
benefited district proposed; or
3. Amend the ordinance to revise the connection fee.
C. The major stormwater drainage connection fee shall be in an amount equal to the maximum area of contiguous property or fraction thereof within the
benefited district under common ownership subject to the provisions of this section for determination of the applicable area for calculation of the
connection fee multiplied by the per acre connection fee established in the connection fee ordinance for that benefited district. The connection fee shall
be adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year based on the change in the ENR construction cost index for the one year period ending in April of the
calendar year in which the adjustment is made. The finance director shall determine the applicable connection fees for each established connection fee
district and the development services department shall maintain on file the connection fees in each connection fee district effective July 1 of each
calendar year.
D. The major stormwater drainage connection fee required by this section shall be due and payable to the city treasurer.
1. For property being platted the fee is due and payable before approval of the final plat.
2. For property subject to a site plan the fee is due and payable before approval of the site plan.
3. For all other property the fee is due and payable before issuance of a building permit.
E. The major stormwater drainage connection fee required by this section is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fees required under other provisions
of this code.
F. Major stormwater drainage facilities for purposes of the connection fees established under this chapter shall be those located on major streets as set
forth in the city's approved major street plans. Major streets shall include major arterials, minor arterials, major collectors and minor collectors. Major
stormwater drainage facilities do not include any drainage facility located on a street other than those set forth in the approved major streets plan.
G. Each individual connection fee district shall determine the minimum drainage basin for major stormwater drainage facilities within that district, but in no
event shall the size of the drainage area be less than one hundred sixty (160) acres. Stormwater drainage facilities on major streets with a tributary
drainage area less than the minimum set forth in the connection fee district shall not be considered a major stormwater drainage facility.
H. For each major stormwater drainage facility the maximum amount to be paid by the connection fee shall not exceed the percentage of the total project
cost as set forth in the city's then current policy on special assessment of costs for major streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 396/687
I. The following properties shall be exempt from, and not subject to, the connection fee for major stormwater drainage facilities:
1. Platted lots with a single-family residential dwelling unit constructed before, or under construction on, the effective date of the ordinance.
2. Single-family residential dwellings on unplatted property constructed before, or under construction on, the effective date of the ordinance to a
maximum area of one acre.
3. Platted property, developed or undeveloped, subject to an approved development plan with the city on the effective date of the ordinance
establishing the connection fee district for the area where the property is located.
4. Nonresidential buildings on platted lots constructed before, or under construction on, the effective date of the ordinance, provided any future division
of a parcel shall subject the nondeveloped portion of the parcel to the applicable connection fee.
5. Nonresidential development on an unplatted property constructed before, or under construction on, the effective date of the ordinance to the extent
of the actual developed area including buildings, drives, parking lots and other similar types of surface improvements.
J. All property shall be subject to the major stormwater drainage connection fee as follows:
1. Newly Platted Property: The gross area of the plat less any street right of way and area to be dedicated as public park.
2. Site Plan: The gross area of the site plan less any street right of way, area to be dedicated as public park and any area for which the connection fee
was previously paid.
3. For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Area Of Less Than One Acre: The gross area of the lot as proportioned to the per acre
connection fee.
4. For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Residential Parcel Of More Than One Acre, Or Any Nonplatted Residential Parcel: One acre.
The property owner may designate the one acre single residence parcel and a remainder parcel and the one acre single residence parcel shall be
subject to the connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised application for connection and payment of the
appropriate connection fee.
K. Each connection fee district may provide that the city may enter into an agreement with a property owner for the property owner to construct a
designated major stormwater drainage facility. Such agreement may provide the city will waive the applicable connection fee to the extent of
documented construction costs incurred by the property owner to construct said major stormwater drainage facility. Said agreement may provide the
city can reimburse the property owner for cost of the major stormwater drainage facilities in excess of the waived connection fee in an amount not to
exceed the then applicable statutory limit of the amount the city can pay to a private property owner. Such agreement shall provide that the property
owner waives and agrees not to recover any additional costs incurred by the property owner above and beyond the waiver of the applicable connection
fee and payment as provided herein.
L. It is within the discretion of the city council when to construct a major stormwater drainage facility as designated in a stormwater connection fee district.
The city shall not be obligated to construct a major stormwater drainage facility in response to any request for said stormwater drainage facility. If a
property owner requests the city to construct a major stormwater drainage facility the property owner, as a condition of that request, must agree to
provide all easements and access necessary for construction of the stormwater drainage facility on property owned or controlled by the requesting
party at no cost to the city. (Ord. 2006, 10-14-2013)
7-8H-1-1: SUGAR CREEK STORMWATER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee district is hereby established, consisting of a tract of land located in sections 9, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 22 and
27 Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the east line of section 27, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian and the north railroad
right-of-way line;
Thence north along the east line of said section 27 to the northeast corner of said section 27;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of the northeast quarter of said section 27 to the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of said section 27;
Thence north along the west line of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west to the northeast corner
of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence west along the south line of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 22 to the southeast corner of the west one-half of the
northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 22 to the northeast corner of the
west one-half of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence east along the north line of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 22 to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of the
southeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence north along the west line of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22 to the northwest corner of the
southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence east along the south line of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22 to the southeast corner of the
northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22 to the northeast corner of the
northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 397/687
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22 to the northeast corner of the west
one-half of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence east along the north line of said section 22 to the northeast corner of said section 22;
Thence north along the west line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter
of the southwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence east along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 14 to the northeast corner of
the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 14 to the northeast corner of the
northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 14 to the northeast corner of the
west one-half of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence north along the east line of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 14 to the northeast corner of the
southwest one-quarter of the southwest one-quarter of the northwest one-quarter of said section 14;
Thence west along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 14 to the northwest corner of
the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence north along the west line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 14 to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence north along the east line of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west
to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 15;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 15 to the southwest corner of the
northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 15;
Thence north along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 15 to the northwest corner of the
northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 15;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 10, township 78 north, range 26 west
to the northeast corner of the west one-half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of the west
one-half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence west along the north line of the west one-half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 10 to the southeast corner of the
southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence west along the north line of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northwest corner of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of the
northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the south right-of-way line of
Interstate Highway 80;
Commencing at the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of section 10, township 78 north, range 26 west;
Thence north along the east line of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence west along the north line of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northwest corner of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of the
northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the south right-of-way line of
Interstate Highway 80;
Thence southwesterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 80 to the point of intersection with the west line of the northeast quarter of
said section 10;
Thence south along the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the southwest corner of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
said section 10;
Thence east along the south line of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the point of beginning.
Thence southwesterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 80 to a point of intersection with the east line of the southwest quarter of
the southwest quarter of section 9, township 78 north, range 26 west;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 398/687
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 9 to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the
southwest quarter of said section 9;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 16, township 78 north, range 26 west to the southeast
quarter of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 16;
Thence west along the south line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 16 to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 16;
Thence west along the north line of the south one-half of the northeast quarter of said section 17, township 78 north, range 16 west to the northwest corner
of the south one-half of the northeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence south along the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 17 to the center of said section 17;
Thence east along the north line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the northeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the southeast corner of the
northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence east along the north line of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the northeast corner of the
southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the southeast corner of the northwest quarter of the
southeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence south along the west line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the southwest corner of the
north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence east along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the southeast corner of the
north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence north along the east line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the northeast corner of the
southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence east along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 16, to the northeast corner of the southwest quarter of
the southwest quarter of said section 16;
Thence south along the west line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 16 to the southwest corner of the
north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 16;
Thence east along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 16 to the southeast corner of the
north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 16;
Thence south along the east line of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 16 to the north quarter quarter of section 21, township
78 north, range 26 west;
Thence east along the north line of the northeast quarter of said section 21 to the northeast corner of the west one-half of the northwest quarter of the
northeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence south along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21 to the southeast corner of the
west one-half of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21 to the southwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence east along the north line of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21 to the northeast corner of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21 to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of
the northeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence east along the north line of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 21 to the northeast corner of the west one-half of the
northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence south along the east line of the west half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 21 to the southeast corner of the west
one-half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence east along the south line of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 21 to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of the
southeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence south along the east line of said section 21 to the southeast corner of said section 21;
Thence south along the west line of the north one-half of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 27 to the southwest corner of the
north one-half of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 27;
Thence east along the south line of the north one-half of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 27 to the southeast corner of the
north one-half of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 17;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 27 to the southeast corner of the northwest quarter of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 399/687
northwest quarter of said section 27;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 27 to the point of intersection with the north line of the
railroad right-of-way;
Thence northeasterly along the northerly right-of-way line of the railroad to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 2024, 4-7-2014; amd. Ord. 2117, 10-5-2015, eff. 10-9-2015)
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee district,
pursuant to ordinance 2006, as follows:
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date through June 30, 2014, a connection fee of four thousand seven hundred ten dollars ($4,710.00) per acre of
property served by the major stormwater drainage facilities shall be imposed. Thereafter, the connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of
each year according to ordinance 2006.
B. Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall also apply to any properties located outside of the defined boundary of the
fee district from which the stormwater or overland flow drainage flows into the boundary of the district and would be conveyed by one or more of the
major stormwater drainage facilities within the connection fee district.
C. Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any properties within the defined boundary of the fee district from which
stormwater or overland flow drainage does not flow into the boundary of the district in such a manner that such flow would utilize one or more of the
major stormwater drainage facilities constructed within the district.
D. Payment: The major stormwater drainage connection fee required by this section shall be due and payable to the city treasurer.
1. For property being platted the fee is due and payable before approval of the final plat.
2. For property subject to a site plan the fee is due and payable before approval of the site plan.
3. For all other property the fee is due and payable before issuance of a building permit.
E. Exemptions: The following properties shall be exempt from and not subject to the connection fee:
1. Platted lots with a single-family residential dwelling unit constructed before, or under construction on, the effective date hereof; a single-family
residential unit would be considered under construction if an application for a building permit is filed by June 30, 2014.
2. Single-family residential dwellings on unplatted property constructed before, or under construction on, the effective date hereof to a maximum area
of one acre.
3. Platted property, developed or undeveloped, subject to an approved development plan with the city on the effective date hereof establishing the
connection fee district for the area where the property is located.
4. Nonresidential buildings on platted lots constructed before, or under construction on, the effective date hereof, provided any future division of a
parcel shall subject the nondeveloped portion of the parcel to the connection fee.
5. Nonresidential development on an unplatted property constructed before, or under construction on, the effective date hereof to the extent of the
actual developed area including buildings, drives, parking lots and other similar types of surface improvements.
F. Area Included: All properties shall be subject to the connection fee district as follows:
1. Newly Platted Property: The gross area of the plat less any street right of way and area to be dedicated as public park.
2. Site Plan: The gross area of the site plan less any street right of way, area to be dedicated as public park and any area for which the connection fee
was previously paid.
3. For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Area Of Less Than One Acre: The gross area of the lot as proportioned to the per acre
connection fee.
4. For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Residential Parcel Of More Than One Acre, Or Any Nonplatted Residential Parcel: One acre.
The property owner may designate the one acre single residence parcel and a remainder parcel and the one acre single residence parcel shall be
subject to the connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised application for connection and payment of the
connection fee.
G. Effect Of Schedule: The above connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an ordinance to
adjust the connection fees to be imposed in subsequent years for the Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee district. Nothing herein is intended to
restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
H. Major Stormwater Drainage Facilities Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct major stormwater drainage facilities within the
Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee district as graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the office of
the city clerk. Other major stormwater drainage facilities to provide comprehensive stormwater drainage to the Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee
district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct under the provisions of the Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee district.
I. Previously Constructed Major Stormwater Drainage Facilities: Property owners or their successors in interest who have constructed major stormwater
drainage improvements within the district prior to the effective date hereof will be exempt from the connection fee if the value of the improvements
constructed exceeds the amount of the connection fee for that property owner's parcel or parcels. To qualify, the previously constructed improvements
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 400/687
must be major stormwater drainage facilities that would have been included in the calculation of the connection fee if that improvement was not
previously constructed. The connection fee district for the exempted property will be reallocated for purposes of calculating the connection fee. This
provision shall be applicable only to major stormwater drainage improvements constructed prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2024, 4-7-2014)
7-8H-1-2: GRAND AVENUE EAST STORMWATER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Grand Avenue East stormwater connection fee district is hereby established, consisting of a tract of land located in sections 2, 10 and 11, Township
78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the northeast corner Lot 103 Clegg Park Plat 4 an official plat in informing a part of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of Clegg Park Plat 4 to the northwest corner of Lot 101 Clegg Park Plat 4;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of Clegg Park Plat 3 to the northwest corner of Lot 99 Clegg Park Plat 3;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of Lot 99 Clegg Park Plat 3 to the southwest corner of Lot 99 Clegg Park Plat 3;
Thence westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of Clegg Road to the point of intersection with the east right-of-way line of 8th Street;
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of 8th Street to the point of intersection with the north right-of-way line of Ashworth Road;
Thence west along the north right-of-way line of Ashworth Road to a point directly north of the northwest corner of Lot 28 Maryland Heights Plat 2;
Thence south to the northwest corner of Lot 28 Maryland Heights Plat 2;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 28 of Maryland Heights Plat 2 to the southwest corner Lot 28 Maryland Heights Plat 2;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 33 Maryland Heights Plat 2 to the north right-of-way line of Grand Avenue;
Thence diagonally southeasterly to the point of intersection of the south right-of-way line of Grand Avenue and the west right-of-way line of 10th Street;
Thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Grand Avenue to the northwest corner Lot 1 Maryland Heights;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 1 Maryland Heights to the southwest corner of Lot 1 Maryland Heights;
Thence south a distance of 8 feet to the southwest corner of the north 8 feet Lot 2 Maryland Heights;
Thence east to a point on the east line of Lot 2 Maryland Heights said point being 8 feet south of the northeast corner of Lot 2 Maryland Heights;
Thence north to the northwest corner Lot 53 Clover Hills Place;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 53 Clover Hills Place to the northeast corner of Lot 53 Clover Hills Place;
Thence east to the east right-of-way of 9th Street;
Thence south along the east right-of-way of 9th Street to the northwest corner Lot 25 Clover Hills Place;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 25 Clover Hills Place to the northeast corner of Lot 25 Clover Hills Place;
Thence south along the east line of Lots 25, 24, 23, 22, 21 and 20 to the north right-of-way line of Prospect Avenue;
Thence east along the north right-of-way line of Prospect Avenue to the southeast corner of Lot 19 Clover Hills Place;
Thence southeasterly to the point of intersection of the east right-of-way line of 8th Street and the south line of Lot 33 West Des Moines Heights, said point
being located 2 feet east of the southwest corner of Lot 33 West Des Moines Heights;
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of 8th Street to the point of intersection of the east right-of-way line of 8th Street and the north right-of-way
line of Hillside Avenue;
Thence east along the north right-of-way line of Hillside Avenue to the southwest corner of Lot 9 Sternagel Place;
Thence north along the west line of Lot 9 Sternagel Place to the northwest corner of Lot 9 Sternagel Place;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 9 Sternagel Place to the northeast corner of Lot 9 Sternagel Place;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 13 Murrowdale to the northwest corner of Lot 1 Murrowdale Plat 4;
Thence east along the north line of Murrowdale Plat 4 to the northeast corner of Lot 1 Murrowdale Plat 4;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 15 Murrowdale to the northeast corner of Lot 15 Murrowdale;
Thence east to a point on the east right-of-way line of 5th Street;
Thence north along the west line of Lot 23 Murrow Heights to the northwest corner of Lot 23 Murrow Heights;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 23 Murrow Heights to the northeast corner Lot 23 Murrow Heights;
Thence east across the alley to the southwest corner Lot 35 Murrow Heights;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 401/687
Thence north along the west line of Lot 35 Murrow Heights to the northwest corner of Lot 35 Murrow Heights;
Thence north along the west line of Lot 36 Murrow Heights to the northwest corner of Lot 36;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 36 Murrow Heights to the northeast corner Lot 36 Murrow Heights;
Thence south along the east line of Lot 36 Murrow Heights to the southeast corner Lot 36 Murrow Heights;
Thence south along the east line of Lot 35 Murrow Heights to a point on the west right-of-way line of 4th Street directly west of the south right-of-way line
of Prospect Avenue;
Thence east across 4th Street to the northwest corner Lot 77 Linnwill;
Thence east along the south right-of-way of Prospect Avenue to the northeast corner of Lot 64 Linnwill;
Thence easterly across Linnwill Place to the southwest corner Lot 2 Linnwill;
Thence east along the south line of Lot 2 Linnwill to the southeast corner Lot 2 Linnwill;
Thence north along the east line of Lot 2 Linnwill to the northeast corner Lot 2 Linnwill;
Thence north along the east line of Lot 1 Linnwill to the northeast corner Lot 1 Linnwill;
Thence east to the east corporate limits of the City of West Des Moines;
Thence north along the east corporate limits of the City of West Des Moines to a point on the east corporate limit lines directly east of the southeast corner
of the levee easement on Lot 23 Ashworth;
Thence west to the point of intersection of the west right-of-way line of 1st Street and the south line of the levee easement on Lot 23 Ashworth;
Thence northerly and westerly along the south line of the levee easement on Lot 23 Ashworth to the east right-of-way line of Hoak Drive;
Thence west across Hoak Drive to a point on the west right-of-way line of Hoak Drive;
Thence northerly along the westerly right-of-way line of Hoak Drive to a point on the westerly right-of-way line of Hoak Drive with said point being
described as "commencing at the intersection of the present centerline of Hoak Drive with the centerline of Ashworth Road, said intersection being 239.39
feet west of the south quarter corner of Section 2, Township 78 North, Range 24 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, thence north 25 degrees 25 minutes
23 seconds east 93.65 feet along the present centerline of Hoak Drive, thence north 15 degrees 33 minutes 16 seconds west 778.51 feet along the
present centerline of Hoak Drive, thence south 78 degrees 48 minutes 44 seconds west 68.21 feet to the present westerly right-of-way line of Hoak Drive;"
Thence south 70 degrees 48 minutes 44 seconds west 302.99 feet to the easterly right-of-way line of the railroad right-of-way;
Thence northerly along the easterly railroad right-of-way line to the southeast corner of Lot 5 Colby's Factory Addition;
Thence west across the railroad right-of-way to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of properties within the Grand Avenue East stormwater connection fee district,
pursuant to ordinance 2006, as follows:
A. Fee Schedule: From the effective date through June 30, 2014, a connection fee of fourteen thousand six hundred fifty four dollars ($14,654.00) per acre
of property served by the major stormwater drainage facilities shall be imposed. Thereafter, the connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1
of each year according to ordinance 2006.
B. Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall also apply to any properties located outside of the defined boundary of the
fee district from which the stormwater or overland flow drainage flows into the boundary of the district and would be conveyed by one or more of the
major stormwater drainage facilities within the connection fee district.
C. Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply to any properties within the defined boundary of the fee district from which
stormwater or overland flow drainage does not flow into the boundary of the district in such a manner that such flow would utilize one or more of the
major stormwater drainage facilities constructed within the district.
D. Payment: The major stormwater drainage connection fee required by this section shall be due and payable to the city finance department.
1. For property being platted the fee is due and payable before approval of the final plat.
2. For property subject to a site plan the fee is due and payable before approval of the site plan.
3. For all other property the fee is due and payable before issuance of a building permit.
E. Exemptions: The following properties shall be exempt from and not subject to the connection fee:
1. Platted lots with a single-family residential dwelling unit constructed before, or under construction on the effective date hereof. A platted lot shall be
considered under construction on the effective date hereof if an application for a building permit has been approved by June 30, 2014.
2. Single-family residential dwellings on unplatted property constructed before, or under construction on the effective date hereof to a maximum area of
one acre.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 402/687
3. Platted property, developed or undeveloped, subject to an approved development plan with the city on the effective date hereof establishing the
connection fee district for the area where the property is located.
4. Nonresidential buildings on platted lots constructed before, or under construction on the effective date hereof, provided any future division of a parcel
shall subject the nondeveloped portion of the parcel to the connection fee.
5. Nonresidential development on an unplatted property constructed before, or under construction on the effective date hereof to the extent of the
actual developed area, including buildings, drives, parking lots and other similar types of surface improvements.
F. Area Included: All properties shall be subject to the connection fee district as follows:
1. Newly Platted Property: The gross area of the plat less any street right of way and area to be dedicated as public park.
2. Site Plan: The gross area of the site plan less any street right of way and area to be dedicated as public park, and any area for which the connection
fee was previously paid.
3. For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Area Of Less Than One Acre: The gross area of the lot as proportioned to the per acre
connection fee.
4. For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Residential Parcel Of More Than One Acre, Or Any Nonplatted Residential Parcel: One acre.
The property owner may designate the one acre single residential parcel and a remainder parcel, with the one acre single residential parcel subject
to the connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised application for connection and payment of the connection
fee.
G. Effect Of Schedule: The above connection fee schedule shall remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an ordinance to
adjust the connection fees to be imposed in subsequent years for the Grand Avenue East stormwater connection fee district. Nothing herein is intended
to restrict or prohibit the city council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
H. Major Stormwater Drainage Facilities Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct major stormwater drainage facilities within the
Grand Avenue East stormwater connection fee district as graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the
office of the city clerk. Other major stormwater drainage facilities to provide comprehensive stormwater drainage to the Grand Avenue East stormwater
connection fee district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct under the provisions of the Grand Avenue East stormwater
connection fee district. (Ord. 2028, 4-21-2014)
Chapter 9
WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION
7-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to protect the public water supply of the City by regulating the locations and types of construction of certain structures or
facilities which may be potential sources of contamination of the publicly-owned water supply wells. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words used herein shall be those found in textbooks of Civil Engineering, except that a shallow well has a total depth of one hundred feet
(100') or less and a deep well has a total depth of one hundred one feet (101') or more. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
7-9-3: PROTECTION FOR PUBLICLY-OWNED SHALLOW WELLS:
A. No structure or facility of any of the following types shall be located within the distances hereinafter set forth, from a publicly-owned shallow well within
the City:
1. Well pump house floor drain openings: 5 feet.
2. Basements, pits or sumps: 10 feet.
3. Flowing streams or other surface water bodies: 50 feet.
4. Well pump house floor drain piping, if discharged to the ground surface:
a. None permitted if located less than 5 feet from the well.
b. If located between 5 feet and 10 feet from well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for water mains in West Des
Moines and shall be encased in a minimum of 8 inches of Portland cement concrete.
c. If located between 11 feet and 25 feet from the well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for water mains in West
Des Moines.
d. If located between 26 feet and 75 feet from the well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for watertight sanitary
sewers in West Des Moines.
5. Well pump house floor drain piping, if discharged to a water treatment plant waste handling system or a sanitary or storm sewer or drain:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 403/687
a. None permitted if located less than 25 feet from the well.
b. If located between 25 feet and 75 feet from the well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for water main in West
Des Moines.
c. If located between 76 feet and 200 feet from the well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for watertight sanitary
sewers in West Des Moines.
6. Sanitary or storm sewage force mains:
a. None permitted if located less than 75 feet from the well.
b. If located between 75 feet and 200 feet from the well, the force main piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for water mains
in West Des Moines.
7. Cisterns: 100 feet.
8. Irrigation systems using nonpotable water; concrete vaults and septic tanks; cesspools and earth pit privies; soil absorption fields; sewage lagoons;
storage of chemicals, whether under, on or above the ground surface; storage tanks, basins, lagoons or stockpiles of animal wastes; earthen silage
storage trenches or pits; animal enclosures; cemeteries; privately-owned wells; solid waste disposal sites; mechanical wastewater treatment plants:
200 feet.
B. No practices of any of the following types shall be located within the distances hereinafter set forth, from a publicly-owned shallow well within the City:
1. Animal pasturage, water treatment plant wastes or waste discharges: 50 feet.
2. Land application of animal wastes, whether in the form of solids, liquids or slurries; sanitary sewage or industrial waste discharges; land application
of solid waste; application of chemicals to the ground surface: 200 feet. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
7-9-4: PROTECTION FOR PUBLICLY-OWNED DEEP WELLS:
A. No structure or facility of any of the following types shall be located within the distances hereinafter set forth, from a publicly-owned deep well within the
City:
1. Well pump house floor drain openings: 5 feet.
2. Basements, pits or sumps: 10 feet.
3. Cisterns, flowing streams or other surface water bodies: 50 feet.
4. Well pump house floor drain piping, if discharged to the ground surface:
a. None permitted if located less than 5 feet from the well.
b. If located between 5 feet and 10 feet from well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for water mains in West Des
Moines and shall be encased in a minimum of 8 inches of Portland cement concrete.
c. If located between 11 feet and 25 feet from the well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for water mains in West
Des Moines.
d. If located between 26 feet and 75 feet from the well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for watertight sanitary
sewers in West Des Moines.
5. Well pump house floor drain piping, if discharged to a water treatment plant waste handling system or a sanitary or storm sewer or drain:
a. None permitted if located less than 25 feet from the well.
b. If located between 25 feet and 75 feet from the well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for water mains in West
Des Moines.
c. If located between 76 feet and 200 feet from the well, the drain piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for watertight sanitary
sewers in West Des Moines.
6. Sanitary or storm sewage force mains:
a. None permitted if located less than 75 feet from the well.
b. If located between 76 feet and 200 feet from the well, the force main piping shall be constructed of one of the materials permitted for water mains
in West Des Moines.
7. Aboveground storage of chemicals, storage tanks for animal wastes; earthen silage storage trenches or pits, animal enclosures, irrigation systems
using nonpotable water: 100 feet.
8. Concrete vaults and septic tanks; cesspools and earth pit privies; soil absorption fields; sewage lagoons; on ground or underground storage of
chemicals; basins, lagoons or stockpiles of animal wastes; cemeteries; privately-owned wells; solid waste disposal sites; mechanical wastewater
treatment plants: 200 feet.
B. No practices of any of the following types shall be located within the distances hereinafter set forth, from a publicly-owned deep well within the City:
1. Animal pasturage, water treatment plant wastes or waste discharges: 50 feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 404/687
2. Land application of animal wastes, whether in the form of solids, liquids or slurries, land application of solid waste, application of chemicals to the
ground surface: 100 feet.
3. Sanitary sewage or industrial waste discharges: 200 feet. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
7-9-5: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all publicly-owned wells existing within the City, except former publicly-owned wells which have been
abandoned and from which the pumping equipment has been removed. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
7-9-6: EXISTING STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES:
The use of structures and facilities existing on the effective date hereof may be continued even though such use may not conform with the regulations of
this Chapter. Such structure shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or substituted subsequent to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
Chapter 10
TREES AND SHRUBS
7-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and to preserve the benefits provided by trees by
providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and shrubs within the city. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
CITY FORESTER: The city manager or any person designated by the city manager of the city of West Des Moines to enforce this chapter.
CLOSING: A closing exists any time the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be stopped on a public way, for reason of public safety, as a
result of any action covered by this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The city manager or any enforcement officer designated by the city manager of the city of West Des Moines to
enforce this chapter.
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, public safety, indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
PERSONS: An individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, company, association, trust, or legal entity.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person owning or responsible for private property in the city.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any and all property not defined as public right of way (ROW) located within the confines of the city and owned by the city of West
Des Moines, Iowa, or held in the name of the city by any of the departments, commissions, or agencies within the city government.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY (ROW): All the land lying between property lines on either side of all public streets, alleys, and boulevards or parkways, including
public easements and grants to the city of West Des Moines, Iowa. The term used herein shall include vertical directions above and below the ground
surface within the public right of way.
PUBLIC TREE OR SHRUB: Any perennial woody plant, shrub, or tree located on public right of way or public property of the city of West Des Moines.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Includes purveyors of electricity, natural gas, water, telephone, communications services and cable television services, and
storm and sanitary sewer facilities, who are governmental agencies, who are performing services related to city initiated public improvement projects, or
who have a valid franchise to operate within the city of West Des Moines.
SHRUB: Any woody perennial plant less than fifteen feet (15') tall at maturity, multiple stemmed, and adaptable to shaping, trimming, and pruning without
injury.
TREE: Any woody perennial plant greater than fifteen feet (15') at maturity. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-3: AUTHORITY OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to enforce nuisance abatement of trees and shrubs growing on private property which violate city
ordinances or policies. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-4: AUTHORITY OF THE CITY FORESTER:
The city forester shall have the authority to perform and to regulate the planting, maintenance, and removal of public trees and shrubs. The city forester
shall manage public trees and shrubs in order to promote and protect public health, safety, and general welfare and to preserve the benefits of city tree
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 405/687
resources. The city forester shall enforce nuisance abatement of trees and shrubs growing on public property which violate city ordinances or policies.
(Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-5: DUTIES OF THE CITY FORESTER:
The city forester shall have and exercise the following duties pertaining to public trees and shrubs:
A. Pruning Or Removal: To prevent indiscriminate pruning or removal of public trees and shrubs.
B. New Plantings: To regulate and locate new plantings of public trees and shrubs in accordance with the "City Forestry Standards Of Practice And
Specifications".
C. Secure Compliance: To order persons to comply with the duties placed upon them by this chapter.
D. Advise: To assist and advise code enforcement officers and other city employees regarding trees and shrubs on public and private property.
E. Supervision: To supervise all activities by city employees and contractors in the planting, maintenance, and removal of public trees and shrubs. To
supervise does not require the city forester to be physically present to directly monitor such activities.
F. Issue Permits: To issue all tree and shrub permits in accordance with section 7-10-6 of this chapter.
G. Conditions Of Permit: To affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit hereunder and supervise work done under the permit.
H. Replacement Of Public Trees And Shrubs For Public Improvement: If replacement of public trees or shrubs is required, it shall occur within one hundred
twenty (120) calendar days after the public improvement has been completed, or within the appropriate planting season at the discretion of the city
forester.
I. Removal Of Trees Or Shrubs For Nuisance Abatement: To remove or require removal of any public tree or shrub in whole or part that is so hazardous,
diseased, or insect ridden as to be deemed a nuisance.
J. Notification Of Future Tree Or Shrub Removal On Public Property: To provide written notification via certified mail with return receipt requested and
regular mail to the abutting property owner at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to any scheduled removal. Unclaimed or returned mail shall not
constitute improper notification. The notification shall provide that the abutting property owner must contact the city within fourteen (14) calendar days
of the date of the mailing if the property owner has any questions or concerns regarding the tree or shrub removal. Notification shall not be required for
the removal of a public tree or shrub in an emergency situation as determined by the city forester. Notification shall also not be required if the abutting
property owner requested the removal of the public tree or shrub. No right is conferred upon or provided to the abutting property owner due to
notification of removal. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-6: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall plant, remove, treat, prune, cable, brace, or otherwise disturb a public tree or shrub without first applying for and receiving a permit from
the city forester. Requests for permits must be made a minimum of forty eight (48) business hours in advance of the time the work shall begin. A permit will
not be required to prune branches that are less than six inches (6") in diameter. All work shall be performed in accordance with the "City Forestry
Standards Of Practice And Specifications". The city shall be exempt from acquiring permits to perform necessary maintenance to public trees and shrubs
or to remove public trees and shrubs as part of a city initiated public improvement project. Property owners shall be exempt from acquiring permits for
planting, removing, or otherwise disturbing a public tree or shrub if the work is being performed as part of a development agreement approved by the city.
If being performed as part of a development agreement, the city forester shall be notified a minimum of forty eight (48) business hours in advance of the
time the work shall begin.
A. Required Permits And Ensuing Conditions Of Issuance: The following permits with the ensuing conditions of issuance shall be obtained before any
private person or entity performs any work on public trees and shrubs:
1. Planting: A permit shall be issued for planting within the public right of way or on public property when the city forester finds that the new planting is
desirable and the method of workmanship will be satisfactory and that the new planting(s) will conform to the "City Forestry Standards Of Practice
And Specifications". A permit shall be denied if the planting(s) will likely create a future public nuisance or danger. Any tree planted within the public
right of way or on public property pursuant to this chapter shall become the property of the city.
2. Removal: A permit shall be issued for removal of a public tree or shrub, including where the city forester finds the tree or shrub interferes with
performing improvements within the public right of way or on public property, or the tree or shrub creates a public nuisance or danger. All public tree
or shrub removal shall conform to the "City Forestry Standards Of Practice And Specifications".
No person shall close any street, alley, boulevard or parkway, highway, sidewalk, or trail to remove a public tree or shrub or private tree, or any
portion thereof, without first obtaining the approval for such closing from the city in writing.
3. Treatment: A permit shall be issued for the treatment of any tree located within the public right of way for disease or insect infestation. A permit will
only be issued when the tree has been designated by the city forester as a candidate for possible treatment. When required by law, treatment shall
be performed by a commercial pesticide applicator licensed to perform work in the state of Iowa and shall consist of chemical treatments approved
by the city forester.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 406/687
B. Permits; Contents Of Permit Application: The application shall be made on a form supplied by the city. A fee may be assessed for the permit to cover
the cost of administration. Fees will be established by resolution of the city council. Fees will not be required from public agencies or franchised utilities
that operate within the city. The applicant shall, at the time of making the application, agree in writing to, in all respects, save the city harmless,
indemnify the city, and protect the city and the public at all times in connection with work done under such permit.
C. Inspection Of Location Designated By The Permit: The city forester shall inspect the location designated by the permit, and if in his or her opinion it will
be desirable that such tree or shrub be planted, removed, treated, or otherwise disturbed, the city forester shall issue a permit.
D. Improper Planting: Trees and shrubs planted within the public right of way or on public property without authorization or in accordance with an issued
permit, and public trees and shrubs found growing in violation of the "City Forestry Standards Of Practice And Specifications", are subject to removal
by the city forester following the appropriate notification.
E. Utility Requirements: All public utilities, their agents, employees, and subcontractors shall operate under an annual permit to prune public trees and
shrubs for the purpose of eliminating potential hazards to public safety, to maintain their facilities, and to install or replace existing utilities. The annual
permit requirement shall not apply to City initiated public improvement projects. The utility company shall provide to the City Forester a copy of its work
specifications and work schedule a minimum of forty eight (48) business hours prior to the commencement of any work. In cases of emergency,
notification shall be given a maximum of forty eight (48) hours after the commencement of work. All work must comply with the "City Forestry
Standards of Practice and Specifications". (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-7: GENERAL STANDARDS:
Any person growing a tree or shrub on private property, or growing a tree, shrub, garden, or other vegetative growth, or installing landscaping, structures,
or other objects located within private property which encroaches upon the public right-of-way or that interferes with the vision triangle as provided in this
Code, or any person growing a public tree or shrub, shall comply with the following standards:
A. Maintenance: Trees or shrubs planted within the public right-of-way that extend over public streets or sidewalks, or that obstruct traffic signs or public
utilities, shall be maintained by the City. Trees or shrubs planted on private property that extend over public streets or sidewalks, or obstruct traffic signs
or public utilities, shall be maintained by owners of abutting property in accordance with this section and the "City Forestry Standards of Practice and
Specifications" at the cost of the property owner. Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, watering, fertilizing, insect and disease control, treatment,
and pruning. The City reserves the right to perform maintenance of private or public trees or shrubs that are planted or extend into the public right-ofway
without notice or compensation to the abutting property owner if the City Forester determines that such maintenance is necessary to promote and
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. Pruning: Subject to the maintenance responsibility provisions cited above, trees or shrubs shall be properly pruned for the purpose of preventing the
following potentially hazardous situations: the obstruction of traffic signs; the obstruction of a clear view of street and alley intersections; the obstruction
of the proper lighting of public streets and places; and the obstruction of public walks, trails, or streets. The minimum vertical clearance of trees and
shrubs shall be fourteen feet (14') between the surface of a street and the lowest branch. The minimum vertical clearance shall be eight feet (8')
between the surface of a sidewalk, trail, or other pedestrian way and the lowest branch. All pruning shall be done in accordance with the "City Forestry
Standards of Practice and Specifications".
C. Avoid Damage Or Nuisance: The planting of trees, shrubs, gardens, or other vegetative growth, or the installation of landscaping, structures, or other
objects on private property which would cause a public danger or nuisance shall be prohibited.
D. Street Or Alley Intersection: The planting of trees, shrubs, gardens, or other vegetative growth, or the installation of landscaping, structures, or other
objects on corner lots or lots adjacent to an alley within the area bounded by street or alley lines of such lots and a line joining points along said street
or alley lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of intersection of the public right-of-way lines, defined in this Code as the "vision triangle", shall be
limited to trees, shrubs, gardens, and other vegetative growth, and landscaping, structures, and other objects located within this area that shall not
exceed two feet (2') in height, and the lowest branches of any trees planted outside of this area, but the branches of such trees that extend within this
area, must be a minimum of ten feet (10') in height. Height shall be measured from the curb elevation and trees, shrubs, gardens, and other vegetative
growth must be pruned or maintained to comply with these height restrictions to create an unobstructed view of the intersection between heights of two
feet (2') and ten feet (10') above the curb elevation. Notwithstanding these height restrictions, no trees, shrubs, gardens, or other vegetative growth
shall be planted within the vision triangle that create or constitute a vision obstruction to vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic. Similarly, no
landscaping, structures, or other objects shall be placed within the vision triangle that create or constitute a vision obstruction to vehicular, bicycle, or
pedestrian traffic. The City shall have sole discretion to determine whether a vision obstruction exists for vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic. There
shall be no compensation by the City to the affected property owner for any damage to or removal of any trees, shrubs, gardens, or other vegetative
growth, or any damage to or removal of landscaping, structures, or other objects, encroaching upon the public right-of-way or that interferes with the
"vision triangle" as defined in this Code.
E. Dead, Diseased, Or Insect Ridden Trees Or Shrubs: Dead, diseased, or insect ridden trees or shrubs shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. Public Trees Or Shrubs: The City Forester shall coordinate treatment or removal of any public tree or shrub which is so hazardous, diseased or
insect ridden as to be deemed a nuisance and constitutes a hazard to other trees or shrubs or the public safety. Public trees that are at risk of
becoming diseased or insect ridden may be treated or preemptively removed by the City as part of a management plan approved by the City Council.
Trees in the public right-of-way not identified for treatment by the City and not deemed a nuisance or a hazard may be treated by the abutting
property owner with an approved permit.
2. Trees Or Shrubs Located Within Private Property: The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide written notice to be served on a property owner by
personal service, or by certified mail with return receipt requested and regular mail, requiring the treatment or removal within fourteen (14) calendar
days of notification of any trees or shrubs located within private property which are dead, diseased or insect ridden so as to be deemed a nuisance
and constitute a hazard to public trees or shrubs, other trees or shrubs on private property, or public safety. Such removal, pruning, or treatment as
required by provisions of this section shall be subject to the applicable "City Forestry Standards of Practice and Specifications".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 407/687
F. Prohibited Trees: Trees prohibited from being planted within public property shall be identified by the City Forester and included on an official list. Copies
of this list shall be made available at City offices and on the City website.
G. Appropriate Trees: Any tree planted in the public right-of-way must first meet all requirements listed in the City's tree planting permit. Trees appropriate
to be planted within the public right-of-way are those listed in the most recent edition of Iowa State University's extension bulletin Pm-1429e "Street
Trees" and Pm-1429d "Low-Growing Trees for Urban and Rural Iowa". Copies of these lists are available at City offices and through the Polk County
Extension Office. Other trees or shrubs not listed within these publications, but not prohibited, may be reviewed and approved at the discretion of the
City Forester. (Ord. 2192, 12-27-2016)
7-10-8: UNAUTHORIZED INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS:
The following actions are prohibited on public trees and shrubs unless authorized by the City Forester:
A. Damage: Damaging, cutting, carving, transplanting, or removing any public tree or shrub.
B. Attachments: Attaching any rope, wire, nails, or other contrivance to any public tree or shrub.
C. Electric Wire: Causing or permitting any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any public tree or shrub.
D. Harmful Substance: Allowing any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to any public tree or shrub to come in contact with it or the soil
supporting the sustenance of any public tree or shrub.
E. Fire: Setting fire or permitting any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree or shrub.
F. Exception: Fastening holiday or ornamental lighting from November 1 to January 15 is allowed. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-9: INSURANCE AND BOND FOR BUSINESSES ENGAGED IN WORKING WITH TREES AND SHRUBS:
A. Insurance: Any person or entity engaging in the business of trimming, pruning, spraying, or otherwise treating trees or shrubs on private property within
the City shall be sufficiently insured and bonded at all times the person or entity performs these services. Any person or entity engaging in the business
of trimming, pruning, spraying, or otherwise treating trees or shrubs on public property within the City shall acquire, and continuously maintain during
the period in which the person or entity is performing services, and shall provide the City with acceptable proof of liability insurance coverage that
satisfies the City's requirements.
For the trimming, pruning, spraying, or otherwise treating trees or shrubs on public property by others, the City shall be named as an additional insured
by endorsement to the liability insurance policy. Certificates of insurance evidencing that the person or entity has secured the required liability
insurance must be provided to the City prior to the commencement of any work. A minimum of thirty (30) calendar days' notice to the City prior to the
cancellation of or change in any such insurance shall be endorsed on each policy and noted on each certificate.
B. Bond: A bond or cash deposit in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be deposited with the City to assure adequate cleanup of
activities. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-10: VIOLATION NOTICE AND ASSESSMENT:
If a person or property owner is in violation of any regulations of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester may serve written notice on
the responsible person by personal service, or by certified mail with return receipt requested and regular mail; or if the certified mail is returned
undelivered, then by posting a copy of said notice at the address of the responsible person. The notice shall include a sufficiently detailed description of
the violation and shall allow a reasonable time for the performance of any required remedial actions or order to cease and desist all work regulated by this
chapter. If the responsible person or property owner fails to undertake the remedial actions specified in the notice within the allowable time, the Code
Enforcement Officer or City Forester may take steps to effect compliance with the violation, to revoke any applicable permit, to perform the required action,
and to assess the reasonable costs to the responsible person or property owner and against the private property for collection in the same manner as
Property Tax. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-11: APPEAL:
A. Any appeal of a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester shall be submitted in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester
within ten (10) calendar days of the date the City personally served or mailed the notice. Fees for appeal shall be established by resolution of the City
Council. The subject matter of an appeal may be the issuance of permits under this chapter, the concurrence of the City Forester in permits required
under other ordinances or policies, violation notices issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester, or other relevant matters involving the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
B. The appeal shall be considered by the City Manager or designee within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the appeal. Action by the Code
Enforcement Officer or City Forester shall be stayed until the decision of the City Manager or designee is rendered, unless the Code Enforcement
Officer or City Forester certifies to the City Manager or designee, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reason of the facts
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 408/687
stated in the petition, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed unless
an injunction has been obtained from a court of record.
C. The City Manager or designee may reverse, affirm, modify, or waive, wholly or partially, any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester,
or the City Manager or designee may grant, deny, or revoke any permit or license. The decision of the City Manager or designee shall be final. (Ord.
2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-12: PROTECTION OF TREES:
All public trees and shrubs deemed to be saved during construction or reconstruction activities shall be protected by the developer or property owner from
damages or disturbances, including their root systems. Protective fences shall be placed and maintained at or beyond the drip line of public trees and
shrubs that are unaffected by approved excavation or construction activities, but are subject to damage during said activities. Any disturbance of any kind
within the fenced area shall be prohibited. Cutting, boring, and filling soil within the drip line of a public tree or shrub to be preserved shall be prohibited
unless otherwise approved by the City Forester. Soil compaction caused by any type of equipment shall not be allowed to occur over the protected area of
the root zone of any public tree or shrub unless approved by the City Forester. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-13: INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY FORESTER, CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, OR CITY EMPLOYEES ENFORCING
THIS CHAPTER:
It is unlawful for any person or property owner to hinder, obstruct, or otherwise interfere with the City Forester, Code Enforcement Officer, or employees of
the City while engaged in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-14: PENALTIES:
The following penalties shall be imposed upon any person or property owner who violates any provision of this chapter:
A. Any person or property owner who violates the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be punished as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this
Code.
B. In addition to the penalties provided above, any person or property owner found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter may be required to pay
the cost of repair or replacement of such public tree or shrub. The replacement costs shall be determined in accordance with the latest version of "A
Guide for Plant Appraisal" as published by the International Society of Arboriculture and authored by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers.
C. The City reserves the right to collect costs in addition to penalties. The imposition of any penalty of a violation of this chapter shall not be construed as a
waiver of the right of the City to collect the costs of removal or treatment of any tree or shrub in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Public utilities may be held responsible for the replacement of any public tree or shrub which has been severely damaged or died in the opinion of the
City Forester as a result of the maintenance or new installation of utilities. The City Forester shall coordinate with the public utility appropriate and
reasonable replacement of said severely damaged or dead public tree or shrub in accordance with the "City Forestry Standards of Practice and
Specifications".
E. Property owners abutting the area on which the public tree or shrub is located shall be notified by the utility company forty eight (48) hours prior to the
commencement of any utility repair, maintenance, or replacement activities which will affect or harm the public tree or shrub. In cases of emergency
repair, the City Forester shall have the option to waive said notification. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
Chapter 11
PARK REGULATIONS
7-11-1: PURPOSE:
The city council has adopted certain park rules governing the use of and conduct in city parks. The term "city park(s)" as used herein refers to the city
parks, park facilities, and trails within city parks located within or without the corporation limits of the city. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999)
7-11-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations are established concerning the conduct and use of city parks, also regulating traffic and parking automobiles and
vehicles. Persons and vehicles authorized for activities related to public safety or maintenance are exempt from the regulations:
A. Use Of Roadways: No person shall ride or drive any automobile, motorcycle, moped, snowmobile or any other motorized vehicle in any public park
except on the established roads or designated areas.
B. Speed: No person shall ride or drive any automobile or other vehicle in a public park at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour1. (Ord. 1355, 3-
22-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 409/687
C. Parking: Vehicles shall be parked in designated parking lots and marked stalls only, unless the parks and recreation director or designee has
specifically authorized parking on the grass or outside designated parking lots. No vehicle shall be parked or allowed to remain within or upon any park
area or facility for a period in excess of twenty four (24) hours. No person(s) shall obstruct or impede the normal flow of traffic within a park. (Ord. 2104,
7-13-2015)
D. Hitching Animals: No person shall ride a horse or other animal or operate any type of horse or animal drawn conveyance in a public park except by
permission of the director of parks and recreation.
E. Destruction Of Natural Environment: No person shall in any manner deface, injure or remove any tree, shrub, or plant standing or growing in a public
park or pick or destroy flowers or seeds growing therein, or remove nests or wildlife/wildfowl.
F. Fires: No fires shall be lighted or made in any public park except with the permission of the director of parks and recreation, provided that this
subsection does not apply to fires in stoves, ovens, grills, fire rings or fireplaces provided in any facility in the city parks for use in picnic cooking. Fires
may be prohibited entirely during posted periods.
G. Firearms, Weapons, Or Explosives: No person shall use firearms, explosives, weapons, firecrackers or fireworks in any public park except as otherwise
provided by any other section of this code. Fireworks displays may be allowed by permission of the director of parks and recreation and the fire chief.
H. Litter: No person shall deposit upon or litter the ground with any form of waste material. All waste shall be deposited in receptacles provided for such
purposes. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999)
I. Use Of Tobacco: No person, at any time, shall use tobacco of any kind while present on any city park property. Tobacco includes any product made or
derived from tobacco that is intended for human use, including any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product. This includes, but is not limited
to, cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, cigarette tobacco, roll your own tobacco, smokeless tobacco, and dissolvable tobacco. "Electronic smoking
devices" means any device that can be used to deliver an aerosolized solution that may or may not contain nicotine to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, e-hookah, or other simulated smoking device. Nicotine products approved
by the United States food and drug administration for tobacco cessation shall be allowed within city parks. (Ord. 2140, 3-21-2016)
J. Defacing Of Public Property: No person shall write, mark or draw characters on or deface, injure or destroy any building, or part thereof, or
improvement, apparatus or fixture, wall or fence, drain or sewer located on or in any public park. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999)
K. Posted Notices: (Rep. by Ord. 1197, 9-9-1996)
L. Control Of Animals: All animals must be under the control of a person competent to restrain and control the animal, either by leash, cord, chain, or other
similar restraint not more than ten feet (10') in length, or properly restrained within a motor vehicle. The owner or person in charge of an animal shall
clean up and/or remove as soon as possible any excrement or droppings deposited by the animal on park property. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999)
The requirement of a restraint on an animal shall not apply to animals registered to use a designated off leash area of a park while in said off leashed
area and while abiding by all the rules and regulations of such designated off leash area. (Ord. 1566, 1-5-2004)
M. Hours: No person shall be in any public park between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or at any time duly posted
and designated by the director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999)
N. Safety: (Rep. by Ord. 1197, 9-9-1996)
O. Compliance With Rules: All persons shall abide by rules established by city ordinance or by the parks and recreation department and posted in park
areas and facilities.
P. Posting: No person shall post, fasten, paint or affix any placard, bill, notice or sign upon any structure, tree, stone, directional sign, fence or enclosure
along or within any park except by permission of the director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999)
Q. Moving Fixtures: (Rep. by Ord. 1197, 9-9-1996)
R. Grounds Alteration: No person shall cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any public park without written permission from
the director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999)
S. Consumption In Public Parks: The department of parks and recreation may establish facility use policies regarding alcoholic beverage possession,
consumption, and sales within park facilities. No person shall consume alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine while present upon Holiday Aquatic Center
premises, Valley View Aquatic Center premises, the designated beach and swimming area at Raccoon River Park, Crossroads Park, Western Hills
Park, Brookview Park, Woodland Hills Park, Maple Grove Park, or in any parking lot, driveway, or road within a city park. However, beer may be
possessed and consumed in any other public park owned or leased by the city, provided it is within individual cans not exceeding sixteen (16) ounces
in size. Dispensing from kegs shall be permitted only with written permission of the director under the rules adopted by the department for the Raccoon
River Park Nature Lodge, the Raccoon River Park Softball Complex, and during activities held pursuant to a city special event permit. Consumption of
wine shall be permitted in the nature lodge in accordance with department established facility use policies. Signs prohibiting the consumption or
possession of alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer shall be posted where appropriate. (Ord. 2022, 2-24-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 410/687
T. Responsibility Of Adults: (Rep. by Ord. 1197, 9-9-1996)
U. Park Roads: No park road shall be used as a through street by any vehicle where posted.
V. Golfing: No person shall play or practice golf in any city park, except during supervised activities approved by the director of parks and recreation.
W. Prohibited Activities: The following activities are specifically prohibited in any public park or greenbelt:
1. Disposing Of Material: No person shall place, store or dump any organic or inorganic materials including raked leaves, grass clippings, compost,
construction material, firewood, paint, trash, debris, junk or any similar materials in park dumpsters or on park property.
2. Private Improvements: No person shall garden, mow or plant trees without written permission from the department of parks and recreation. No
person shall install other private improvements such as fences, play equipment, irrigation systems, or similar encroachments on park land.
3. Miscellaneous: No person shall remove or deposit snow on park land. No person shall bury animals on park land.
The parks and recreation department is authorized to monitor and enforce such rules and regulations. Enforcement procedures shall follow city code
procedures for either administrative abatement or municipal infraction as determined in the best interest of the city.
X. Swimming/Beach Use: Swimming shall be allowed in posted areas only, except for organized activities approved by the director of parks and recreation.
No swimming shall be allowed from boats. Inner tubes, air mattresses, or other beach toy type items shall be allowed in posted areas only.
Y. Ice Skating: Ice skating shall be allowed in posted areas only. Ice skating shall only be allowed when posted as safe. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999)
Z. Boating: A boat equipped with any size motor may be operated at a no wake speed on Raccoon River Park Lake, except for in areas designated as
"Non-Motorized And Electric Motors Only" zones. All other regulations under the code of Iowa, chapter 462A, shall apply. All sailboats with a mast
height measuring thirty six feet (36') or greater above from the water surface are prohibited on the Raccoon River Park Lake. Additionally, all sailboats
are prohibited on Raccoon River Park Lake when the lake water level reaches an elevation of one foot (1') above the concrete dock at the boat ramp.
(Ord. 1360, 5-3-1999)
AA. Fishing: Fishing activities in parks shall comply with the code of Iowa, chapter 481A.
BB. Sales In Parks: No sales activities or admissions shall be allowed in any park except with approval of the director of parks and recreation.
CC. Hunting: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any hunting activity on park property using a rifle, shotgun, bow and arrow or any other
means on land or in the water unless approved by official action of the park and recreation advisory board and the city council.
DD. Trapping; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, locate, set, use or attempt to use on park property, any type of claw, spring or metal
trap of any nature on land or in the water, or to set, use or maintain any snare, pitfall, deadfall, spring gun, set gun or device of similar character or
purpose.
Exceptions: The city or its authorized agents are exempt from the above and may control or manage animals, birds, or insects pursuant to established
policies that have been approved by the city council.
EE. Camping: All overnight camping is prohibited unless written authorization is received from the director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999)
7-11-3: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter are declared to be municipal infractions and may be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. For violations of
subsections 7-11-2I, "Use Of Tobacco", 7-11-2S, "Consumption In Public Parks", and 7-11-2X, "Swimming/Beach Use", of this chapter, police officers or
designees shall enforce and be authorized to issue citation-complaints. Before issuing a citation-complaint, the police officer or designee shall verify that
the offender has previously received a warning against engaging in such conduct, or the offender has refused to discontinue engaging in such conduct
after the police officer or designee has advised the offender that such conduct must cease. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) civil penalty shall be imposed
for each violation where a citation-complaint has been issued. For violations of subsection 7-11-2C, "Parking", of this chapter, police officers or designees
shall be authorized to issue parking tickets as specified in title 6, "Motor Vehicles And Traffic", of this code. (Ord. 2140, 3-21-2016)
Chapter 12
LIBRARY REGULATIONS
7-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt certain library rules governing the conduct of patrons of the library of the City. The term "library" as used herein
refers to the City Library Building located at 4000 Mills Civic Parkway, West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1363, 5-17-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 411/687
7-12-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations are established concerning the conduct of patrons and use of library facilities, as follows:
A. Library patrons are expected to be engaged in the productive use of the library's resources. This includes reading, studying, researching, attending
programs and utilizing library material. Patrons have the right to use the library undisturbed and library employees have the right to work without undue
interference.
B. The library will not tolerate bullying in any library space, gathering, or program and staff will do all they reasonably can to create a safe space for all
library users, regardless of an individual's actual or perceived age, color, creed/denomination, national origin, race, religion, marital status, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, physical attributes/appearance, physical or mental ability or disability, ancestry, political party preference, political belief,
socioeconomic status, or familial status. Bullying is defined as the unwanted, aggressive use of physical, social, or mental/intellectual power to control,
harm, or humiliate another person in a repetitive or pervasive manner.
C. No person shall engage in any conduct which disturbs or interferes with the legitimate use of the library, as follows:
1. Refuse to follow reasonable directives or instructions from a library staff member.
2. Willfully annoy, bully, harass, or threaten another person.
3. Behave in a disorderly, loud, or boisterous manner, including loud conversations.
4. Interfere with another person's passage within the library or on library grounds.
5. Consume or possess alcoholic beverages unless the Library Board of Trustees has approved of an event or function at the library where alcoholic
beverages will be provided. The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to that provided to those in attendance at the
approved library event or function, and shall be confined to a designated area within the library during the event or function.
6. Use or possess controlled substances on library grounds or be under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances in a manner that causes
public disturbance.
7. Possess any firearm, knife, or any device which could be used as a weapon or other weapon prohibited by City ordinance or State Statutes.
8. Deface or destroy library property.
9. Eat or drink in the library (unless eating or drinking is specifically allowed in an area or at a particular activity).
10. Use tobacco or smoke in the library, including the use of electronic cigarettes or vaping devices.
11. Sleep in the library, or exhibit the appearance of sleep.
12. Remain in the library after regular closing hours.
13. Solicit funds, "panhandle", or engage in commercial activity unless authorized by library administration.
14. Interfere with patrons' use of the library through poor bodily hygiene which is so offensive as to constitute a nuisance, or through excessive use of
perfume, cologne, or alcohol.
15. Bring animals into the library except as required by persons with disabilities.
16. Use sports equipment, skates, or a skateboard in the library.
17. Use any audio, personal communication, or computing device in a manner that is disturbing to other patrons. Cellphone ringers should be set to
silent or vibrate and device speakers muted or headphones used.
18. Campaign, leaflet, petition, interview, or survey patrons or staff in a manner that is disruptive to library activities.
19. Willfully expose patrons and staff to offensive images or language.
20. Engage in lengthy conversations (including conversations on cellphones) in areas intended for quiet study.
21. Interfere with the library's right to maintain a clean, pleasant, and safe facility.
22. Relocate or rearrange furniture beyond repositioning existing seating around tables.
23. Be in any state of inappropriate undress.
24. Engage in sexual activity of any kind, including inappropriate displays of romantic affection.
25. Bring luggage, bedrolls, or large bags into the library.
26. Leave packages, backpacks, or personal belongings unattended. Personal property must be within sight of the owner. The library assumes no
responsibility for belongings left unattended. Large or possibly valuable belongings left on the premises after closing will be forwarded to the Police
Department.
27. Use bathrooms for unreasonable or unintended purposes, such as bathing or laundering. (Ord. 2321, 7-23-2018)
7-12-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 412/687
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be punished not in excess of a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine or in excess
of thirty (30) days' imprisonment. (Ord. 1363, 5-17-1999)
Chapter 13
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR STREETS
7-13-1: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide general guidance to staff and notice to citizens concerning the processes utilized to establish special
assessments for street improvements which will be levied upon private property in West Des Moines. Whenever the word "assessment" or words
"special assessment" are used in this Chapter, the word or words refer only to special assessments for street improvement projects, including
construction, paving, reconstruction, resurfacing or repair measures.
B. It is realized that special situations will arise which cannot be anticipated in a general policy but which will need to be addressed in a reasonable manner
once they arise. While this Chapter cannot be literally applied to every such exceptional situation, it is nonetheless the directive of the City Council that
the concepts reflected in this Chapter be fairly and equitably applied in a reasonable fashion to all street assessments. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-2: SCOPE:
A. Policy: It is the policy of the City to eventually have all streets within the City paved or widened to the extent suitable to their intended or actual use. All
street improvement projects shall be assessed in accord with this Chapter (as limited by the purpose) to the extent such improvement benefits property
in a definable benefited property district or area.
B. Other Finance Mechanisms: The City Council recognizes that not all streets are improved through use of a special assessment and that developers and
others may finance the improvement of streets through the use of other mechanisms. Where such alternative mechanisms have effectively shifted
costs to benefited property owners, even when not formally assessed, such property owners shall be treated as if their property had been previously
assessed. The City will not ordinarily place the same tract of land in more than one benefited property district for assessment purposes.
C. Street Width; Special Benefit: The amount assessed for any street improvement project shall normally be equivalent to constructing, paving, repairing,
or widening a local street in accordance with the current Urban Design Policy Standards Manual and the Urban Specifications for Construction of
Public Improvements (the "design standards") as adopted or amended by the City. In so limiting the amount of assessment, it is the intent of the
Council to assess only for the special benefit derived from a street improvement project; provided, however, that the City Council may in its discretion
assess up to the width of the classification of the street being improved, as provided in the design standards.
D. General Benefits: All general benefits from a street improvement project in excess of the above standard shall be paid from other City funds and shall
not be assessed. Subject to final determination by the Council, the percentage of general benefit to the City shall be determined in accordance with the
schedule set forth in subsection 7-13-3F of this Chapter.
E. Assessable Items: Assessable items, to the extent special benefits are conferred, shall include:
1. All related storm sewer for the project (but not all storm sewer costs and oversizing of drains necessitated by anticipated future expansion shall be
assessed).
2. All required grading for the project.
3. All utility relocations required due to the project.
4. All driveways, sidewalks, and trails required due to the project.
5. All surface restoration required by the project.
6. All right of way required due to the project up to sixty feet (60').
7. All the engineering fees associated with the design and construction of the project.
8. All legal fees associated with the project.
9. All appraisal fees associated with the project.
10. Pro rata share of administrative costs.
11. Paving costs.
12. Traffic signals where a special local benefit is conferred.
13. All other miscellaneous costs and contingency costs directly related to the project.
F. Design Standards: All standards and details of design for proposed assessment projects shall be in accordance with the design standards as amended
and the Comprehensive Plan as amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 413/687
G. Street Improvements: In addition to constructing new streets, the City may assess for street widening, reconstruction, repair or resurfacing when such
improvement is found to confer special benefits. Such assessment will ordinarily occur only in a manner consistent with this general statement, and
only to the extent that the property has not been assessed or owners have not otherwise previously participated directly in the cost of such
construction. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-3: PROCEDURE:
A. Procedural Steps: The City will generally endeavor to follow the procedural steps set out in this Section.
B. Identification Of Streets: City staff shall, during the budget process or as part of the citizens Capital Improvement Program, and at other times as
directed by the City Council, identify streets which in the opinion of staff should be considered for improvement. The City Manager shall review such
recommendations and report to the Mayor and City Council his or her findings as to the need for improvement. The City Council shall act upon such
recommendations as part of its annual budgetary process, either through consideration of capital improvement projects or at such times as may seem
proper in the circumstances.
C. Petition By Property Owners: As an alternative, assessments for street improvement projects may be initiated by petition of all property owners to be
assessed for the cost subject to Council approval. Such projects, however, shall normally be considered in light of the regular budgetary process.
D. Project Determination: After the initial considerations and discussions set forth above, the City Council shall decide whether it wishes to consider a
street improvement project and whether that project should be specially assessed. As part of such decision, the City Council shall direct the appropriate
eminent domain notice be issued, and may employ consulting engineers, bond counsel and such other consultants as may be necessary.
E. Preliminary Plat And Schedule Of Assessments: As part of the consideration of whether to levy special assessment for a project, the City Council shall
direct the engineer to prepare a preliminary plat and schedule of assessments, estimate the costs, and preliminary plans and specifications, and to
furnish necessary data to bond counsel needed to prepare legal proceedings. The engineer shall present a preliminary draft of the plat and schedule to
the City staff which shall review the documents and make recommendations to the City Council.
F. Arterial Or Collector Streets: All streets classified in the then current Comprehensive Plan as arterial or collector shall be considered to generally benefit
the community as well as specially benefited properties in the benefited property district. Therefore, any reduction in the special assessment shall
generally be applied to the specially affected parcel within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the street improvement project in accordance with the
following schedule:
Street
Classification
Amount
Of Reduction
Major arterial 40 percent
Minor arterial 20 percent
Major collector 10 percent
Minor collector 5 percent
The distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') on each side of the street shall generally be applied to create an area similar to the area established by
application of the Flint Formula, as further set forth in Section 7-13-9 of this Chapter. The final determination of any reduction, however, shall be
established by the City Council.
G. Property Valuation: The City Council shall determine the valuation of the property to be specially assessed. The valuations for property within the
proposed assessment district shall not exceed the fair market value of the property with the proposed public improvement in place. The City Council
shall retain the services of an MAI appraiser to advise the City Council as to its findings regarding the valuation of each lot and parcel within the
benefited property district with the street improvement in place.
H. Project Information Meeting: As part of the consideration of whether to levy a special assessment for a street improvement project, the City Council
shall either conduct a project information meeting or direct staff to conduct a project information meeting. Benefited property owners shall be notified by
letter with details concerning the proposed project and the time, location and place of the meeting. Staff shall arrange for the delivery of the notification
at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting.
I. Informational Pamphlet: Staff shall provide an informational pamphlet describing the project, assessment procedure, and pertinent deadlines along with
a copy of this Chapter to those attending the project information meeting and to others upon request. No official action shall be taken by the City
Council on the assessment proceeding within a thirty (30) day period following the project information meeting to permit affected property owners to
petition for or against the project.
J. Preliminary Plans And Specifications: At the completion of the above process, the preliminary plans and specifications, preliminary plat, schedule of
assessments, and estimate of costs shall be officially filed in the office of the City Clerk.
K. Council Resolutions: After the filing of the preliminary plans and specifications, preliminary plat, schedule of assessments, and estimate of costs, the
City Council shall meet to consider the preliminary resolution for the street improvement project, resolution fixing value of lots, resolution adopting
preliminary plat and schedule, estimate of costs, and preliminary plans and specifications. If the City Council adopts the foregoing, it shall then consider
a proposed resolution of necessity for the project and set a date and time for public hearing on the proposed resolution of necessity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 414/687
L. Notice To Property Owners; Publication: Notice shall then be given to the affected property owners that the proposed resolution of necessity will be
considered by the City Council. The notice shall be published as required by law.
M. Resolution Of Necessity: The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the resolution of necessity. The City Council shall hear all objections and
endorsements and consider all filed and written objections. The City Council shall then officially continue or close the public hearing. After closing the
public hearing, the City Council may reject, adopt, or amend and adopt, the proposed resolution of necessity, or the City Council may defer action until
a subsequent meeting.
N. Required Vote: Passage of the resolution of necessity shall require the affirmative vote of three-quarters (3/4) of the City Council; provided, however, if
written remonstrances signed by the owners of seventy five percent (75%) of the amount of the proposed assessments on property subject to
assessment have been timely filed with the City Clerk, the resolution of necessity will require the unanimous affirmative vote of the City Council for
passage.
O. Plans And Specifications; Contract: If the resolution of necessity is adopted either as proposed or as amended, the City Council shall then adopt
resolutions directing the preparation of detailed plans and specifications, and the form of contract and notice to bidders.
P. Court Decree: Following the adoption of either the original or amended resolution of necessity when more than sixty percent (60%) of the amount of the
proposed assessments on property subject to assessment have petitioned against the project, the City Council may direct bond counsel or other legal
counsel to file in District Court a petition requesting the Court to review and confirm the proposed street improvement by decree. The City Council, at its
own discretion, retains the option of having other assessments for street projects confirmed by the same process.
Q. Detailed Plans And Specifications: Detailed plans and specifications and the form of contract and notice to bidders shall officially be placed on file in the
City Clerk's office.
R. Resolution Ordering Bids; Approving Plans: The City Council shall, either at the meeting at which the resolution of necessity is adopted, or thereafter,
adopt a resolution ordering bids, approving plans, specifications and form of contract, and notice to bidder; fixing amount of bid security; ordering City
Clerk to publish notice, fix a date for reviewing bids; and for a public hearing on plans, specifications, form of contract and estimate of costs. The notice
to bidder shall then be published as required by law.
S. Filing With County Treasurer: The resolution of necessity and preliminary plat and schedule of assessments shall be filed in the county treasurer's office
as required by State law. The City Clerk shall also execute a certificate with regard to the amount of agricultural deferment requests timely filed by
property owners pursuant to Section 7-13-5 of this Chapter.
T. Public Hearing; Resolution Awarding Contract: The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the plans, specifications, and form of contract as required
by the published notice. After the public hearing is complete, the Council may adopt the resolution adopting plans, specifications, form of contract, and
estimated cost. Bids which have been received for the street improvement project shall be evaluated by City staff and, where appropriate, consulting
engineers and legal counsel. If satisfactory bids have been received, the City Council may adopt a resolution awarding a contract, or the City Council
may defer action, or for proper reasons reject all bids.
U. Review Of Completed Work: After completion or substantial completion and in accordance with law, the engineer shall review the completed work and
file certificates of completion and final estimates of costs with the City Clerk. The total project cost and the total assessable cost of the project shall be
summarized by category with a full description of costs, including unit quantities, available to the public on request.
V. Resolution Accepting Work; Levy Of Final Assessments: The City Council shall then adopt a resolution accepting the work and ordering preparation of
the final plat and schedule of assessments. The final plat and schedule of assessment shall be filed by the engineer in the City Clerk's office. The
resolution adopting and levying the final assessments and providing for the payment thereof shall then be adopted by the City Council. In no case may
the final assessments be greater than the preliminary assessment. Notice of filing of the final plat and schedule shall be given as required by law.
W. Final Plat And Schedule Filed With County Treasurer; Notice To Property Owner: The City Clerk shall file a certificate of levy and copy of the final plat
and schedule in the office of the county treasurer and the Building Permit Official's office. Notice of such filing shall be published for two (2) consecutive
weeks with the first publication not more than fifteen (15) days from the date of filing the final plat and schedule with the county officials. On or before
the date of the second publication of notice, the Clerk shall send, by ordinary and certified mail, a copy of the notice to each property owner. (Ord.
1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-4: PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS:
A. Any assessment levied under this Chapter may be paid in full or in part without interest within thirty (30) days after the date of certification.
B. Except as to assessments of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), which must be paid in full before the next July 1, assessments may be paid, with
interest, in installments with real estate taxes over a period of ten (10) years. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-5: AGRICULTURAL DEFERMENT:
A. Persons having a tract of land, either alone or as an integral part of a larger tract, which is both used and assessed for agricultural purposes, and which
would otherwise be subject to assessment, may apply for an agricultural deferment as provided by State law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 415/687
B. Any property owner who seeks deferment of an assessment shall file a written request for deferment with the City Clerk at the time of the hearing on the
resolution of necessity or within ten (10) days following the date of the closing of the public hearing. The request shall identify those lots subject to the
proposed assessment which the property owner claims are entitled to agricultural deferment.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such additional annual filings as are required by law for the continuation of an agricultural
deferment. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-6: DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENTS:
A. If the proposed assessment is greater than twenty five percent (25%) of the value of any tract with the improvement in place, the Council shall provide
by resolution that the portion of the assessment which exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the value of the tract with the improvement in place shall
be certified to the county treasurer as a deficiency.
B. The amount of the deficiency shall amortize over a period of ten (10) years and after ten (10) years no part of the deficiency may be assessed;
provided, however, that if a private improvement is constructed on a lot subject to deficiency during the period of amortization, the pro-rata deficiency
on the lot which has not been amortized shall be assessed to the extent that it is assessable. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-7: ASSESSMENT METHODS:
A. The City Council has elected to use formulas as a guide to the exercise of its legislative power to determine the proper amount to be assessed against
property which receives a special benefit from a street improvement project. Depending upon the character of the street to be improved, the City will
utilize a method of assessment which assures that the assessable costs of a street improvement project are fairly spread among benefited properties
and that no property is assessed an amount greater than the special benefit received.
B. In its sole legislative discretion, the City Council shall determine whether the application and use of a formula to guide it in establishing the amount of
individual assessments meet the criteria established by this Chapter and the law. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-8: BENEFITS:
A. Benefit Conferred: It is the policy of the City not to assess any amount for street improvements in excess of the benefit conferred on a lot or parcel.
Benefits resulting from street improvements which inure to property owners within the assessment area will depend upon the circumstances of each
project.
B. Nature And Extent Of Benefits: As a result of street improvement projects, property owners often benefit from enhanced access, an improved
environment because of dust and drainage control, enhancement of aesthetic qualities in the area, a decrease in the cost of automobile and other
vehicle maintenance, an improvement in the ability of police, fire, ambulance and other public safety organizations to respond, an increase in the value
of property, and an improvement in the ability of property owners to market their property either for present uses or possibly new uses. Moreover, the
nature and extent of benefits may vary depending upon conditions in the area of the improvement including such factors as topography, the level of
economic activity, and the level or nature of economic development.
C. Not Exhaustive Discussion: Any discussion in this Chapter of specific special benefits is not to be construed as exhaustive or illustrative of all benefits
which may in any particular project inure to the benefit of property owners; and this Chapter is neither intended to be, nor to be construed as a
complete or definitive discussion of the special benefits to be derived from street improvement projects. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-9: MODIFIED FLINT FORMULA:
A. In areas of the City laid out in a traditional grid or similar pattern, a modified Flint Formula shall be used to determine assessments. Streets to be
assessed by this method shall be largely those commonly known as infill streets. All property within three hundred feet (300') of the right of way or onehalf
(1/2) the distance to the next parallel street (whichever distance is less) shall be assessed benefit calculated upon a curve which applies
incrementally less benefit to parcels of property located a greater distance from the proposed improvements.
B. A depth factor chart and proximity curve, as adopted by the City Council and on file with the City Clerk's office, shall be used in calculating assessments
levied under this method. The curve may, however, be modified by the City Council for any street improvement project where reason or circumstances
require such modification. Moreover, the Council may modify any proposed assessment which results from the application of the curve where reason or
circumstances make such modification reasonable or just. All modifications, however, shall be limited to the extent necessary to reflect actual special
benefit conferred on the lot or parcel. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-10: AREA (DISTRICT) ASSESSMENT METHOD:
A. The area (district) assessment method shall be used for the assessment of all streets which confer local benefit outside the traditional grid pattern as
set forth in Section 7-13-9 of this Chapter. It is the intent of the Council that all property served outside the traditional grid pattern be assessed for the
street improvement which provides access and other special benefits in accord with City street and development plans, but that no parcel shall
generally be assessed more than once for such improved street.
B. The area (district) assessment method may be combined with any other method of assessment if the Council finds such combination is necessary in
order to properly determine special benefits in an area. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 416/687
7-13-11: BOUNDARIES OF ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS FOR AREA (DISTRICT) ASSESSMENT:
A. The boundaries of an area to be assessed in an area (district) assessment shall be established in accord with this Section and shall include the
benefited land on both sides of the street to be improved. The line demarcating the boundaries shall commence at the intersecting streets at the
terminus of the street improvements and bisect the land area to be served by the public improvement and the intersecting streets so as to divide the
service area of the streets. Where actual bisection is inappropriate because of street patterns, land divisions, natural or other barriers, adjustments will
be made to accommodate such patterns, barriers or divisions. The assessment district shall be established based upon the area served or otherwise
benefited by the street improvement.
B. In determining actual boundaries, all property which reasonably receives a special benefit shall be included in the district. To establish district
boundaries, consideration shall be given to topography, land division lines, planning and development criteria regarding land use in the district, actual
and present land use, the need to plan for and provide access to adjacent areas, the need to coordinate access to adjacent areas, plans for the use
and the actual use of adjacent areas, actual and projected street and transportation patterns, and the relationship of the street improvement project to
other planned, projected, or existing public improvements. Where possible all land within one subdivision should be included within a single area
assessment district. In establishing boundaries, all lots on a street which provide access to the street being improved should be included in the same
district.
C. The City Council shall make the final determination of the boundaries of the district after holding a public hearing pursuant to subsection 7-13-3M of this
Chapter, giving consideration to the provisions of this Chapter, the advice and judgment of engineers and other consultants, and such other
considerations as it deems appropriate to its determination. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-12: METHODOLOGY:
A. Special Benefit Conferred: In the application of the area assessment method, the City shall generally follow the method set out below, reserving,
however, to the City Council the right to vary, amend, or otherwise change the formula or method or the application of either, where such modification is
necessary in order to properly reflect in the assessment the special benefit conferred by a street improvement project.
B. Area Distribution: After the benefited area has been preliminarily determined, the assessment shall be distributed over the entire area based upon the
area of each lot included in the district. The resulting calculation shall constitute the base assessment rate for the public improvement project. For
purposes of assessment, a lot shall be defined consistent with the definition in Iowa Code section 384.37.10 (1999) as an actual platted lot or any other
tract of land under common ownership.
C. Direct Access Lots: Lots within an area of depth up to one hundred fifty feet (150') which have, or could reasonably have, direct vehicular access by
driveway, or otherwise, onto the public improvement shall be assessed at a rate of two (2) times the base assessment rate in the area. Any portion of a
lot with direct access within an area of depth greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be assessed at the base assessment rate.
D. Abutting Lots: Abutting lots shall be defined consistent with the definition in Iowa Code section 384.37.1 (1999) as lots which abut or join the street in
which the public improvement is located or which abut the right of way of the public improvement. Lots within an area of depth up to one hundred fifty
feet (150') which abut the public improvement, but which lack direct access by driveway or otherwise, shall be assessed at a rate of one and one-half
(11/2) times the base assessment to reflect the special benefit of proximity to the street improvement project. Any portion of abutting lots within an area
of depth greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be assessed at the base assessment rate.
E. Adjacent Lots: Adjacent lots shall be defined consistent with the definition of Iowa Code section 384.37.2 (1999) as lots within the district which do not
abut upon the street or right of way of the public improvement. Adjacent lots within an area of depth up to one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be
assessed at a rate of one and one-half (11/2) times the base assessment rate to reflect the special benefit of proximity to the street improvement
project. Any portion of adjacent lots within an area of depth greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be assessed at the base assessment rate in
the area.
F. Subdivided Lots; Preliminary Plat; Development Agreement: Parcels which abut the street improvement, but have not been subdivided into residential
lots at the time of the preliminary schedule of assessments, even though such lots could be divided into residential lots, shall be considered to have
direct access to the public improvement and shall be assessed to a depth of one hundred fifty feet (150') at a rate of two (2) times the base rate of
assessment in the area; provided, however, that if a preliminary plat is filed and approved, or a development agreement is executed with the City, prior
to the passage of the resolution of necessity, the lots shown by such plat or agreement shall be used to determine the rate of assessment. Any
development agreement executed pursuant to this subsection shall be recorded.
G. City Council Final Determination: The City Council shall make the final determination by reviewing the formula results, and may adjust the formula, or
the results as to the entire area, individual lots or both, in order to achieve a fair and just distribution of any assessment in accord with the special
benefit conferred by the improvement project to lots in the assessment district. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
Chapter 14
UTILITY SYSTEMS
7-14-1: SUBJECT TO CITY APPROVAL:
A. All installation, replacement or upgrade of cables, wires and conduits in connection with any utility system shall require submission of detailed plans to
the city, of detailed plans clearly indicating proposed work and all applicable city permits shall be approved by the city before proposed utility work
commences.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 417/687
B. All utility work shall comply with the city's current design standards and standard construction specifications. (Ord. 1432, 1-8-2001, eff. 1-8-2001)
7-14-2: PLACEMENT UNDERGROUND:
A. Underground: All cables, wires and conduits in connection with any utility system shall be placed underground, except as provided in subsection B of
this section.
B. Exceptions: Underground installation shall not be required in the following situations:
1. Electric lines of nominal voltage in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) volts.
2. Where aboveground connection to building or other location is reasonably necessary, as determined by the public works director.
3. Where another section of this code specifically allows aboveground placement.
4. Replacement or upgrade of aboveground cables and wires where the length of replacement or upgrade does not exceed three hundred feet (300').
5. Electric transformers, telephone and cable TV pedestals, and any other appurtenances in connection with any utility system, as approved by the
public works director.
6. Replacement of support poles, for aboveground cables, when the segment of pole replacement does not exceed three hundred feet (300').
7. When the public works director deems an exception to be in the best interest of the city.
C. Upgrade And Replacement Of Existing Systems: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall apply to any system upgrade, including
replacement or relocation of existing utility cables, wires or conduits.
D. All Parts Of City: The application of this chapter shall apply to all areas of the city and shall not be limited to public ways, property, and easements.
(Ord. 1432, 1-8-2001, eff. 1-8-2001)
7-14-3: PLACEMENT ABOVEGROUND:
A. Structures within city street right of way:
1. Structures associated with any cables, wires or conduits in connection with any utility system shall not be placed within the street "clear zone", as
defined in the city's current design standards and standard construction specifications, except as directed by city council. Should, after city council
approval, said structures be placed within the street "clear zone", as defined herein, it will be the responsibility of the utility company to provide, at no
cost to the city, all barricades, safety measures, etc., as deemed necessary by the public works director, for any structure in connection with any
utility system that is placed within the said street "clear zone", defined herein.
2. All aboveground structures associated with any cables, wires or conduits in connection with any utility system shall be maintained by the respective
utility so as to be plumb, secured to prevent unauthorized entrance and finished, where appropriate, to be aesthetically attractive. (Ord. 1432, 1-8-
2001, eff. 1-8-2001)
7-14-4: VIOLATION:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be subject to civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each violation or, if the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each repeat offense. (Ord. 1432,
1-8-2001, eff. 1-8-2001)
Chapter 15
PUBLIC ARTS
7-15-1: PURPOSE; POLICY:
A. The purposes of this chapter are to promote the cultural heritage and artistic development of the city, to enhance the city's character and identity, to
contribute to economic development and tourism, to add warmth, dignity, beauty, and accessibility to public spaces and to expand the experience and
participation of citizens with visual arts, by directing the inclusion of public arts in appropriate city capital improvement program projects.
B. The city council recognizes the importance of the creation, support, and maintenance of public arts. The city council shall fund the public arts program
with a portion of hotel/motel funds as determined annually in the adoption of the final budget. The funds shall be used for artist design services and for
the selection, acquisition, display, and maintenance of artworks. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter and any policies, guidelines, and procedures that may be developed to implement the public arts
program plan:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 418/687
ARTIST: Any practitioner in the visual and design arts, generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional in the field as evidenced by his or her
education, experience, exhibition record, and artwork production.
ARTWORKS: Works in a variety of media produced by professional artists; works may be permanent, temporary, or functional, and may be stand alone or
integrated into the architecture or landscaping, if such are designed by an "artist" as defined herein, and should encompass the broadest range of
expression, media, and materials. The term "artworks", does not include ineligible expenditures as described in section 7-15-4 of this chapter.
"Artworks" include:
A. "Sculpture": Sculptures may be made of any material or combination of materials; they may be freestanding, wall supported, or suspended, kinetic,
electronic, or mechanical.
B. "Murals" Or "Paintings": Murals or paintings may be made of any materials or combination of materials with or without collage; they may be made by
traditional or nontraditional means.
C. "Other": Earthworks, neon, glass, organic materials (fiber, clay, wood, etc.), mosaics, photographs, prints, literary expression, calligraphy, any
combination of forms of media, including audio, video, film, CD-ROM, DVD, holographic, or computer generated technologies or new genres.
"Artworks" as defined herein may be permanent, fixed, temporary, or portable, they may be an integral part of a building, facility, or structure, and may be
integrated with the work of other design professionals.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (CIP): The city's program for capital development.
COMMISSION: The city's public arts advisory commission that advises the city council on expenditures from the public arts fund.
ELIGIBLE CONSTRUCTION PROJECT: Any permanent public improvement project paid for wholly or in part by the city, for the construction or renovation
of any building, park, highway, road or street, streetscape or road beautification, bridge, transit or aviation facility, trail or bikeway, decorative or
commemorative structure, viaduct or pedestrian overpass/underpass, parking facility, abovegrade utility, or any portion thereof, to which the public has
access or which is visible from a public right of way.
ELIGIBLE PROJECT COSTS: The total project appropriation, less real property acquisition, demolition, environmental remediation, legal and accounting
fees, and interest charges. It shall also exclude funding from any outside source, if such funds are not permitted to be used for artworks.
PUBLIC ARTS COLLECTION: The artworks owned by the city, regardless of whether they were accumulated before or after the effective date of this
chapter.
PUBLIC ARTS FUND (FUND): A separate account into which all monies generated under this chapter or derived from gifts or donations for public arts
shall be deposited.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area on public or private property that is legally accessible and visible to the general public.
RENOVATION: Any major redesign of a facility or system or portion thereof which is included in eligible construction projects, including expanding or
upgrading the capacity of the facility or system, or enlarging the facility or creating a new use for the facility. It does not include repairs, maintenance, or
installation of replacement mechanical equipment or modifications required solely for the purposes of code compliance. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-3: FUNDING:
A. Each year, the city council shall budget discretionary funds from the hotel/motel fund to be appropriated and expended for acquisition or commissioning
of artworks in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Appropriations for purposes of acquiring artworks in order to carry out the provisions of
this chapter shall be made in accordance with law and the budgeting procedures of the city. Development and placement of artworks shall be approved
by the city council.
B. Appropriations and expenditures for artworks may include, but are not limited to, the costs and expenses incurred in the process of designing,
fabricating, installing, and maintaining artworks in public buildings or grounds.
C. Any monies collected or designated in accordance with this chapter shall be deposited into the public arts fund by the finance director. The finance
director shall establish accounting records sufficient to identify and control these funds. The account containing these funds shall earn interest and the
earned interest shall be deposited in the city's general fund according to the code of Iowa. The public arts fund shall be authorized to accept gifts,
grants, and donations made to the city for artworks. The public arts fund shall be self-perpetuating from year to year. Subfunds will be established as
the finance director deems necessary to maintain compliance with public and private requirements.
D. Funds authorized or appropriated pursuant to this chapter may be expended for artworks in association with any current city projects or in existing
public facilities and spaces which are owned by the city, if legally permissible.
E. In the case of any eligible construction project which involves the use of grant funds, or the proceeds of any bonds issued, amounts for artworks shall
be used for projects and purposes consistent with state and federal laws, and the resolutions or policies approved by the voters or the city council, as
applicable.
F. Unless any monies collected for the public arts fund are designated for a specific purpose or project, the monies shall be pooled into this fund.
G. An amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the public arts allocation for each project shall be set aside in a separate account to be used for the public
arts program administration and community participation activities, including artist selection, design/proposal/maquette costs, consultant fees, project
documentation, publicity, community education activities, interpretive plaques, and other purposes as may be deemed appropriate by the commission
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 419/687
for the administration of the program. Funds in the program administration account not expended at the close of any fiscal year shall be carried forward
into the next fiscal year.
H. An amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the public arts allocation for each project shall be set aside in a separate account for curatorial services and
the preservation and maintenance of artworks in the public art collection. Funds in the maintenance and conservation account not expended at the
close of any fiscal year shall be carried forward into the next fiscal year.
I. The public arts fund shall be used to provide sites for artworks in public places, but shall not be used for the purchase of any easement. Public artworks
may be placed on public display, integral or attached to a public building or structure, detached within or outside a public building or structure, within or
as a part of the landscape of a public park, square, or other outdoor public site or lands, part of a portable exhibition or collection, part of a temporary
exhibition, or loaned or exhibited in other public facilities. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-4: INELIGIBLE EXPENDITURES:
Expenditures that would not be eligible include, but are not limited to:
A. Reproductions of original artworks by mechanical or other means; however, limited editions controlled by the artist, or original prints, cast sculpture,
photographs, etc., may be included;
B. Decorative, ornamental, or functional elements that are not designed by an artist selected through an approved selection process;
C. Those elements generally considered to be components of the landscape architectural design, vegetative materials, pool(s), paths, benches,
receptacles, fixtures, planters, etc., designed by the architect, landscape architect, or other design professional engaged by the primary designer;
D. Art objects which are mass produced or of a standard design, such as playground sculpture or fountains;
E. Directional or other functional elements, such as signage, color coding, maps, etc., not designed by an artist selected through the commission approved
process;
F. Purchase of existing artworks without the selection process as provided for in the adopted public arts program guidelines and principles;
G. Representations of historical figures or events, or historical plaques, not designed by an artist through the commission approved process;
H. Notwithstanding maintenance of the artworks, continuing operating expenses or maintenance of architectural elements on or in which the artworks are
placed, or sites where artworks are located; and
I. Notwithstanding architectural elements on or in which the artworks are placed or affixed or mechanical elements and utilities needed to activate the
artworks, which would be eligible expenditures, each installation will be reviewed individually to determine eligible expenditures. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-5: EXCLUSIONS; ADDITIONS:
A. Prior to submission of the city's proposed annual capital improvement program budget to the city council, the city manager in concert with parks and
recreation staff, shall notify the commission of:
1. Capital improvement program projects in said budget that are eligible for public arts, as defined in "eligible construction project" in section 7-15-2 of
this chapter. The funding source for each project shall be identified and the city manager shall indicate whether or not the funds can legally be used
to provide artworks at the project site and if the funds can legally be pooled with other monies in the public arts fund for use at a different site;
2. Proposed capital improvement program projects in said budget which are not appropriate for public arts, due to low anticipated public visibility or
public usage. The funding source for each project shall be identified and the city manager shall indicate if the funds can legally be pooled with other
monies in the public arts fund for use at a different site; and
3. Proposed additional or discretionary funds added to the public arts fund.
B. In conjunction with the approval of the city's annual capital improvement program budget, the city council shall consider the commission's
recommendations and may:
1. Determine that the funds for certain capital improvement program projects can be pooled, and therefore be deposited into the public arts fund;
2. Determine that the funds for certain capital improvement projects cannot legally be pooled and therefore cannot be deposited in the public arts fund;
3. Designate additional funds to be added to the public arts fund, and said additional funds may be utilized to place artworks in or outside existing
public buildings which do not otherwise qualify as eligible; the amount of said additional funds shall be discretionary; and
4. Designate more funds to the public arts fund, as it deems fit. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-6: APPROVAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 420/687
Contracts for development of artworks or for other purposes authorized by this chapter shall be in accordance with federal or state law and the city's
purchasing policies. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-7: OTHER AGENCIES:
If the city enters into an agreement with another public agency, whereby city monies are transferred to such agency for the purpose of performing a capital
improvement program project, which would otherwise be deemed an eligible construction project under this chapter, such agreement shall provide,
whenever it is lawful, that the recipient or its successor in interest shall take appropriate measures to ensure that monies are expended for development of
arts within this program. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-8: MANAGEMENT:
A. Public arts funds shall be appropriated and expended by the city council with the advice of the commission. The public arts program guidelines and
principles are hereby adopted to provide guidance in the appropriation and expenditures of the public arts fund and in accordance with this chapter.
These guidelines and principles may be amended only after a public hearing by the commission and adoption of a resolution by the city council.
B. The commission shall function in accordance with the adopted public arts program guidelines and policies and the ordinance establishing the
commission.
C. Once a project has been included in the approved public arts work plan, the commission shall be responsible for the selection of artists, the
commissioning of artworks, and the purchase of artworks. Projects recommended by the commission shall be presented to the city council for review
and approval at the mock up or maquette stage, prior to the fabrication and installation of the artworks. All contracts or purchases shall be in
accordance with the city's purchasing policies. Over time, the commission should aim to achieve an appropriate balance among local, regional, and
national artists in the public arts program. The enduring quality of the artworks should be a primary consideration during artist selection.
D. The commission shall require that all artworks needing operations or maintenance be reviewed by the appropriate city department staff prior to the
acquisition of that artwork. At least once every five (5) years, the commission shall be responsible for conducting a maintenance survey of the public
arts collection. This survey shall include a condition report on each artwork, prioritized recommendations for the restoration, repair, or maintenance of
artworks, and estimated costs. It shall be the responsibility of the various city departments to provide for the routine maintenance of artworks under
their jurisdiction. Such routine maintenance shall be in accordance with approved plans submitted by each project artist. The commission shall monitor
any nonroutine maintenance.
E. The commission may encourage and help obtain additional grants and gifts of public arts from outside sources.
F. Day to day management of the public arts program shall be provided by the city's parks and recreation department staff. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-9: PLACEMENT:
A. Artworks selected and implemented pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and any resolution thereto, may be placed in, on, or about eligible
construction projects. The artworks may be attached or detached, within or about such property, and may be either temporary or permanent. City
officials responsible for the design and construction of such projects shall make appropriate spaces available for the placement of artworks unless
prohibited by federal or state law.
B. Placement of artworks shall be followed, within a reasonable time frame, by interpretative plaques on or near the artwork, indicating the artist, the year
created and dedicated, and a description of the artwork or its reason for installation, as appropriate. Plaque placement shall be determined by the city's
parks and recreation department staff in consultation with the artist. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
Title 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
BUILDING NUMBERING
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined:
OWNER: The owner of the principal building.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The main building on any lot or subdivision thereof. (Ord. 1999, 8-19-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 421/687
8-1-2: OWNER REQUIREMENTS:
Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
A. Obtain Building Number: Owner shall obtain the assigned number to his principal building from the city addressing administrator.
B. Display Building Number: Owner shall place or cause to be installed and maintain on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place
to the street in figures not less than two and one-fourth inches (21/4") in height and of a contrasting color with their background or in accordance with
adopted fire codes, whichever results in a larger and more prominent address display.
C. Failure To Comply: If an owner refuses to number a building as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after being notified in
writing by the city to do so, the city may proceed to place the assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax. (Ord. 1999, 8-19-2013)
8-1-3: BUILDING NUMBERING MAP:
The city addressing administrator shall be responsible for preparing and maintaining a building numbering map. (Ord. 1999, 8-19-2013)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
8-2A-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES:
This article shall consist of the 2015 edition of the International Building Code (IBC), and the 2015 edition of the International Residential Code, (IRC),
published by the International Code Council and together known commonly as the Building Code, with provisions that include electrical, mechanical,
plumbing, energy, and property maintenance requirements, and which volumes are incorporated herein by this reference as fully as though set forth herein
in their entirety, excepting only such portions as are hereinafter stated to be deleted therefrom; and such additional or amended provisions as are
hereinafter set forth.
This article, and all provisions incorporated herein by reference or otherwise, shall be known as the Building Code, may be cited as such, and will be
referred to herein as such and as "this Code". Further references made herein to chapters will be to chapters of the IBC or the IRC. References to section
numbers not proceeded by "8-2A" will be sections in the IBC or the IRC. (Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS:
The remaining sections in this article represent amendments, additions and deletions to the requirements contained in the International Building Code
(IBC) or the International Residential Code (IRC), and where their requirements conflict with those of the IBC or the IRC, the requirements of this article
shall prevail. (Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-3: SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION:
Amend Section 101.1 of the IBC, Title, and R101.1 of the IRC, Title, by inserting the following jurisdiction name: City of West Des Moines.
Amend Section 101.2.1 of the IBC, and Section R102.5 of the IRC, Appendices, by adding the following:
The appendices may be utilized to determine basic guidelines or acceptable solutions towards meeting the intent of code requirements
(determination to be made by the Building Official).
Amend Section 101.4 of the IBC, Referenced Codes, and Section R102.4 of the IRC, Referenced Codes and Standards, by adding the following:
1. The provisions adopted by the Iowa Department of Public Safety, including but not limited to the current edition and amendments of the
International Energy Conservation Code, and the National Electrical Code, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code.
2. The current edition and amendments of the Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code and Fuel Gas Code provisions adopted by the Iowa Department of
Public Health, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code, with the following modification:
Corrugated Stainless Steel. Only CSST with an Arc Resistant Jacket or Covering System listed in accordance with ANSI LC-1 (Optional Section
5.16)/CSA 6.26-2016 shall be installed in accordance with the terms of its approval, the conditions of listing, the manufacturers instructions, and
this code including electrical bonding requirements. CSST shall not be used for through wall penetrations from the point of delivery of the gas
supply to the inside of the structure. CSST shall not be installed in locations where subject to physical damage unless protected in an approved
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 422/687
manner.
3. Administrative Policies established by the Building Official may be considered part of the requirements of this code to the extent that the provisions
are written documentation established to enable consistent enforcement of a code interpretation.
Amend Section 101.4.4 of the IBC, Property Maintenance, by adding the following:
1. The 2015 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the extent
that the provisions are utilized as a mechanism to address property maintenance concerns and are not considered a mandate for enforcement action
on existing properties. If any provisions of the IPMC conflict with the amended provisions of this ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall
apply.
2. The Building Security provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) and Section 8-2A-25 of the City Code shall apply to new
residential rental projects. Documentation for compliance with these requirements shall be provided prior to project approval.
Amend Section 101.4.7 of the IBC, Existing Buildings, by deleting the existing language and replacing it with the following:
The provisions of the 2015 Edition of the International Existing Building Code (IEBC), upon submittal of the required documentation by a design
professional, may apply to matters governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings.
In Section 103.1 of the IBC and Section R103.1 of the IRC, Creation of Enforcement Agency, Department of Building Safety shall mean Building Division
(a Division of Development Services).
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-4: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
Amend Section 104.4 of the IBC and R104.4 of the IRC, Inspections, by adding the following provision:
Personnel currently employed by the City of West Des Moines and actively working in the Building Division as a Building Inspector, Plans Examiner,
Rental Inspector, Building Official, or any similar position as determined by the City, are hereby deemed as qualified, certified, licensed, or otherwise
authorized to review plans and permit application documents, and to perform all required inspections for commercial or residential projects, and to
perform rental housing inspections, and to perform any similar duties necessary to enable compliance with the adopted code provisions of the City,
and to fulfill the duties and responsibilities specifically listed in the job descriptions of said personnel.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-5: WOOD BURNING APPLIANCES (SOLID-FUEL-TYPE AND PELLET):
Amend Section 104.9 of the IBC, Approved Materials and Equipment, by adding the following provision:
New multifamily projects with stacked units (apartments, condominiums, and similar) shall not utilize wood burning fireplaces, stoves, and similar
solid fuel or pellet burning appliances that would require a chimney chase through the unit, or walls of the unit, located above. Top floor units with a
wood burning appliance located at the party wall of an adjoining unit shall have a minimum 2 hour fire resistive rated wall assembly at the party wall
location.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-6: WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:
Amend Section 105.2 of the IBC and Section R105.2 of the IRC, Work Exempt From Permit, as follows:
1. No. 1 shall read as follows: One story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the
floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the structure does not utilize a permanent foundation.
2. Delete No. 2, Fences not over 7 feet high.
3. Delete No. 10 in the IBC: Shade cloth structures for nursery or agriculture purposes.
4. Delete No. 10 in the IRC: Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-7: EXPIRATION, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT (PROJECT PROGRESS/MAINTENANCE):
Amend Section 105.5 of the IBC and Section R105.5 of the IRC, Expiration, by adding the following conditions:
Every building permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire six (6) months from the date of issue, unless the application is
accompanied by a construction schedule of specific longer duration, in which instance the permit may be issued for the term of the construction
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 423/687
schedule, with approval in writing by the City's building official. If the work has not been completed by the expiration date of the permit, no further
work shall be done until the permit has been renewed by the owner or the owner's agent and by payment of any required renewal fees, provided no
changes have been made in plans or location.
Amend Section 105.6 of the IBC and Section R105.6 of the IRC, Suspension or Revocation, by adding the following conditions:
It is the responsibility of the permit holder to schedule the required inspections and obtain final approval. Failure to schedule the required inspections
and receive approval of work authorized by the permit before covering said work or at completion shall result in revocation of the permit and void any
associated approvals granted by the City. This failure shall also equate to working without a permit in violation of City ordinance and no future
permits shall be issued to any person or company who has outstanding violations of this code or any other laws or ordinances of the City. Failure to
contact the City for any inspection or follow-up within 180 days of permit approval shall also be deemed a violation of this code section, and the
approved permit may be voided or revoked.
Anytime work is suspended or abandoned for more than 30 days, the Building Official may determine to suspend or revoke the permit due to neglect
if the site is not properly secured, including:
1. Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc. that make the area unsightly and create a public nuisance.
2. Excavations, including open basement foundations, shall be protected by a fence to help prevent an attractive nuisance in an occupied
neighborhood.
3. Ground cover, silt fencing, and similar erosion prevention measures shall be provided in an effort to prevent erosion, damage, and nuisance to
surrounding properties, including public right-of-ways, sidewalks, streets, etc.
(Ord. 2281, 2-20-2018)
8-2A-8: FLOODPLAIN:
Amend Section 107 of the IBC, Submittal Documents, and Section 1612 of the IBC, Flood Loads, and Section R106 of the IRC, Construction Documents,
and Section R322 of the IRC, Flood-Resistant Construction, by adding the following paragraph:
Compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and any associated flood plain management regulations established by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (DNR) shall be met through enforcement of all associated
Flood Plain Ordinances adopted by the City of West Des Moines. All provisions of Chapter 1, Administration of the IBC and Chapter 1, Administration
of the IRC, and all administrative, appeals, and liability provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the application of all associated Flood Plain
Ordinances adopted by the City of West Des Moines.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-9: BUILDING PERMIT FEES AND VALUATION:
In Section 109 of the IBC and Section R108 of the IRC, amend the sections by adding the following:
1. All fees due the City for permits, as determined by City Council Resolution, shall be collected by the Building Division and forwarded to the City
Finance Department.
2. No building permits shall be issued to any person or company who has fees outstanding or has outstanding violations of this code or any other
laws or ordinances of the City.
3. If within 180 days of the date of issuance, the holder of a permit decides not to commence the work described in said permit, they may upon
application to the Building Division, be refunded up to 80% of the paid fees.
4. Work commencing before permit issuance shall be subject to an investigation fee, which shall be equal to and in addition to the calculated
"building permit" fee (this does not include plan check fees, sewer fees, storm water fees, etc.)
Amend Section 109.3 of the IBC and Section R108.3 of the IRC, Building Permit Valuations, by adding the following:
Building valuation for the calculation of permit fees will be the construction cost for the total work submitted by the contractor, however it shall not be
less than the valuation derived from the most current Building Valuation Data published by the International Code Council (ICC). This published data
is utilized by the Building Official in an effort to maintain consistency and fairness for building permit fee calculation only and is not intended to reflect
actual taxable value.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-10: INSPECTIONS:
Amend Section 110.3.8 of the IBC and Section R109.1.5 of the IRC, Other Inspections, by adding the following:
In addition to the inspections specified, the Building Official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work, including
special inspection of fire stop materials by a qualified person who can demonstrate competence to the satisfaction of the Building Official, to
ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the Building Division.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 424/687
8-2A-11: DESIGN CRITERIA:
The climatic and geographic design criteria utilized in Chapter 16 of the IBC and Table R301.2(1) of the IRC shall be as follows:
Ground Snow Load: 30 lb.
Roof Snow Load: 24 lb.
Wind Speed: 105/115/120 mph. based on building risk category
Seismic Zone: A
Weathering: Severe
Frost line depth: 42 inches
Termite Condition: Moderate to Heavy
Winter Design Temp: -5 degrees
Ice Barrier Required: Yes
Flood Hazard: National Flood Insurance Program adopted 11-01-79
100 year rainfall rate: 3.4 inches per hour
Air freezing index: 1833
Mean annual temperature:
48.6 degrees
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-12: CICC 2015 IBC AMENDMENTS:
Delete Code Section: IBC 308.6.4: Replace with and add the following language:
308.6.4 Eight or fewer persons receiving care in a dwelling unit. A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having eight or fewer
persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the International Residential Code.
Delete Code Section: IBC 310.5 & 310.5.1: Replace with and add the following language:
310.5 Residential Group R-3. Residential Group R-3 occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified as
Group R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, including:
1. Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units
2. Boarding houses (non-transient) with 16 or fewer occupants
3. Boarding houses (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants
4. Care facilities as identified in Sections 308.3.4 or 308.4.2 that provide accommodations for five or fewer persons receiving care
5. Day care facilities as identified in section 308.6.4 located within single family dwellings with 8 or fewer persons receiving custodial care
6. Congregate living facilities (non-transient) with 16 or fewer occupants
7. Congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants
8. Lodging houses with five or fewer guest rooms
310.5.1 Care facilities within a dwelling. Care facilities that are located within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International
Residential Code in accordance with this section.
310.5.1.1 24-hour care facilities within a dwelling. Care facilities as identified in sections 308.3.4 or 308.4.2 that provide accommodations for 5 or
fewer persons receiving custodial care in a single-family dwelling for 24-hours per day are permitted to comply with the International Residential
Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of the International Residential
Code.
310.5.1.2 Day care facilities within a dwelling. Day care facilities as identified in section 308.6.4 that provide custodial care for 8 or fewer persons
for less than 24-hours per day in a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code.
Exception: Day care facilities as identified in section 308.6.4 that provide custodial care for 16 or fewer persons for less than 24-hours per day in
a single-family dwelling, and are registered with the State of Iowa Department of Human Services as child development homes on or before
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 425/687
January 1, 2017, are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code.
Modify Code Section: IBC 403.3.2 (correlation: IFC 914.3.1.2) by replacing it with the following:
403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps: Required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to a minimum of two water mains located in
different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the
supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate.
Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be permitted provided the main is valved such that an interruption can be isolated so that the
water supply will continue without interruption through at least one of the connections.
Insert into Code Section: IBC 423.3 the following exception to storm shelter requirements:
Exception: Existing emergency operations centers undergoing alterations, additions, or construction of new accessory buildings.
Insert into Code Section: IBC 423.4 the following exception to storm shelter requirements:
Exception: Existing schools undergoing alterations, additions, or construction of new accessory buildings.
Insert New Code Section: IBC 901.8 (correlation: IFC 901.4.6.1):
901.8 Fire Sprinkler Riser Room: A fire sprinkler riser room shall be separated from the electrical room. The riser room shall have no electrical
panels, devices, or apparatus inside the room other than the outlets or support equipment (lighting, air compressor, and heater) required for the use
of the fire sprinkler system and/or the fire alarm panel. The sprinkler riser room shall not be accessed from the electrical room, but the electrical room
may be accessed from the fire riser room.
Modify Code Section: IBC 903.2 (correlation: IFC 903.2): Replace and add the following:
903.2 Where required: Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in
Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12:
Exceptions:
1. Prior to July 1, 2016 any jurisdiction calculating fire areas by other methods not defined by the International Fire Code or International Building
Code, may continue to utilize those methods in calculating fire sprinkler square footage requirements as previously established by local
jurisdiction.
2. Prior to July 1, 2016 any jurisdiction requiring reduced fire areas or reduced occupant loads in determining the requirements for automatic
sprinkler systems in Section 903.2.1 through 903.2.12 may continue to utilize these methods as previously established by local jurisdiction.
3. Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution
equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection system in
accordance with Section 907.2 and are separate from the remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance
with Section 70 of the International Building Code or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the
International Building Code, or both.
Modify Code Section: IBC 903.2.11.1.3 (correlation: IFC 903.2.11.1.3) by replacing it with the following:
903.2.11.1.3 Basements: Where any portion of a basement is located more than 75 feet from openings required by Section 903.2.11.1, the
basement shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
Modify Code Section: IBC 903.4.2 (correlation: IFC 903.4.2) by replacing it with the following:
903.4.2 Alarms: An approved weather proof audible device suitable for outdoor use with 110 candela visual signal shall be connected to every
automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the
smallest orifice size installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an approved location. Where a fire
alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm.
Insert Code Section: IBC 905.3.9 (correlation: IFC 905.3.9):
905.3.9 Building Footprint and Access: Where the most remote portion of a floor or story is more than 400 feet from a hose connection or fire
department access road the fire code official is authorized to require standpipes to be provided in approved locations. Class I manual standpipes
shall be allowed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 426/687
Modify Code Section: IBC 907.2 (correlation: IFC 907.2) by adding the following:
Exception: Prior to July 1, 2016 any jurisdiction requiring reduced fire areas or reduced occupant loads in 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 may continue to
utilize these methods as previously established by local jurisdiction determining the requirements for fire alarm systems in Section 907.2.1 through
907.2.23.
Insert Code Section: IBC 907.1.4 (correlation: IFC 907.1.4):
907.1.4 FACP (Fire Alarm Control Panels): Each building shall have no more than 1 FACP. Installation of fire alarm panel shall be not exceed six
feet in height measured from floor to top of the unit.
Exception: Suppression system releasing panels are not required to meet the height requirement or the limitation in the number of panels.
Modify Code Section: IBC 907.6.6 (correlation: IFC 907.6.6) by replacing it with the following:
907.6.6 Monitoring: Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the International Building Code shall be monitored by a central station
approved and listed under UL 827 in accordance with NFPA 72.
Exception: Monitoring station is not required for automatic sprinkler and fire alarm systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
Modify Code Section: IBC 910.2.1 (correlation: IFC 910.2.1) by replacing it with the following:
910.2.1 Group F-1 or S-1: Smoke and heat vents installed in accordance with Section 910.3 or a mechanical smoke removal system installed in
accordance with Section 910.4 shall be installed in buildings and portions thereof used as a Group F-1 or S-1 occupancy having more than 30,000
square feet of undivided area. In occupied portions of a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
903.3.1.1, where the upper surface of the story is not a roof assembly, a mechanical smoke removal system in accordance with Section 910.4 shall
be installed.
Exception: Group S-1 aircraft repair hangars.
Modify Code Section: IBC 1008.3.1 (correlation: IFC 1008.3.1) by replacing it with the following:
1008.3.1 General: In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces 400 square feet or greater an emergency electrical system shall
automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
1. Aisles.
2. Corridors.
3. Exit access stairways and ramps.
Modify Code Section: IBC 1008.3.2 (correlation: IFC 1008.3.2) by replacing it with the following:
1008.3.2 Buildings: In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces 400 square feet or greater an emergency electrical system shall
automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
1. Interior exit access stairways and ramps
2. Interior and exterior exit stairways and ramps.
3. Exit passageways.
4. Vestibules and areas on the level of exit discharge used for exit discharge in accordance with Section 1028.1.
5. Exterior landings as required by Section 1010.1.6 for exit doorways that lead directly to the exit discharge.
Modify Code Section: IBC 1008.3.3 (correlation: IFC 1008.3.3) by replacing Item # 5 with the following:
Restrooms containing more than one water closet/urinal or that are accessible.
Modify Code Section IBC 1009.2 (correlation: IFC 1009.2) by adding the following as item # 11:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 427/687
Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
Modify Code Section: IBC 1010.1.9.1 (correlation: IFC 1010.1.9.1) by adding the following:
Thumb Turn Locks shall not be allowed.
Insert Code Section: IBC 1013.1.1 (correlation: IFC 1013.1.1):
1013.1.1 Additional Exit Signs: Exit signs may be required at the discretion of the Code Official to clarify an exit or exit access.
Delete Code Section: IBC 1013.3 (correlation: IFC 1013.3) and replace with the following language:
1013.3 Exit Sign Illumination: Exit signs shall use an LED lighting system and be illuminated internally. Exit signs are required to have battery
backup unless an onsite generator is used. Luminance on the face of an exit sign shall have an intensity of not less than 5.0 foot candles (53.82 lux).
Exception: Tactile Exit signs required by Section 1013.4 need not be provided with illumination.
Delete Code Section: IBC 1013.5 (correlation: IFC 1013.5).
Delete Code Section: IBC 1013.6 (correlation: IFC 1013.6) including 1013.6.1, 1013.6.2, and 1013.6.3.
Insert Code Section: IBC 1028.5.1 (correlation: IFC 1028.5.1):
1028.5.1: Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other approved hard surface.
Insert Code Section: IBC 1030.5.3 (correlation: IFC 1030.5.3):
1030.5.3 Window wells drainage: All window wells shall be provided with approved drainage.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-13: CICC 2015 IRC AMENDMENTS:
Delete Code Section: R302.13, Fire Protection of Floors.
Delete Code Section: R313.1 and replace it with the following language:
313.1 Townhomes automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses.
Exceptions:
1. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required where additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not
have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
2. Townhomes in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and each unit has an open yard or public way on at least two sides.
Delete Code Section: R313.2 and replace it with the following language:
313.2 One- and two-family dwelling automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one- and
two-family dwellings.
Exceptions:
1. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required where additions or alterations are made to existing buildings that are not
already provided with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system.
2. One- and two-family dwellings less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet of floor space.
Delete Code Section: R403.1.4.1, Exception 1, and replace it with the following language:
Exception: Protection for detached garages and other accessory structures 1,000 square feet or less in size, with a maximum height of twenty (20)
feet, located more than ten (10) feet from a dwelling, attached garage, or other principal structures, may be accomplished with a floating slab. The
floating slab shall include a thickened slab edge a minimum of 12 inches thick. Six inches of the thickened slab shall be below grade and six (6)
inches shall be above finished grade. The bottom portion of the thickened slab area shall be 12 by 12 inches. Two #4 rebar shall be placed within the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 428/687
thickened edge continuous around the perimeter of the slab. The floor shall be Portland cement concrete not less than four (4) inches thick. Garage
floor areas shall have all sod and/or debris removed.
Amend Code Section: R1601.4 by inserting the following language:
Section 1601.4 Installation. Duct installation shall comply with sections M1601.4.1 through M1601.4.11
Insert Code Section: R1601.4.11 with the following language:
Section 1601.4.11. Air plenum and duct separation. Air plenums and ducts located in floor and wall cavities shall be separated from unconditioned
spaces by construction with sufficient insulation to meet energy code requirements. These areas include but are not limited to exterior walls,
cantilevered floors, and floors above garages.
Delete Code Section: IRC G2414.5.3 (403.5.4) and replace it with the following language:
G2414.5.3 (403.5.4): Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing.
Arc resistant corrugated stainless steel tubing shall be listed in accordance with ANSI LC 1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26.
Delete Code Section: IRC G2415.2 (404.2) and replace it with the following language:
G2415.2 (404.2) CSST. Only CSST with an Arc Resistant Jacket or Covering System listed in accordance with ANSI LC-1 (Optional Section
5.16)/CSA 6.26-2016 shall be installed in accordance with the terms of its approval, the conditions of listing, the manufacturers instructions and this
code including electrical bonding requirements in Section G2411. CSST shall not be used for through wall penetrations from the point of delivery of
the gas supply to the inside of the structure. CSST shall not be installed in locations where subject to physical damage unless protected in an
approved manner.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-14: DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION:
Amend Section R302.2 of the IRC, Townhouses, by including "and Two-family dwellings" in the title.
Further amend Section R302.2 of the IRC, Townhouses and Two-family dwellings, by deleting the phrase "Common walls separating townhouses
shall be assigned a fire resistance rating in accordance with Section R302.2, Item 1 or 2" and replacing it with: "Common walls shall not be less than
a 2-hour fire resistive rated wall assembly, or two 1-hour fire resistive rated wall assemblies."
Delete Section R302.3 of the IRC, Two-family dwellings.
Amend Section 708.3 of the IBC, Fire-Resistance Rating, by deleting Exception #1 and #2, which permitted 1/2 hour corridor walls and 1/2 hour dwelling
and sleeping unit separation.
Amend Section R302.6 and the corresponding Table, Dwelling-Garage Separation, by deleting the allowance for 1/2" gypsum board and replacing it with
5/8" Type X gypsum board.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-15: BATHROOM VENTILATION:
Amend Section R303.3 of the IRC, Bathrooms, by adding the following paragraph:
All bathrooms shall be provided with a mechanical ventilation system. The system shall exhaust directly to the outside, and shall not terminate within
an attic area or soffit.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-16: EMERGENCY ESCAPE:
Amend Section 1029.1 of the IBC and R310.1 of the IRC, Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings, by adding the following provisions:
1. Existing basements with an egress window or walkout basements constructed before 1992, shall not be required to add an additional egress
window in each additional sleeping room, provided the second means of emergency escape and rescue, and the stair to a grade level floor are
separated at least one half the diagonal dimension of the basement, and provided additional smoke detectors are installed in each area or room in
the basement.
2. Existing basements constructed before 1992, which do not have sleeping rooms, but will have other finished areas, shall provide smoke detectors
in each area or room. Plus, a smoke detector shall be located at the first floor in an area that covers the path from the top of the stairway to an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 429/687
exterior door. The required smoke detectors may be battery powered if the project does not involve opening the detector wall or ceiling locations.
3. In basements, the sill height for an emergency escape and rescue opening may be measured from an elevated landing not less than 36 inches
wide, not less than 12 inches extended out from the exterior wall, and not more than 24 inches high. The landing shall be permanently affixed to the
floor below and the wall under the opening it serves.
Amend Section 1030.1 of the IBC, Emergency Escape and Rescue by deleting exception #1 and #2.
Amend Section 1030.3 of the IBC, Maximum height from floor, by adding the following exception:
In basements, the sill height for an emergency escape and rescue opening may be measured from an elevated landing not less than 36 inches wide,
not less than 12 inches out from the exterior wall, and not more than 24 inches high. The landing shall be permanently affixed to the floor below and
the wall under the opening it serves.
Amend Section 1030.5 of the IBC and Section R310.2.3 of the IRC, Window Wells, by adding the following sentence to the section:
Window wells that are utilized to meet minimum protected opening elevations established on the approved plat or site plan shall be a solid structure
of concrete, metal, plastic or similar impermeable product. Landscape timbers or similar products shall not be utilized without an exterior water proof
membrane and prior design approval from the Building Official.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-17: STAIRWAYS:
Amend Section R311.7.5.1 of the IRC, Risers, by adding the following exception:
Due to variation in thickness and lack of permanence in floor coverings, the riser height of the top and bottom tread of an interior stair may vary up to
1 inch or less from the stairway riser dimension, however in no case shall the riser height exceed 73/4 inches.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-18: HANDRAILS:
Amend Section R311.7.8.2 of the IRC, Continuity, exception no. 1, to read as follows:
Handrails shall be permitted to be interrupted by a newel post at a turn, and by a wall, ceiling or similar, if the handrail is offset and continued
immediately for the full length of the stairs.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-19: GUARDS (GUARDRAILS):
Amend Section R312.1.3 of the IRC, Opening Limitations, by adding the following paragraph:
Guards that utilize cables or similar materials which require constant tension to maintain the integrity of the system, shall be spaced a maximum of
31/2 inches on center, with perpendicular cable spacers/support posts every 4 feet maximum.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-20: SMOKE ALARMS:
Amend Section R314.3 of the IRC, Location, by adding the following required location:
Movie theatre and similar entertainment rooms equipped with lighting, seating, and sound packages designed specifically for
movie/sports/entertainment viewing where occupants are isolated from the safety levels provided by typical smoke alarm installation locations.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-21: FOOTINGS AND FOUNDATION (CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE):
Amend Section R403 of the IRC, "Footings" and Table R403.1 of the IRC "Minimum Width and Thickness of Concrete Footings" by adding the following
adjusted footing dimensions based on soil bearing pressure:
Residential Conventional Footing Dimensions
Assuming 2,000 P.S.F. is required for the footing, the following adjusted footing dimensions may be used for the soil conditions specified in the table
below, unless specific engineering problems exist:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 430/687
SOIL BEARING PRESSURE CONVENTIONAL FOOTING & REINFORCEMENT
* 2,000 P.S.F. 8" x 16" with two #4 reinforcement bars
* 1,850 P.S.F. 9" x 20" with two #4 reinforcement bars
* 1,500 P.S.F. 10" x 20" with two #5 or three #4 reinforcement bars
* 1,250 P.S.F. 11" x 28" with three #5 reinforcement bars
* 1,000 P.S.F. 12" x 32" with three #5 reinforcement bars
The dimensions specified in this table are typically accepted dimensions for conventionally designed single family dwelling structures of one or two
stories in height, which are intended to be constructed on undisturbed, non-expansive soils.
Amend Section R404 of the IRC, Foundation and Walls, and the applicable Tables, with the following reinforcement criteria for cast-in-place concrete
walls:
1. (8' walls) Requirements include: three horizontal #4 rods, with 1'-0" overlap, located at 1'-0", 4'-0", and 7'-0" from the bottom of the wall. The rods
shall be continuous (overlapping) at corners.
2. (9' & 10' walls) Requirements include: five horizontal #4 rods, with 1'-0" overlap, located at 24" on center. Vertical #4 rods shall be placed at 20"
on center. The steel shall be ASTM grade 40, and the concrete 3,000 psf minimum.
3. Step ups, at garages and similar, shall not have a span of more than 4'-0".
4. Forms shall have proper bearing on footings.
5. Cold weather pouring temperature shall be above 20 degrees.
6. 1/2 inch anchor bolts or straps shall be spaced not more than 6' on center, or per manufacturers listing, and not more than 1' from the end. They
shall be embedded 7" minimum into the concrete.
Amend Section R403 of the IRC, Footings, and R404 of the IRC, Foundation Walls, by adding the following Criteria for decks, seasonal rooms and
additions:
On residential occupancies, seasonal rooms and additions less than 400 sq. ft. may be constructed on an isolated column foundation (post and
beam) consisting of a minimum 6 inch x 6 inch treated wood posts located under all roof bearing points on a minimum 24 inch by 10 inch thick frost
footing extending 42 inches below grade. Seasonal rooms and additions that exceed 400 sq. ft. shall utilize a design professional (exceptions
determined by the Building Official).
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-22: RETAINING WALLS:
Amend Section 1807.2 of the IBC and Section R404.4 of the IRC, Retaining Walls, by adding the following:
1. Retaining walls shall be setback from property lines by a "one to one" height to setback distance ratio.
2. Guards shall be provided on retaining walls that are 30 inches or more above grade when the retaining wall is considered part of a building
structure, or the retaining wall is in close proximity to a finished walking surface (loading dock, sidewalk, bike path, patio, or similar), or in any
location on a commercial or multifamily project where the height and location of the retaining wall create an obvious fall hazard.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-23: FOUNDATION DRAINAGE:
Amend Section R405 of the IRC, Foundation Drainage, by adding the following:
Subsoil foundation drainage shall be into a sump basket with a sealed cover, and mechanically discharged into the City's storm sewer system by
means of a sump pump.
Exception: Connection is not required where the City storm sewer is not located within 400 feet of the property line, and where storm sewer will
not be available within two years.
Amend Section R405.1 of the IRC, Concrete or masonry foundations, by deleting the Exception, which provided criteria for not requiring foundation
drainage.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-24: SUPPORT FOR HEADERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 431/687
Amend Section R602.7.5 and the corresponding table of the IRC, by adding the following exception:
Minimum number of full height studs at the end of headers spanning 8' or more in exterior walls: 2
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-25: TRUSS DESIGN DRAWINGS:
Amend Section R502.11.4 and Section R802.10.1, both of the IRC, by deleting "shall be provided to the Building Official and approved prior to installation"
and inserting "shall be available on site for review."
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-26: BUILDING SECURITY:
Amend Section 1010 of the IBC, "Doors" by adding the following provision:
New multifamily apartment and condominium projects shall provide the following security measures:
1. Latch plates for door locks and deadbolts shall be installed with lag screws, or similar, at least 3 inches in length, and capable of attaching
through the door frame at least 11/2 inches into the stud wall framing.
2. Sliding patio doors at grade level shall have foot bolt locks, or similar locks.
3. View ports capable of a 180 degree viewing angle shall be installed in all entry doors.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-27: FROST PROTECTION:
Amend Section 1010.1.6, of the IBC, Landings at Doors and Section R311.3 of the IRC, Floors and Landings at Exterior Doors, by adding the following
language:
Landings for all exterior exit doors that swing out in the direction of travel, landings that provide an accessible entrance and exit path, and landings
where storm doors have less than a 4 inch clearance above the landing, shall be provided with a foundation extending at least 42 inches below
grade, or a foundation design that provides equivalent frost protection.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-28: SWIMMING POOL BARRIERS:
Amend Section 3109 of the IBC and Section R326 of the IRC, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs, by restricting the barrier height provisions referred to
in Section 305 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (2015 Edition) with the following language:
Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48
inches in height for above ground swimming pools, and 72 inches in height for in-ground pools. The height shall be measured on the outside of the
barrier.
Further amend Section 3109 of the IBC and Section R326 of the IRC, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs, by deleting Section 305.1, exception 2 of the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (2015 Edition) and replacing it with the following language:
Residential in-ground swimming pools equipped with an operational powered safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 may utilize a fence or
barrier at least 48 inches in height.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-29: RENTAL HOUSING:
DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF RENTAL CERTIFICATE FOR VIOLATIONS: Issuance or renewal of a rental certificate may be denied or revoked if the
applicant, or a subsidiary firm, partnership, or corporation owns one or more properties within the City in which the applicant or owner has been notified of
violations of the City Code, but has not corrected said violations prior to City enforcement or abatement, including but not limited to failure to have current
rental certificates. Violations of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) shall be deemed violations of the City Code. Specifically, three (3) or
more nuisance violations that occur within a twelve (12) month period may cause the issuance or renewal of a rental certificate to be denied or revoked.
The West Des Moines Police Department or Community Compliance should notify the building official or their designee when three (3) or more nuisance
violations have occurred within a twelve (12) month period. The building official may then choose to deny or revoke the issuance or renewal of one, some,
or all rental certificates in the name of the applicant or owner for unabated violations of the City Code, whether or not the violations occurred on each
property owned by that person or entity.
EXPIRATION DATE: Every certificate shall expire at the end of two (2) years following its date of issuance, or from the listed expiration date, unless
suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 432/687
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS:
A. Owners and/or tenants of single-family dwellings shall remove snow and ice from the sidewalks associated with the property they own or occupy
within a reasonable time but in no case more than twenty four (24) hours following the weather event by which the snow and ice was deposited.
B. Owners of multi-family dwellings shall remove snow and ice from the sidewalks associated with the property they own within a reasonable time but
in no case more than twenty four (24) hours following the weather event by which the snow and ice was deposited.
FAILURE TO ACQUIRE OR RENEW RENTAL CERTIFICATE: The City is not involved in or a party to property sales, changes in ownership, or rental
agreements. Therefore, it is the responsibility of the property owner/agent to ensure that their rental properties have valid rental inspection certificates.
Failure to acquire or renew the required rental certificate may result in notice being sent to the property owner that the specified address is an illegal rental.
This action may include posting notice on the property as an illegal rental with door hangers, yard signage or similar signs, and providing notice to the
tenant that the property they occupy has not been approved by the City as a legal rental property.
FEES: All fees due the City for permits or rental housing certificates, as determined by City Council resolution, shall be collected in the Building Division
and forwarded to the City Finance Department. Rental inspection fees are due within thirty (30) days of the inspection or billing date. Investigation fees, as
described in the City Council fee resolution as equal to and in addition to the calculated inspection fee, shall apply for failure to pay rental inspection fees
within thirty (30) days, or for failure to have a current rental certificate.
GUARDS (GUARDRAILS): Located in common areas of multifamily units constructed prior to July, 1992 shall not be less than thirty six inches (36") in
height, and shall not have openings which allow passage of a sphere six inches (6") in diameter.
HEAT SUPPLY: Shall be available September 1st through May 30th.
INSECT SCREENS: Shall be provided April 15th to October 15th.
INSPECTION PROCEDURES: Inspections shall not be conducted with a minor as the sole representative of the owner. Inspections shall not be conducted
against the will of the tenant without the building owner or agent present. Inspections shall not be conducted without prior notice to the tenant, as required
by State law.
The property owner, or their agent, shall be present for all inspections. The agent shall not be the tenant.
ISSUANCE, DURATION, AND VALIDATION: If the premises are found to comply with the requirements of this Code and the fees are paid, a rental
inspection certificate shall be issued and valid for two (2) years from initial inspection, or from the listed expiration date.
NEW UNITS: New construction projects, which have received final inspection approval and have been issued a Certificate of Occupancy, shall be
considered to be in compliance with rental inspection certificate and fee requirements for a period of two (2) years from the issue date.
PROPERTY STATUS: Given a situation where the property is not occupied by the owner of record. However, it is being sold on contract and the sales
transaction has not been recorded or documented by the County Assessor's Office. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to record the transaction
and provide written documentation to the City that the non-owner occupied property is not a rental. Acquiring homestead exemption status will be part of
the determination criteria. If the property is held by a trust, it is the resident's responsibility to provide written documentation to the City that will confirm that
the property is not a rental.
RECEPTACLE OUTLETS: All receptacle outlets in bathroom areas, basements, kitchens within six feet (6') of the sink, and exterior locations, shall be
GFCI protected.
RENTAL HOUSING COMPLAINTS: When receiving or responding to complaints from rental property tenants, the City will typically intervene only if the
tenant has presented their concerns in writing to the management/owner with a seven (7) day notice to respond, and the management/owner has failed to
respond.
Exception: Life/safety issues such as smoke detectors, blocked exits, exposed wiring, or similar.
RENTAL INSPECTION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED: No person shall rent, lease, let, operate or otherwise allow the occupancy of any dwelling unit or any
portion of any dwelling unit (including single rooms) unless they hold a valid rental inspection certificate. The preceding language does not preclude
relatives, or similar persons from occupying a portion of an owner occupied single family dwelling unit, which complies with the single family rental housing
criteria listed in this section.
RENTAL INSPECTION SCHEDULE: The Building Division shall seek to inspect every residential rental dwelling within the corporate limits of the City
every two (2) years. As part of the inspection process, the City may determine to extend or shorten the timeframe to the next scheduled inspection.
Factors that may influence the City to inspect more or less frequently include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Age and condition of dwelling.
B. Inspection history.
C. Tenant/management complaints.
D. Natural disasters such as flooding.
E. Timely inspection scheduling, follow-up and fee payment by the owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 433/687
F. In-house inspection and maintenance program by the owner that includes specific life/safety provisions.
G. Maintain the "Crime-Free Multi-Housing" designation through the Police Department.
It is the responsibility of the property owner/agent to ensure that their rental properties have a valid rental inspection certificate. However, the City
may schedule inspection appointments with the owner or agent of the property by regular mail, facsimile, or e-mail, a minimum of thirty (30) days in
advance of the inspection. It shall be the owner or agent's responsibility to notify all tenants of the inspection date and time, in accordance with Iowa
law.
REQUIRED OWNER/AGENT INFORMATION: Owners of residential rental property in the City, who reside in Polk or Dallas County, Iowa, or any county
contiguous thereto, shall provide the Building Division with their contact information including but not limited to: mailing addresses, telephone numbers, fax
numbers, and e-mail addresses. Owners of residential rental property in the City who reside in any area other than described above, shall provide the
Building Division with the name, physical address, and contact information of an individual over the age of eighteen (18) who shall reside in Polk, Dallas,
Warren, or Madison County, Iowa, or any county contiguous thereto, and who shall be designated as agent for scheduling inspections, receiving notice,
and service of process. A new owner shall provide the information required in this definition within five (5) days from the date of any change of ownership.
Failure to give said notice will render the rental certificate null and void. Re-inspection and the associated fees shall be required to re-instate the rental
certificate. The previous owner shall disclose this requirement to the new owner.
REVIEW REQUIREMENT: Every rental inspection certificate issued under the authority of this chapter shall be made available by the owner, for a tenant
to review, before any dwelling unit may be rented, leased, or otherwise occupied.
REVOCATION OF RENTAL CERTIFICATE: The rental certificate may be revoked for violation of the requirements listed in this document, which includes
the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC).
SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSING CRITERIA: The West Des Moines zoning ordinance and official zoning map currently designate where single-family (onefamily)
dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple dwelling units may be located within the City. The zoning ordinance definitions are also
utilized as approval criteria for determining where rental units may be located. The following zoning ordinance definitions are utilized to establish whether a
dwelling unit meets current zoning and rental housing criteria:
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached: A detached building, on a building site, designed for and used exclusively for residential purposes by one family
and containing one dwelling unit.
Dwelling Unit: One or more habitable rooms which are occupied, or are intended or designed to be occupied, by one family with facilities for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating.
Family:
A. Definition: Individuals who live together as a single housekeeping unit and do their cooking on the premises. The definition of "family" does not
include the following:
1. More than eight (8) people who are:
a. Residents of a "family home" as defined in section 414.22, 414.30 and 414.31 of the Iowa Code and this section; or
b. "Handicapped" as defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 USC section 3602(h). This definition does not include those persons currently illegally
using or addicted to a "controlled substance" as defined in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC section 802(6).
2. Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, coterie, or like organization;
3. Substance abuse rehabilitation facility; and
4. Any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement as a result of criminal offenses.
Kitchen: Any room or portion of a building used, intended or designed to be used for cooking and preparation of food, including any room having a
sink and provisions for either a gas or electric stove.
In addition to the definitions, the following criteria shall be utilized to determine if the intent of the zoning requirements have been met for singlefamily
(one-family) dwelling units: There shall not be more than one lease between the property owner and the tenant (tenants) for each single-family
zoned property address. Subleases between tenants are a private issue and shall not be subject to City scrutiny, provided all other criteria have been
met.
A. There shall not be more than one kitchen for each single-family zoned property address. Exception: Additional sinks, wet bars, or kitchen areas
will not be considered an additional kitchen provided walls, floors, and locking doors, as specified below, do not separate the dwelling into
multiple tenant use.
B. There shall not be more than one electric meter, gas meter, or water meter for each single-family zoned property address.
C. There shall not be any walls or floor/ceiling assemblies in any single-family zoned property address, which separate the one-family dwelling into
more than one unit. Determining factors shall include locked or locking interior doors, and separate entrances which make portions of the unit
inaccessible to all "family" members. (Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017; amd. Ord. 2252, 9-18-2017)
8-2A-30: APPEALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 434/687
Delete Section 113 of the IBC and Section R112 of the IRC, Board of Appeals, and in lieu thereof the following criteria shall apply:
Appeals Procedure:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Official may appeal the decision to the Municipal Code Appeals Officer as set out in Title 4,
Chapter 4, Section 9, of the City Code. The appeal shall be completed by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14)
days from the date of issue of the written decision by the Building Official. For appeal purposes, the date of issue shall be the date the Building
Official signs, dates, and mails the written decision. Failure to file a timely notice of appeal as required herein shall constitute a waiver of the right
to appeal and the decision of the Building Official shall be final.
The notice of appeal shall clearly set forth with specificity each and every ground that serves as the basis for the appeal, and it shall be
accompanied by copies of plans, specifications, or any pertinent information which may be required to adequately evaluate the appeal. Any matter
not specifically raised in the notice of appeal shall be deemed to be final and shall not be reviewed by the Municipal Code Appeals Officer.
The notice of appeals shall also be accompanied by a $100.00 filing fee for administrative and publication costs.
Upon receipt of a timely filed notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall schedule the appeal for hearing before the Municipal Code Appeals Officer.
Written notification of the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be given to the petitioner within five (5) working days after the written petition
is filed with the City Clerk.
The hearing shall be scheduled no later than twenty (20) working days after the date on which the written petition was filed and may be extended
for a reasonable period by the Municipal Code Appeals Officer's discretion, or upon written request from the petitioner or the Building Official, for
good cause shown.
In the event that an ambiguity arises as to an interpretation of the code, the Municipal Code Appeals Officer may interpret the code as applied to
the specific instance presented. Such decisions shall be on a case-by-case basis and shall not be binding in future cases.
The Municipal Code Appeals Officer shall not waive any requirements of the code unless the Municipal Code Appeals Officer concludes that the
provision(s) is unduly burdensome or impracticable under the circumstances. Such decisions will also be on a case-by-case basis and shall not be
binding in future cases.
Hearing Procedure:
The procedures provided in Title 4, Chapter 4, Section 9(E) of the City Code shall apply to hearing held under this Chapter.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-31: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
A. This Code is enacted only for the purpose of securing to individuals the enjoyment of rights and privileges to which they are entitled as members of the
public, rather than for the purpose of protecting any individual from harm.
B. Issuance of a permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the
jurisdiction, or of any State or Federal mandates regarding energy, accessibility, or similar provisions. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate
or cancel the provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the jurisdiction, or any State or Federal mandates shall not be valid.
C. The City, its officers, employees or agents make no representations or warranties of any kind whatsoever, expressed or implied, with respect to the
completeness or thoroughness of the inspections and examinations performed under this Code but said inspections are made solely to assist the
owner of any building, structure, equipment and premises to meet certain minimum requirements of this Code and to compel, if necessary, the owner to
meet the minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of persons and property. Nothing herein contained in this Code
shall alleviate the owner of any building, structure, equipment and premises to make an independent inspection in order to fulfill the requirements of
this Code nor shall this Code be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building, structure,
equipment or premises regulated herein from any damages to any person or property caused by defects or Code violation. The City, its officers,
employees or agents shall not be held as assuming any liability for damages to any person or property by reason of any inspections authorized by this
Code or investigations, or any approvals issued herein, or for any act or failure to act in the enforcement of this Code. (Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-32: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this article shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the
validity of this article as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-33: VIOLATION OF ARTICLE:
Violations of this article are simple misdemeanors and are punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or a term of imprisonment
not to exceed thirty (30) days. Violations of this article are also declared to be Municipal infractions and may be punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 4,
of this Code. (Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
8-2A-34: EFFECTIVE DATE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 435/687
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2235, 7-10-2017)
ARTICLE B. ELECTRICAL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)
ARTICLE C. PLUMBING CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)
ARTICLE D. MECHANICAL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)
ARTICLE E. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)
ARTICLE F. MUNICIPAL CODE APPEALS BOARD
8-2F-1: DEFINITIONS:
BOARD or BOARD OF APPEALS: The Municipal Code Appeals Board.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The code enforcement officer or the designee of the officer.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CODES or THE CODE:1 The duly adopted Uniform Building Code, Uniform Fire Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing
Code and the Uniform Mechanical Code including any additions or amendments to the said Codes adopted by the City Council. The term shall also
include provisions of the City Code which grant appeals to the Appeal Board.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator or an executor.
PETITIONER: Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Building Official and files a written petition of appeal with the Appeals Board recording
secretary. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-2: APPOINTMENT; TERMS; RULES OF PROCEDURE:
The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to City Council approval, as allowed by subsection 1-6A-3H of this Code. The Board shall
consist of seven (7) members, five (5) of which shall be individuals knowledgeable by training and/or education in the construction industry or the fire
service and two (2) members shall be citizens appointed at-large. Members of the Board shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years, except when the
Board shall first be created two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years, two (2) members for a term of four (4) years, one member for
the term of three (3) years, one member for the term of two (2) years, one member for the term of one year. All terms shall expire on June 30 of the
appropriate year. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. All members of the Board shall reside in the City. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure
for conducting its business. The Board shall conduct all business at public hearings unless otherwise exempt by State or Municipal law. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-
92)
8-2F-3: POWERS OF THE BOARD:
The Board shall have the power to hear and determine the suitability of alternate materials, types of construction, and to provide reasonable interpretation
to the provisions of the Codes.
The Board is empowered to hear and determine City Code appeals where Code provisions provide for appeals to the Appeal Board. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 436/687
8-2F-4: APPEAL PROCEDURE; TIME FOR HEARING:
A. Filing Petition for Appeal; Fee: Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the Building Official regarding the Codes may appeal to the Board. The
appeal shall be perfected by filing with the Appeals Board recording secretary within ten (10) days from the date of the decision by the Building Official,
a written petition requesting a hearing of the appeal setting forth the particular section of the Code involved and a detailed statement of the grounds
and reasons why the decision made should be modified or vacated. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) filing fee shall be filed with the petition for appeal to
cover the administrative cost and publication cost and shall be made payable to the City and directed to the Appeals Board recording secretary. The
City Council shall have the option to waive the filing fee, for cause.
Failure to file a timely written petition as required herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and the decision of the Building Official shall
constitute a final determination.
B. Schedule of Hearing: Upon receipt of a timely filed written petition with the Appeals Board recording secretary, and the appropriate filing fee, the
recording secretary shall promptly notify the chairperson of the Board and the Building Official of the appeal. The recording secretary shall arrange a
time and place for hearing on the appeal. Written notification of the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be given to the petitioner and the Board
members within ten (10) days after the petition is filed with the recording secretary.
Hearing shall be scheduled no later than thirty (30) days after the date on which the petition was filed and may be extended for a reasonable period by
the chairperson upon written request of the petitioner or Building Officials, for good cause shown.
The failure of a petitioner to appear at a scheduled hearing of an appeal, the Board may proceed with the hearing and make a decision in the absence
of the petitioner. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-5: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded either by mechanical or manual means. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to
respond and present evidence and argument on all issued involved. Parties may represent themselves or may be represented by legal counsel.
B. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. A finding shall be based upon the kind of evidence on which reasonable prudent
persons are accustomed to rely for the conduct of their serious affairs, and may be based upon such evidence even if it would be inadmissible in a
court of law. The Appeals Board shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. Objections to the evidentiary offers may be made and shall
be noted in the record. Subject to these requirements, when a hearing will be expedited and the interest of the parties will not be prejudiced
substantially, any part of the evidence may be required to be submitted in verified written form.
C. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
D. Witnesses at the hearing, or available persons whose testimony has been submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross-examination by any party
as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
E. The Board's experience, technical competence and specialized knowledge may be utilized in the evaluation of the evidence.
F. The chairperson of the Board or his or her designee shall conduct the hearing and have power to administer oaths. The Board may cause subpoenas to
be issued for such witnesses and the production of such books and papers as either party may designate. The subpoenas may be signed by the
chairperson of the Board.
G. No hearing shall be valid unless a majority of the Board is present and no decision at the hearing shall be valid and binding unless reached by a
majority of all members of the Board. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-6: RECOMMENDATION OF THE BOARD AFTER HEARING:
Upon submission of all evidence and at the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall make a recommendation to the City Council based upon the record
made. This recommendation may be made immediately after the conclusion of the hearing or within a reasonable time thereafter. The Board's
recommendation may affirm, modify or reverse any action or interpretation of the Building Official which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of an ordinance. The recommendation shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law separately stated. Following the recommendations
of the Board, all parties shall be notified of the recommendations by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-7: RECOMMENDATION TO CITY COUNCIL:
The Board shall file its recommendation with the Appeals Board recording secretary. The recommendations, along with the proceedings based upon the
record made before the Board, shall be presented to the City Council for review. The City Council shall establish a public hearing granting each affected
party an opportunity to appear and present arguments to the City Council on the relief sought. After hearing before the City Council, the City Council may
affirm, modify or reverse the Board's recommendation by a majority vote of the members of the City Council. Appeal of the City Council's decision shall be
by judicial review by the Polk County or Dallas County District and shall be filed within twenty (20) days from the date of the City Council's decision. (Ord.
1012, 7-6-92)
ARTICLE G. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL; CONTAINMENT PROVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 437/687
8-2G-1: ADOPTION OF CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL; CONTAINMENT PROVISIONS:
This Article shall consist of the Cross-Connection Control; Containment Provisions as established by the West Des Moines Water Works. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-
1998)
8-2G-2: LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
All license and permit requirements for work on backflow prevention assemblies shall be as established for plumbing work in the Plumbing Code
Ordinance1 adopted by the City, and established requirements utilized by the West Des Moines Water Works. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-3: DEFINITIONS:
Where terms, phrases and words are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. The
following definitions shall be applicable to this Article:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY: The administrative authority shall be the West Des Moines Water Works and Building Division of the Community
Development Department.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT: A backflow prevention assembly which is listed by the University of Southern
California - Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research as having met the requirements ANSI-AWWA Standard C510-89, "Double
Check Valve Backflow-Prevention Assemblies", or ANSI-AWWA Standard C511-89, "Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow-Prevention Assemblies" for
containment. The listing shall include the limitations of use based on the degree of hazard. The backflow prevention assembly must also be listed by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT IN A FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM: A backflow prevention assembly to be
used in a fire protection system which meets the requirements of Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) and Underwriters Laboratory (UL), and the
requirement to the Fire Code and the Building Code of the City of West Des Moines, in addition to the requirements of the "administrative authority" as
defined in this Section. Devices sized smaller than two and one-half inches (21/2") which have not been listed by Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and tested
by Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) may be allowed if approved by the Fire Marshal and the Building Official.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the water purveyor's approved public water supply such as, but
not limited to, a private well, pond or river.
CONTAINMENT: A method of backflow prevention which requires the installation of a backflow prevention assembly at the water service entrance.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any
plumbing fixture or tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated
water, or other substance, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition.
CUSTOMER: The owner, operator, occupant of a building or property which has a water service from a public water system, or the owner or operator of a
private water system which has a water service from a public water system.
DEGREE OF HAZARD: The rating of a cross-connection or water service which indicates if it has the potential to cause contamination or pollution.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: A backflow prevention device consisting of two (2) independently acting internally
loaded check valves, four (4) properly located test cocks, and two (2) isolation valves.
HIGH HAZARD CROSS-CONNECTION: A cross-connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of the potable water by creating an actual
hazard to the public health, through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste.
ISOLATION: A method of backflow prevention in which a backflow prevention assembly is located at the cross-connection rather than at the water service
entrance.
LOW HAZARD CROSS-CONNECTION: A cross-connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of potable water to a degree which does not
create a hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: A backflow prevention device consisting of two (2) independently acting
internally loaded check valves, a different pressure relief valve, four (4) properly located test cocks, and two (2) isolation valves.
REGISTERED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TECHNICIAN: A person who is registered by the State of Iowa to test or repair backflow
prevention assemblies and report on the condition of those assemblies.
THERMAL EXPANSION: Volumetric increase of water due to heating resulting in increased pressure in a closed system.
WATER SERVICE: Depending on the context, water service is the physical connection between a public water system and a customer's building, property
or private water system, or the act of providing potable water to a customer.
WATER WORKS: For the purposes of this Article, Water Works shall mean the West Des Moines Water Works. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-4: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
A. Water Works, and the Building Division shall have the right to enter, with the consent of the customer or upon the basis of a suitable warrant issued by a
court of appropriate jurisdiction, any property to inspect for possible cross-connections.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 438/687
B. Water Works shall maintain records of cross-connection hazard surveys, and the installation, testing and repair of all backflow prevention assemblies
installed for containment purposes. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-5: NEW WATER SERVICE:
A. Plans shall be submitted to the Water Works for review on all new water services in order to determine the degree of hazard.
B. The Water Works shall determine the type of backflow prevention assembly required for containment based on the degree of hazard.
C. The Building Division shall require the installation of the appropriate backflow prevention assembly for containment before the initiation of water service.
(Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-6: EXISTING WATER SERVICES:
A. Upgrades of existing water services shall be treated as new water services.
B. The Water Works shall publish and make available to each customer a copy of the standards used to determine the degree of hazard.
C. The Water Works shall, in writing, notify customers whose premises are classified as single-family residential of the provisions of this Article and shall
require compliance therewith.
D. Customers whose premises are not classified as single-family residential shall complete and return to the Water Works a cross-connection hazard
survey to be used to determine the type of containment device.
E. The Water Works shall, on the basis of information received from customers or gathered through on-premises investigations or surveys, determine the
type of backflow prevention assembly required for containment based on the degree of hazard.
F. Within the time frame specified in writing by the Water Works, the customer shall install a backflow prevention assembly for containment required by the
Water Works.
G. For existing water services, the Water Works may inspect the premises to determine the degree of hazard. When high hazard cross-connections are
found, the Water Works shall, at its sole discretion: 1) develop a schedule of compliance which the customer shall follow; or 2) terminate the water
service until a backflow prevention assembly for containment required by the Water Works has been installed.
H. Failure of the Water Works to notify a customer that they are believed to have a high hazard cross-connection and that they shall install backflow
prevention assemblies for containment in no way relieves a customer of the responsibility to comply with all requirements of this Article. (Ord. 1297, 5-
4-1998)
8-2G-7: CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross-connections exist without approved backflow protection within his premises starting at the
point of service from the public potable water system.
B. The customer shall, at his own expense, cause installation, operation, testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assemblies required by the
Water Works.
C. The customer shall ensure that the Water Works is provided with copies of records of the installation and of all tests and repairs made to the backflow
prevention assembly on the approved form within fifteen (15) days after testing and/or repairs are completed.
D. In the event of a backflow incident, the customer shall immediately notify the Water Works of the incident and take steps to confine the contamination or
pollution. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-8: REQUIREMENTS FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
A. Required Backflow Prevention Assemblies For Containment; Water Services:
1. An air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly is required for water services having one or more crossconnections
which the Water Works classified as high hazard.
2. An approved double check valve assembly is required for water services having no high hazard cross-connections but having one or more crossconnections
which the Water Works has classified as low hazard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 439/687
B. Required Backflow Prevention Assemblies For Containment; Fire Protection Systems:
1. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on all new and existing fire protection systems which the Water Works
determined to have any of the following:
a. Direct connections from public water mains with an auxiliary water supply on or available to the premises for pumper connection.
b. Interconnections with auxiliary supplies such as reservoirs, rivers, ponds, wells, mills or other industrial water systems.
c. Use of antifreezes or other additives in the fire protection system.
d. Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction tanks.
e. Any other facility, connection or condition which may cause contamination.
2. A double check valve assembly will be required for all other fire protection systems. The double check valve shall be required on all new systems at
the time of installation and on existing systems at the time that they are upgraded.
C. Backflow Prevention Assembly Technicians: A backflow prevention assembly technician registered by the State of Iowa shall include his registration
number on all correspondence and forms required by or associated with this Article.
D. Registered Backflow Prevention Assembly Technician Noncompliance: Noncompliance with any of the following by a registered technician shall be
grounds for reporting said individual to the State Health Department:
1. Improper testing or repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
2. Improper reporting of the results of testing or of repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies.
3. Failure to meet registration requirements.
4. Related unethical practices.
E. Installation Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
1. The required backflow prevention assemblies for containment shall be installed in horizontal plumbing immediately following the meter or as close to
that location as deemed practical by the Water Works. In any case, it shall be located upstream from any branch piping. Installation at this point does
not eliminate the responsibility of the customer to protect the water supply system from containment or pollution between the backflow prevention
assembly and the water main.
2. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to be protected from flooding.
3. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall not be installed in underground vaults or pits.
4. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be protected from freezing.
5. If hot water is used within the water system, thermal expansion shall be provided for when installing a backflow prevention assembly for
containment.
6. Provisions shall be made to convey the discharge of water from reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies to a suitable drain.
7. No backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a place where it would create a safety hazard, such as, but not limited to, over an electrical
panel, or above ceiling level.
8. If interruption of water service during testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies for containment is unacceptable, another backflow
prevention assembly, sized to handle the temporary water flow need during the time of test or repair, should be installed in parallel piping.
9. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so that they are accessible for testing as stated in section 1003.
10. All shut-off valves shall conform with the current edition of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control (University of Southern California) requirements
for either ball or resilient seat gate valves at the time of installation. Ball valves shall be used on assemblies installed in piping two inches (2") and
smaller and resilient seat gate valves on assemblies installed in piping larger than two inches (2").
11. Location and protection of the assembly shall be approved by the Water Works and Department of Community Development prior to installation.
F. Testing Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
1. Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician. The costs of tests required
in subsection F2 through F5 of this Section, shall be the responsibility of the owner.
2. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation and tested and inspected at least annually.
3. Backflow prevention assemblies which are in place, but have been out of operation for more than three (3) months, shall be tested before being put
back into operation. Backflow prevention assemblies used in seasonal applications shall be tested before being put into operation each season.
4. Any backflow prevention assembly which fails a periodic test shall be repaired or replaced. When water service has been terminated for
noncompliance, the backflow prevention assembly shall be repaired or replaced prior to the resumption of water service. Backflow prevention
assemblies shall be retested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician immediately after repair or replacement.
5. Water Works may require backflow prevention assemblies to be tested at any time in addition to the annual testing requirement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 440/687
6. The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the successful test of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to
the Water Works on the form provided by the Water Works within fifteen (15) days of the test.
7. Water Works may require, at its own cost, additional tests of individual backflow prevention assemblies as it shall deem necessary to verify test
procedures and results.
G. Repair Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
1. All repairs to backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by registered backflow prevention assembly technicians.
2. The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall not change the design, material or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention
assembly during repair or maintenance, and shall use only original manufacturer replacement parts.
3. The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the repair of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to the Water
Works on the form provided by the Water Works within fifteen (15) days of the repair. The report shall include the list of materials or replacement
parts used.
H. Customer Noncompliance: The water service may be discontinued in the case of noncompliance with section 1003A. Noncompliance includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
1. Refusal to allow the Water Works and/or the Building Inspection Division personnel access to the property to inspect for cross-connections.
2. Removal of a backflow prevention assembly which has been required by the Water Works.
3. Bypassing of a backflow prevention assembly which has been required by the Water Works.
4. Providing inadequate backflow prevention when cross-connections exist.
5. Failure to install a backflow prevention assembly which has been required by the Water Works.
6. Failure to test and/or properly repair a backflow prevention assembly as required by the Water Works.
7. Failure to comply with the requirements of this Article. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-9: BOARD OF APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any decision by the Water Works Department regarding this Article may appeal to the Water Works Board utilizing their
procedures and guidelines.
A. Appeals Procedure: Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the Building Official regarding this Article may file an appeal to the Mayor and City
Council. The appeal shall be completed by filing with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the written decision of the Building Official, a
notice of appeal requesting a hearing based on a claim that the true intent of this Article, or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted.
However, in serving as the Board of Appeals, the Mayor and City Council shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative
provisions of this Article, nor shall they be empowered to waive requirements of this Article.
Failure to file a timely written petition as required herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and the decision of the Building Official shall
constitute a final determination.
The application shall be accompanied by copies of plans, specifications, or any pertinent information which may be required to adequately evaluate the
appeal. Said appeals shall also be accompanied by a one hundred dollar ($100.00) filing fee for administrative and publication costs.
Upon receipt of a timely filed written petition to the Mayor and City Council, the City Clerk shall place the appeal on the next regular City Council
agenda. Written notification of the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be given to the petitioner within five (5) working days after the written
petition is filed with the City Clerk.
The hearing shall be scheduled no later than twenty (20) working days after the date on which the written petition was filed and may be extended for a
reasonable period by the Mayor's discretion, or upon written request from the petitioner or the Building Official, for good cause shown. The public shall
be noticed of the hearing by use of the media as is typical for other City public hearings.
Due to the failure of a petitioner to appear at a scheduled hearing of an appeal, the Mayor and City Council may proceed with the hearing and make a
decision in the absence of the petitioner.
B. Hearing Procedure:
1. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded, transcribed and maintained. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to respond and
present evidence and arguments on all issues involved. Parties may represent themselves or may be represented by legal counsel, or other
individuals of their choosing.
2. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts if the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given
an opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
3. Witnesses at the hearing, or available persons whose testimony has been submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross-examination by any
party as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
4. The Mayor shall conduct the hearing and have the power to administer oaths. The Mayor and City Council may cause subpoenas to be issued for
such witnesses and the production of such written articles as either party may designate. The subpoenas may be signed by the Mayor and City
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 441/687
Council.
5. When five (5) City Councilmembers are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to
request a postponement of the hearing.
6. The City Council shall modify or reverse the decision of the Building Official by a concurring vote of three (3) members.
7. The decision of the City Council shall be by resolution. Certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Building Official.
8. The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the City Council decision.
9. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors
of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the decision.
10. Other remedies to the decision of the City Council shall be by judicial review by the appropriate County District Court and shall be filed within twenty
(20) days of the decision. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-10: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
A. This Article is enacted only for the purpose of securing to individuals the enjoyment of rights and privileges to which they are entitled as members of the
public, rather than for the purpose of protecting any individual from harm.
B. The City, its officers, employees or agents make no representations or warranties of any kind whatsoever, expressed or implied, with respect to the
completeness or thoroughness of the inspections and examinations performed under this Article but said inspections are made solely to assist the
owner of any building, structure, equipment and premises to meet certain minimum requirements of this Article and to compel, if necessary, the owner
to meet the minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of persons and property. Nothing herein contained in this Article
shall alleviate the owner of any building, structure, equipment and premises to make an independent inspection in order to fulfill the requirements of
this Article nor shall this Article be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building, structure,
equipment or premises regulated herein from any damages to any person or property caused by defects. The City, its officers, employees or agents
shall not be held as assuming any liability for damages to any person or property by reason of the inspections authorized by this Article, or any
approvals issued herein, or for any act or failure to act in the enforcement of this Article. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-11: SAVING CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Article shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the
validity of the Article as a whole or any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-12: VIOLATION:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Article upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this City Code. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-
1998)
8-2G-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
Chapter 3
SIGNS
(Rep. by Ord. 1247, 6-16-1997)
Chapter 4
SWIMMING POOLS
(Rep. by Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
Chapter 5
SITE GRADING REGULATIONS
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading, and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments as well as
removal of trees and shrubs; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance and review of permits; and provides for approval of plans and
inspection of grading construction. (Ord. 1130, 5-22-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 442/687
8-5-2: APPLICABILITY:
A grading permit shall be obtained from the City Engineer prior to commencement of any of the following:
A. Any activity that changes the physical conditions of landform, vegetation and hydrology, creates bare soil, or otherwise may cause erosion or
sedimentation. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing, removal of vegetation, stripping, grading, grubbing, excavating, filling, logging
and storing of materials. No grading, unless specifically exempted by this chapter, shall occur on the subject property prior to obtaining a grading
permit.
B. Grading on property which is part of a development project subject to site plan review, or subdivision on which grading occurs prior to approval of the
development. Any grading permit issued prior to approval of the site plan development permit is at the applicant's own risk. Final grades will need to
comply with any changes necessary for the site development approval. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
8-5-3: EXEMPTED WORK:
A. If the grading activity threatens or impedes the ability of the City to meet its own permit requirements under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES), the City Engineer may terminate any exemption and require the applicant to obtain a grading permit in full compliance with chapter 6
of this title.
B. A grading permit will not be required for any of the following work which is carried out on an individual tract or on a single lot within a subdivision:
1. Property which is part of a development project subject to site plan or subdivision which has been approved by the City, except that no grading,
unless specifically exempted by this chapter, shall occur on the subject property prior to obtaining approval of the development plan.
2. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit.
This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five
feet (5') after the completion of such structure.
3. Cemetery graves.
4. Excavations for wells, tunnels or utilities as part of an approved utility installation in accordance with title 7, chapter 14 of this Code or street
excavation in accordance with title 7, chapter 1, article B of this Code.
5. Excavating or stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect
a lateral support or increase the stresses upon any adjacent or contiguous property.
6. Gardening and agricultural production.
7. Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers, engineering geologists or in connection with an environmental, archaeological, or
paleontological investigation, or mitigation.
8. Grading activities that cumulatively disturb less than one acre and are not part of a larger common plan of development which disturbs a cumulative
area of one acre or more, involves excavation or fill of less than three feet (3') in height at any location, contains less than fifty (50) cubic yards, does
not create a slope in excess of three feet (3') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical, and does not obstruct a drainage way.
9. Emergency work to correct or remedy situations that pose an immediate danger to life or property or substantial flood or fire hazards.
10. Any City, County, State or Federal improvement project.
11. Agricultural use including farm ponds. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
8-5-4: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Procedure: No person shall perform any grading or excavation on property that is not part of an approved development project until they have obtained
grading review approval and received a grading permit. The applicant shall submit the appropriate filing fee and application for a grading permit on
forms provided by the City. All grading permits are subject to review by the City Engineer.
B. Requirements: All site grading work and grading permit requirements shall be in accordance with the Iowa Department of Natural Resources general
permit no. 2, the City's current design standards and standard construction specifications, stormwater management provisions, the floodplain
ordinance, and the Building Code. Should there be a conflict between any of these ordinances or standards the most restrictive provision shall be
followed. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
8-5-5: LIMITATIONS:
A. Construction of permanent utilities or structures shall not be allowed as part of an approved grading permit. Temporary drainage structures to meet the
requirements of a stormwater management plan or stormwater pollution prevention plan associated with the application are allowed.
B. All permits are subject to existing Federal laws and regulations, State Statutes and regulations, City policies and ordinances, and applicable laws and
regulations of other political subdivisions of the State.
C. Approval of a grading permit shall be valid for one year. Grading not completed within this period shall require review and approval of a new permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 443/687
D. Any grading permit issued prior to approval of the site plan development permit is at the applicant's own risk. Final grades will need to comply with any
changes necessary for the site development approval. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
8-5-6: GRADING STANDARDS:
A. Grading plans shall, to the greatest extent possible, maintain the natural gradient and contours of the site and include measures to preserve natural
features including, but not limited to, trees, natural swales, and rock outcrops. Manufactured slopes shall be rounded and shaped to simulate the
natural terrain. No manufactured slope shall have a slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1). Shallower slope angles may be required if
detailed soils and geologic investigations indicate such.
B. No filling will be allowed on lands which lie either wholly or in part within a waters of the State or the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake unless
such fill is approved under the terms of a permit granted by the applicable Federal, State or County agency or the City.
C. Trees and shrubs within the proposed subdivision or property to be graded shall be saved whenever feasible as determined by the City. Protective
fences shall be placed and maintained around the driplines of trees or other measures instituted so as to protect trees and shrubs including their root
systems during period of excavation or construction activities. Cutting and filling soil within the dripline of a tree shall be prohibited. Soil compaction
caused by any type of equipment shall not be allowed to occur over the root zone of trees to be saved.
D. Temporary erosion control measures in accordance with City, State, and Federal regulations, shall be installed prior to any vegetation disturbance with
approved permanent erosion control measures to follow immediately thereafter. Temporary and permanent erosion control measures shall be
maintained at all times.
E. In order to minimize a "stair step" effect on streetscapes, the transitional slope areas along the side lot lines in the front yards shall be softened by
reducing the slope or by contouring the top and toe of the slope into the front yards of each lot. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
8-5-7: DRAINAGE STANDARDS:
A. In general, property shall be graded so that it drains to an approved piping or drainage system or street approved by the City Engineer. Alternative
drainage will only be allowed where, due to existing topography, street drainage would be very difficult to achieve and would not be feasible as
determined by the City.
B. All proposed developments shall be graded so that stormwater runoff is directed away from proposed building sites to an approved piping system, to
swales in drainage easements along property lines, to public rights-of-way, or to another approved drainage course as determined by the City
Engineer.
C. No stormwater runoff from a development shall flow onto other adjacent lands in a higher volume, with greater velocity or in a different location than
under natural conditions if so doing may cause damage to the adjacent land.
D. The property owner shall design for overland flow of stormwater from adjacent properties where the existing off site land slopes to the site.
E. To the maximum feasible extent, all natural drainage courses serving major drainage areas and containing significant vegetation which may constitute a
significant wildlife habitat, as determined by the City, should remain in their natural state. Alterations to the above drainage courses may be allowed if
the application of this section will result in upstream or downstream flooding hazards for which there is no other feasible means of mitigation consistent
with the findings.
F. All grading work in drainage facilities shall be in accordance with the City's design standards.
G. The overall drainage system shall be completed and made operational at the earliest possible time during construction or shall otherwise be provided
for in a manner acceptable to the City. If a development is to be phased, the approved drainage facilities will be completed or otherwise provided for in
a manner acceptable to the City before the completion of the first phase.
H. A stormwater management plan may be required as part of any formal application for development under these regulations. The City Engineer shall
review these submissions for completeness, adequacy and conformance with applicable standards. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
Chapter 6
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
A. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's national pollutant discharge elimination system ("NPDES") permit program (program) administered by the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources ("IDNR") requires that due to certain demographic and environmental impact criteria, the City of West Des
Moines obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the discharge of stormwater from a Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The City's MS4
permit is on file in the Office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection during regular office hours.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 444/687
B. Individuals or entities ("applicant") engaged in construction activities are required to submit an application to the IDNR for a State NPDES general
permit no. 2. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, every applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance with a State NPDES
general permit no. 2 and any other requirement of State or Federal law or administrative rule.
C. In conjunction with the City's MS4 permit requirements, the City will perform periodic monitoring and primary enforcement of the program through this
construction site erosion and sediment control ordinance (COSESCO).
D. No State or Federal funds have been made available to assist the City with monitoring and/or enforcing the program. Accordingly, the City shall fund its
monitoring and enforcement responsibilities entirely by fees imposed on the owners of properties which are made subject to the program by virtue of
State and Federal law, and/or other sources of funding established by separate ordinance.
E. Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the program. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
8-6-2: PROCEDURE FOR COMPLIANCE:
A. Any person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, State agency or political subdivision ("applicant") required by law or administrative rule to
apply to the IDNR for a State NPDES general permit no. 2 is subject to the terms of this chapter.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit by the City for construction activities undertaken by applicant on a site, an applicant shall:
1. Submit to the City a copy of the site plan prepared by the applicant to meet the requirements of the State NPDES general permit no. 2. The site plan
shall show Best Management Practice ("BMP") control measures and a stormwater pollution prevention plan ("SWPPP") applicable to the site.
2. Submit a copy of the applicant's authorization issued pursuant to applicant's State NPDES general permit no. 2, including a copy of the permit issued
by the IDNR for the site. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
3. The contact listed on the Notice of Intent (IDNR form 542-1415) shall be considered the responsible party and will receive all correspondence from
the City regarding compliance with this section until such time the authorization is discontinued or the physical area is covered in its entirety by
subsequent NPDES general permit no. 2 authorizations. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
C. Every SWPPP submitted to the City shall:
1. Comply with all existing requirements for a SWPPP promulgated by the IDNR in connection with issuance of a State NPDES general permit no. 2;
and
2. If the applicant is required by law to file a joint application form "Protecting Iowa Waters, Iowa Department of Natural Resources and U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers", the applicant shall comply with all mandatory minimum requirements pertaining to such application; and
3. Comply with all other applicable State or Federal permit requirements in existence at the time of application regarding, but not limited to, waste at
construction sites that may cause adverse impact to water quality such as building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, solid waste and
sanitary waste.
D. All construction sites shall be furnished with a stabilized construction site entrance to handle the type and frequency of the traffic entering and exiting
the site or make use of some other method of ingress/egress designed to prevent off site tracking. Any soils tracked off site shall be cleaned and/or
removed by the applicant at the end of each day or before sediments enter the public storm sewer or waters of the State. Any soils entering public
storm sewer or waters of the State will be considered a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
8-6-3: SITE VISIT PROCEDURES:
A. All site visits under this chapter shall be conducted by a representative of the City hereinafter referred to as the "Enforcement Officer".
B. Any applicant that is subject to the terms of COSESCO shall allow the City, or an authorized representative of the City, to enter upon applicant's private
property for site visits. Any representative of the City shall present credentials if so required at the time of entry.
C. The City may conduct site visits at any time. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
1. In any calendar year, the City will visit the site the minimum number of times outlined in the City's NPDES MS4 permit and in addition shall visit the
site upon the receipt of a complaint. The City will charge the applicant the amount as established by resolution of the City Council for each such site
visit until such time as the NPDES general permit no. 2 is terminated by the IDNR. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
2. In addition to the required site visits set forth in subsection C1 of this section, the City may conduct additional site visits at any time at the expense of
the City. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
D. In the event a site visit identifies an area or incident of noncompliance, the City may, at its discretion, provide the applicant with a list of deficiencies that
identifies the area or incident of noncompliance. Prior to an enforcement action being taken, a list of deficiencies must be provided to the applicant.
Upon providing a list of deficiencies, the applicant shall immediately commence corrective action and shall complete corrective action within the
timeframe designated by the City on the list of deficiencies. Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 445/687
E. The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences to the applicant or to a third party or parties for noncompliant conditions
undetected by the site visit. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
8-6-4: MONITORING PROCEDURES:
A. It shall be the applicant's duty to monitor the site daily to ensure compliance with the SWPPP and general permit no. 2. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
B. It shall be applicant's duty to notify the City of any changes, alterations, transfers of coverage or sales of any property in the same manner, to the same
extent and at the same time as such notification is provided to the Iowa Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the requirements of the State
NPDES general permit no. 2. In the event the applicant completes a transfer of responsibility in accordance with IAC 567-64.6(6) the contact listed on
the Notice of Intent shall remain the primary point of contact for all correspondence from the City, including any enforcement action and invoices for
service, for the entire permitted area until such time the authorization is discontinued or the physical area is covered in its entirety by subsequent
NPDES general permit no. 2 authorizations. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
C. It shall be the applicant's duty to notify the City when all conditions of the NPDES general permit no. 2 have been satisfied and the permit has been
terminated. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
8-6-5: ENFORCEMENT BY LEGAL OR ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION:
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil legal action, including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief.
B. Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a Municipal infraction within the meaning of Iowa Code section 364.22, pursuant to
section 1-4-1 of this Code, or enforced in the manner of an administrative abatement pursuant to section 4-4-5 of this Code.
C. Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the Enforcement Officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney. (Ord. 1710, 10-
23-2006)
8-6-6: ENFORCEMENT BY ORDER TO TERMINATE FURTHER ACTIVITIES:
A. As an alternative to enforcement by legal or administrative action, an Enforcement Officer may issue an order to terminate further activities at the site
under the following conditions:
1. The order to terminate may be issued for failure to implement or maintain pollution control Best Management Practices.
B. Prior to commencing further activity at the site, the applicant shall establish correction of the deficiency by providing to the Office of the Enforcement
Officer a written statement signed under oath that the deficiency has been corrected with a description, including photographs when appropriate, of the
action taken to correct the deficiency.
C. If the deficiency is not corrected, the City may commence a legal or administrative action against the applicant as set forth in section 8-6-5 of this
chapter. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
8-6-7: APPEAL:
A. Appeal of a decision pursuant to a civil legal action, including injunctive relief, shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Iowa Rules of Civil
Procedure. Appeal of a decision pursuant to a Municipal infraction violation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Iowa Code section 364.22(10)
or succeeding legislation.
B. Appeal of a "notice to abate" issued pursuant to section 4-4-5 of this Code shall be made in the manner prescribed by section 4-4-9 of this Code. (Ord.
1710, 10-23-2006)
Chapter 7
CONVERSIONS
8-7-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council of the city of West Des Moines, by this chapter, to provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and to provide
for the orderly development of the city by establishing standards for property which is to be subjected to residential horizontal property regimes
(condominiums) and multiple housing cooperatives. It is the intent of the city council to assure that all property to be used for residential purposes must at
the time a horizontal property regime or multiple housing cooperative is established meet current building code standards and requirements. It is the intent
of the city council in regard to the conversion of structures to horizontal property regimes (condominiums) or the conversion of structures to multiple
housing cooperatives that such change should provide the residents living in such structures adequate protection by meeting the current health, safety and
welfare standards of the city. This chapter is in part enacted to assure residents that such standards herein provided will be maintained. This chapter is to
be liberally construed to meet the purposes and intent of the city council as herein stated. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 446/687
8-7-2: REQUIREMENTS:
A. After April 25, 2000, an existing structure shall not be converted to a horizontal property regime unless the converted structure meets building code
requirements in effect on the date of conversion. After April 19, 2010, an existing structure shall not be converted to a multiple housing cooperative
unless the converted structure meets building code requirements in effect on the date of conversion.
B. At least sixty (60) days prior to filing a declaration of horizontal property regime as provided in Iowa Code chapter 499B or articles of incorporation for a
multiple housing cooperative as provided in Iowa Code chapter 499A which converts an existing structure within the city of West Des Moines, the
owner shall file a copy of the declaration of the horizontal property regime or the articles of incorporation of the multiple housing cooperative with the
city of West Des Moines chief building official to enable the city to establish that the converted structure meets appropriate building code requirements.
(Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-3: BUILDING CODE COMPLIANCE:
Any person or entity seeking to establish a horizontal property regime (condominiums) or multiple housing cooperative for residential purposes, including a
person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to condominiums or a multiple housing cooperative by establishing a horizontal property regime
pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499B or by establishing a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall establish and document
compliance with all building code requirements of the city applicable upon the date the city receives the declaration of the horizontal property regime or
articles of incorporation of the multiple housing cooperative. Such compliance shall include documentation of the following:
A. That all materials, manner and means of construction in the building proposed meet current building codes for new residential construction including
current fire, building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes.
B. That all plumbing in the building proposed meets current standards for water conservation including low flow toilets and similar devices.
C. That the building proposed have fire sprinklers and all other life safety systems required for new construction.
D. That the building proposed meet all state and federal requirements for handicapped accessibility that would be required of new construction.
E. That the building proposed meet all state energy efficiency standards that would be required for new construction.
F. That the building proposed meet any and all other requirements of the city of West Des Moines building code and subdivision code. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-
2010)
8-7-4: ON SITE PARKING; STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Any person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to condominiums by establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code chapter
499B or seeking to convert an existing structure to a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall comply with all current
provisions for on site parking and stormwater management that would be required for new construction. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-5: WATERWORKS:
Any person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to condominiums by establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code chapter
499B or seeking to convert an existing structure to a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall comply with all requirements
of the West Des Moines waterworks concerning such structures. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-6: CERTIFICATION OF INSPECTION:
Any person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to condominiums by establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code section
499B.3 or seeking to convert an existing structure to a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall at least sixty (60) days
before filing any declaration or article of incorporation submit to the city clerk, the development services director and the public works director a written
analysis by a licensed professional engineer(s) or other appropriate licensed professional, based upon personal inspection of the building sought to be
converted. The written analysis shall certify that the building meets all current city building codes that would be required for new construction. The
certification shall separately itemize and describe in a manner sufficient to show the factual basis of any certification that the fire, life safety, structural,
plumbing, electrical and mechanical systems meet current city standards. The certification shall further certify compliance with current on site parking and
stormwater management requirements and separately certify the building meets current standards for materials and that acceptable means and methods
of construction were used that would be required for new construction. Appropriate city staff will review the certification and report to the chief building
official whether said certification is sufficient to meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-7: ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
Any person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to condominiums by establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code chapter
499B or seeking to convert an existing structure to a multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall comply with all requirements
of title 9 of this code prior to conversion in the same manner as an applicant for new construction including, but not limited to, filing a site plan for review
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 447/687
which shall show compliance with all setback, parking, open space and all other requirements that would be required for new construction. (Ord. 1864, 4-
19-2010)
8-7-8: COMPLIANCE:
No conversion of property to a horizontal property regime under Iowa Code chapter 499B and no conversion of property to a multiple housing cooperative
under Iowa Code chapter 499A shall be complete nor shall a declaration or articles of incorporation be filed until there has been full compliance with this
chapter. Upon showing of full compliance with this chapter, the chief building official shall by written notice so inform the county recorder of the county in
which any property subject to this chapter is located and state in said written notice that the property meets the requirements of the Iowa Code. (Ord.
1864, 4-19-2010)
Title 9
ZONING
Chapter 1
ENTITLEMENTS - PROCESS AND PROCEDURES
9-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall be officially known, cited, referred to as the zoning regulations of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa (hereinafter "these
regulations"). (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-2: POLICY:
A. It is declared to be the policy of the City to consider the development of land as subject to the control of the City pursuant to the official Comprehensive
Plan of the City for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the City.
B. Land to be developed shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other
menace, and land shall not be developed until adequate public facilities and improvements exist and proper provisions have been made for drainage,
water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreational facilities, transportation facilities, and improvements.
C. The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the Comprehensive Plan, Official
Map, and the capital budget and program of the City, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the
provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, subdivision ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and land use plan,
and the capital budget and program of the City.
D. Land that has been developed prior to the effective date of these regulations shall, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of these regulations
to further the purposes of regulation(s) identified in Section 9-1-3 of this Chapter.
E. An entitlement to construct a structure on any land shall only be issued for a legal lot of record. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-3: PURPOSES:
A. These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1. To guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
2. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City.
3. To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger, and to prevent undue congestion of population and
overcrowding of the land.
4. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the City and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the
community through appropriate growth management techniques by assuring the timing and sequencing of development, promoting infill development
in existing neighborhoods and nonresidential areas with adequate public facilities, assuring proper urban form and open space separation of urban
areas, and protecting environmentally critical areas from premature urban development.
5. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
6. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds,
recreation, and other public requirements and facilities.
7. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the City, having particular
regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and
buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 448/687
8. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for development and redevelopment in order to further the orderly layout and use of
land.
9. To ensure that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed
development and that the community will be required to bear no more than its fair share of the cost of providing the facilities and services through
requiring the developer to pay fees, furnish land, or establish mitigation measures to ensure that the development provides its fair share of needed
capital facilities generated by the development.
10. To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the
wise use and management of natural resources throughout the Municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community
and the value of the land.
11. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
12. To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land, including the use of average density in providing for minimum
width and area of lots, while preserving the density of development as established in the zoning ordinance of the City.
13. To ensure that the overall land is developed in a logical fashion and that "leapfrog" development does not occur.
14. To remedy the problems associated with inappropriately developed land, including premature development, excess development, partial or
incomplete development, leapfrog and low grade development. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-4: AUTHORITY:
A. Upon receiving a recommendation from the West Des Moines Planning and Zoning Commission (hereinafter "commission"), the City Council of the City
of West Des Moines, Iowa (hereinafter "City Council") may approve, deny or modify, wholly or partly, any application for the development of land,
including, but not limited to, comprehensive plan amendments, zone changes, site plan development permits, and major modification of the above. The
City Council may impose such conditions and limitations as it deems necessary to assure that the general purpose and intent of this title and all other
ordinances or policies enacted or followed by the City Council will be observed, and that the public interest, health, safety, convenience and welfare will
be served. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
B. All conditions and restrictions approved by the City Council which are not appealed in a timely manner, shall restrict the use of the subject property or
structure until further action is taken by the City Council to modify or eliminate the restriction.
C. The City Council may grant a waiver, modify to a lesser restriction, or defer enforcement of any provision or requirements not expressly reserved to the
Board of Adjustment by the Iowa Code or this Code. (Ord. 1257, 6-30-1997)
D. The Board of Adjustment of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa (hereinafter "Board") may approve, deny or modify, wholly or partly, any application for
the use of land, including, permitted conditional use permits (Pc), which may also be subject to approval of a site plan development permit for
development of land by the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council. The Board may impose such conditions and limitations on the use as it
deems necessary to assure that the general purpose and intent of this title and all other ordinances or policies enacted or followed by the Board will be
observed, and that the public interest, health, safety, convenience and welfare will be served. Conditions placed by the Board shall be enforced by the
Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council as part of site plan development permit approval. No site plan development permit shall be approved if
conditions placed by the Board have not been appropriately accommodated in the development of the site. Conditions placed by the Board as part of
the permitted conditional use permit approval may only be modified or removed by the Board. The Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
not have authority to modify, waive, or remove conditions placed by the Board. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
E. All conditions and restrictions approved by the Board which are not appealed in a timely manner, shall restrict the use of the subject property or
structure until further action is taken by the Board to modify or eliminate the restriction.
F. The Board may grant a waiver, modify to a lesser restriction, or defer enforcement of any provision or requirements not expressly reserved to the City
Council by the Iowa Code or this Code. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
9-1-5: JURISDICTION:
A. These regulations apply to development of any parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the City or outside the corporate limits of the City as
provided by law.
B. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel of land or development after the effective date of and not in substantial
conformity with the provisions of these regulations. No excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be
commenced except in conformity with these regulations. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-6: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT:
A. Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and general welfare. These regulations shall be constructed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted.
1. Public Provisions: These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other
provision of law except as provided in these regulations. If a conflict between requirements appears within this title; the most restrictive requirement
shall prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 449/687
2. Misinformation: Information erroneously presented by any official or employee of the City does not negate or diminish the provisions of this title
pertaining thereto.
3. Quantity: The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
4. Gender: The masculine includes the feminine, and the feminine includes the masculine.
5. Number Of Days: Whenever a number of days is specified in this title, or in any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in
this title, such number of days shall be deemed to be consecutive calendar days, unless otherwise specified.
6. Or: The word "or" shall also mean "and/or".
7. Shall, Must, And May: "Shall" imposes a duty, "must" states a requirement, and "may" confers a power.
8. Rounding Of Quantities: Whenever application of this title results in required parking spaces or other standards being expressed in fractions of whole
numbers, such fractions are to be rounded to the next higher whole number, except that quantities expressing units per acre shall not be rounded.
9. Density: All references to density in this title are based on gross site area unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
10. Procedural Requirements: No action of the City, its City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, the Director of
Community Development or other official body of the City shall be deemed invalid by reason of failure to comply with or conform to the provisions of
this title, provided that the procedural requirements of all State laws, including the Code of Iowa, have been met.
11. Measurement Of Setbacks: Whenever this title refers to setback distances, except for those parcels where the City Council or the Board of
Adjustment has granted exceptions, the setback standard shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way width as shown in the adopted
Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
9-1-7: PUBLIC PURPOSE:
Regulation of the development of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to the development of land is an exercise of valid police power
delegated by the State to this City. The developer has the duty of compliance with conditions laid down by the City for design, dedication, improvement,
and restrictive use of the land to conform to the physical and economic development of the City for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
community at large. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-8: ENTITLEMENTS:
A. An "entitlement" shall mean the authority acquired by an applicant after receiving approval of an application from either the Plan and Zoning
Commission, Board of Adjustment, City Council, Director of Development Services or designee, City Engineer or designee, or other official body of the
City. The following subsections define, indicate applicability, and establish requirements for submittal for all entitlements required by this title: (Ord.
2275, 2-5-2018)
1. Structures Not Requiring A Permit: A building located in any single family residential district which is less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet
in area and not placed on a permanent foundation does not require a permit. Structures not requiring a permit also include dog houses, dog
runs/pens, play houses or play equipment. Any temporary structures such as tents or canopies having an area less than two hundred (200) square
feet in area or used exclusively for camping do not require a permit, although an event utilizing temporary structures may require a temporary use or
sound permit. These structures must meet the same setback and height restrictions as all accessory structures. (Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
2. Site Plan Development Permit:
a. Purpose: The site plan development permit procedure provides a method whereby land may be designed and developed as a unit by taking
advantage of modern site planning techniques; and to produce an environment of stable, desirable character which will be in harmony with the
existing or potential development of the surrounding neighborhood; and to ensure development which meets standards of environmental quality,
public health and safety, and efficient use of the City's resources. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
b. General Provisions:
(1) Unless otherwise modified below, a site plan development permit shall be required prior to site development and construction for:
(A) New construction of any structure or site improvements associated with any use identified as either permitted (P) or permitted conditionally
(Pc) within the use matrix for a zoning district.
(B) Expansion of existing structures, site improvements, use, or operations associated with any use identified as either permitted (P) or
permitted conditionally (Pc) within the use matrix for a zoning district.
(C) Any use, based upon a determination of the Development, Planning and Inspection Manager that is a more intense use than the preceding
approved use which would result in a potential for a significant impact upon its surroundings.
(2) A site plan development permit shall not be required for:
(A) Single-family detached residential dwelling uses and structures located within a zoning district in which said use and structure is permitted
(P) per the use matrix or is otherwise governed by and in compliance with the provisions stated within chapter 3, "General Zoning Provisions",
of this title.
(B) On properties considered being primarily agricultural in nature and operating as such, agricultural structures which are associated with
agricultural production - crops (SIC 01) except greenhouses (SIC 018) and which is permitted (P) within the use matrix for the zoning district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 450/687
(Ord. 1918, 5-2-2011; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
(3) For projects requiring a site plan development permit, no building or grading permit of any kind shall be issued for any such development until
the site plan development permit has been approved, except as herein provided:
(A) Grading permits may be issued prior to approval of a development permit by the City Engineer or designee, subject to all applicable site
grading regulations and application procedures of title 8, chapter 5 of this Code, and
(B) Determination by the Director of Development Services or a designee that the site development plan is in substantial conformance with all
applicable zoning regulations, and
Any grading permit issued prior to approval of the site plan development permit is at the applicant's own risk and final grades will need to
comply with any changes necessary for the site development approval. Structures not required to obtain a site plan development permit shall
be required to obtain the appropriate building and grading permits prior to construction of the structure.
c. Application: Application for a site plan development permit shall be made on the prescribed form(s) provided by the Development Services
Department. The application shall be accompanied by the prescribed number of copies of a project plan and such other detailed elevations, plans
and other information as may be required to adequately evaluate the proposed development. All applications shall be signed by the owner of the
property or person with the appropriate power of attorney. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
d. Required Permit Findings: Site plan development permits shall only be granted if all of the following findings are made; or if conditions and
limitations, as the City Council deems necessary, are imposed to allow it to make said findings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
prove to the satisfaction of the City Council that the following findings can be made:
(1) That the proposed development or use is consistent with the West Des Moines Comprehensive Plan and any applicable subarea plan.
(2) That the proposed development or use does assure compatibility of property uses within the zone and general area.
(3) That all applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(4) That there is adequate on site and off site public infrastructure to support the proposed development.
(5) That the proposed development or use has met all the requirements contained in this Code.
(6) That the proposed development or use be in keeping with the scale and nature of the surrounding neighborhood.
e. Duration: Upon use inauguration any site plan development permit is considered to run with the land, unless its duration is conditioned at the time
the site plan development permit is granted. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
3. Permitted Conditional Use Permit (Pc):
a. Purpose: "Permitted conditional use permit (Pc)" shall mean a zoning instrument used primarily to review the locations or conduct of certain land
uses. These are uses which may have a distinct impact on the area in which they are located, or are capable of creating special problems for
bordering properties unless given special attention.
The Board of Adjustment may grant a permitted conditional use permit (Pc) if the proposed use is found to be in compliance with the required
findings, and the Plan and Zoning Commission shall recommend and the City Council shall approve the development of any land associated with a
permitted conditional use permit (Pc) through the site plan development permit process if the development is found to be in compliance with the
required findings and any conditions of the approval placed by the Board on implementation of the use.
b. General Provisions: A permitted conditional use permit (Pc) shall be required for those uses as noted in the Agricultural/Open Space and
Residential Zoning District and Commercial, Office and Industrial Zoning District matrices, and as specified elsewhere within this title.
c. Application: Application for a permitted conditional use permit (Pc) shall be made on the prescribed form provided by the Development Services
Department. The application shall be accompanied by the prescribed number of copies of a project plan and such other detailed elevations, plans
and other information as may be required to adequately evaluate the proposed use. All applications shall be signed by the owner of the property or
person with the appropriate power of attorney.
d. Required Permitted Conditional Use Permit Findings: Permitted conditional use permits (Pc) may only be granted if all of the permitted conditional
use permit findings from title 2, chapter 2 of this Code are made; or if conditions and limitations, as the Board of Adjustment deems necessary, are
imposed to allow it to make said findings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment that
findings can be made. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
e. Duration: Upon vesting of entitlement any permitted conditional use permit (Pc) use may continue until such time the use is discontinued for a
period of one year or a different use is inaugurated on the site. The duration for any Pc use may be conditioned at the time the permitted
conditional use permit (Pc) is granted. (Ord. 2303, 5-29-2018)
4. Major Modifications To Entitlements:
a. Purpose: The modification procedure is intended to provide a method whereby changes may be made to an existing, approved site plan
entitlement. This procedure may allow an applicant to process changes that affect only a portion of a previously approved entitlement. (Ord. 2274,
2-5-2018)
b. General Provisions: A major modification is generally applicable when additional public input is necessary due to a request for substantial
changes, including, but not limited to, parking requirements, building bulk or area, landscaping plans, site design, architecture or other
improvements. A modification shall not be applied for in place of a variance.
All such applications for a major modification shall reopen the review of the entire entitlement and its conditions at the discretion of the approving
body.
c. Application: Application for a major modification shall be made on the same form in the same manner as prescribed for the original entitlement.
Such requests shall include submittal of the prescribed number of original approved plans with modifications denoted thereon and such other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 451/687
detailed elevations, plans and other information as may be required to adequately evaluate the proposed development. All applications shall be
signed by the owner of the property or person with the appropriate power of attorney. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
d. Required Permit Findings: Findings for modifications shall be the same as those required for the original site plan development permit. Any
modification to a previously approved site plan for a permitted conditional (Pc) use permit shall be subject to review by the Plan and Zoning
Commission and approval by City Council. Any expansion of a permitted conditional use on the property shall require approval by the Board of
Adjustment. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
e. Expiration Date: Any major modification granted pursuant to this section shall not affect the expiration date of the original approved permit. (Ord.
1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
5. Minor Modifications To Entitlements:
a. Purpose: Level 1 and level 2 minor modifications are changes to an approved site plan through a process that allows for a less formal review of
projects that encompass minor changes that do not generate substantial impacts and do not warrant public input.
b. General Provisions:
(1) The Director of Development Services or designee may grant a level 1 or a level 2 minor modification to an approved site plan permit. The
modification may govern only the following measurable design/site considerations, which in no case results in a reduction from any minimum
standard outlined in this title or the previous directives of the City Council or Board of Adjustment.
(A) A level 1 minor modification may be allowed for the following:
(i) Modifications to on site circulation drives, parking, and loading or service areas that do not increase the net impervious surface area more
than two thousand (2,000) square feet and that do not affect existing topography or drainage;
(ii) Placement or changes to walls, fences, and retaining walls;
(iii) Modifications to landscaping that do not affect existing topography or drainage;
(iv) Modifications to wall facades, reconfiguration and/or addition of architectural features, colors, or finish materials that do not compromise
the established theme or otherwise make the structure inconsistent with the architectural design, color, or materials of other structures
within the same development or surrounding area;
(v) Entry vestibules necessary to meet Energy Code requirements and which are no larger than necessary to accommodate accessibility
standards;
(vi) Collocation of communication antennas on existing structures and related accessory buildings up to two thousand (2,000) square feet;
(vii) Installation of trash enclosures and associated screening;
(viii) Installation of backup generators and associated screening; and
(ix) Additions of or expansions of decks and patios for permitted uses.
(B) A level 2 minor modification may be allowed for the following:
(i) Modifications to on site circulation drives, parking, and loading or service areas which increase the net impervious surface area more than
two thousand (2,000) square feet;
(ii) New freestanding accessory buildings for permitted uses of not more than a total of two thousand (2,000) square feet;
(iii) New or expansions of patios or building expansions of an existing facility for permitted uses up to fifty percent (50%) of the existing square
footage and not more than a total of two thousand (2,000) square feet;
(iv) Installation of water, storm sewer, and sanitary utilities on the site. Installation of public utilities may be proposed through the minor
modification level 2 process, but will be subject to the approval and acceptance of the City Council;
(v) Changes in residential density to either decrease the total number of units or to increase the number of units as long as:
(a) The density does not exceed the maximum allowed per the designated zoning of the property; and
(b) The additional density does not warrant a structural addition or new structure which exceeds two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross
floor area;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 452/687
(vi) Changes to topography or drainage that do not affect the ground elevations of sidewalks or buildings.
(2) Any level 1 minor modification request which exceeds the prescribed limitations outlined in this section shall instead file a level 2 minor
modification request or a major modification site plan permit request. A site may have an unlimited number of level 1 minor modifications.
(3) Any level 2 minor modification request which exceeds the prescribed limitations outlined in this section or a site which has been the subject of
two (2) previous level 2 minor modifications shall instead file a major modification site plan permit request. (Ord. 2137, 1-26-2016; amd. Ord.
2248, 9-18-2017)
(4) Any modification to a previously approved site plan for a permitted conditional (Pc) use permit approval that does not qualify for the level 1 or
the level 2 minor modification process shall be subject to review by the Plan and Zoning Commission and approval by City Council. Any
expansion of a permitted conditional use on the property shall require approval of the expansion of the use by the Board of Adjustment.
(5) Any level 1 or level 2 minor modification to a previously approved site plan that is for a site which has nonconforming attributes, e.g., setbacks,
open space percentage, landscaping, parking, and which proposes to increase the scope of any nonconforming attribute shall not be granted
approval, except in those cases where a variance is obtained from the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
(6) Any level 1 or level 2 minor modification to a previously approved site plan that increases the net impervious area by two thousand (2,000)
square feet or more, or changes topography that affects drainage patterns within the site, or changes existing detention facilities within or
serving the site, including changes to the capacity of a detention facility within or serving the site, or properties that are identified to contribute to
known downstream flooding issues will be required to study the effects of the proposal and provide either a revised stormwater management
plan or letter of general conformance to an approved stormwater management plan signed by an Iowa licensed engineer.
(7) Any level 1 or level 2 minor modification to a previously approved site plan that increases the square footage of the usable area of the building,
e.g., expansion of the building or addition or expansion of a patio, or which modifies driveways or internal circulation to the extent that the
change would affect traffic on the public street system may require a traffic impact study. (Ord. 2137, 1-26-2016; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
(8) The Director of Development Services or designee shall have the discretion to refer any level 1 or level 2 minor modification request to the Plan
and Zoning Commission and City Council for permitted uses or permitted conditional uses. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
c. Application: The level 1 or level 2 minor modification shall require the approval of the Director of Development Services or designee. The Director
of Development Services or designee may establish conditions of approval to further the intent of this section or other City Code regulations. An
application for a level 1 or a level 2 minor modification shall be on a form prescribed by the Director and shall be filed with the Development
Services Department with such other detailed elevations, plans and other information as may be required to adequately evaluate the proposed
development.
d. Required Permit Findings: Level 1 and level 2 minor modifications shall only be granted if all of the following findings are made. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to prove that the following findings can be made:
(1) That the proposed development or use is consistent with the West Des Moines Comprehensive Plan and any applicable subarea plan;
(2) That the proposed development or use does assure compatibility of property uses within the zone and general area;
(3) That all applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which protect the public health, safety and welfare;
(4) That there is adequate on site and off site public infrastructure to support the proposed development; and
(5) That the proposed development or use has met all the requirements contained in this Code. (Ord. 2137, 1-26-2016; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-
2017)
e. Appeals: Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the Director of Development Services or designee, a written
request on forms prescribed by the Director for said appeal, along with the appropriate fee, shall be received and stamped filed by the
Development Services Department within a period of ten (10) business days following the decision. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a
request, the Director shall schedule a public hearing on the matter of the appeal before the Board of Adjustment to review and render a decision
on said appeal. The decision of the Board is appealable to the District Court. (Ord. 2078, 12-29-2014; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
6. Overlay District Site Plan Permit:
a. Purpose: The overlay district site plan development permit procedure provides a method whereby land within an overlay district area may be
designed and developed as a unit by taking advantage of modern site planning techniques; and to produce an environment of stable, desirable
character which will be in harmony with the existing or potential development of the surrounding neighborhood; and to ensure development which
meets standards of environmental quality, public health and safety, and efficient use of the City's resources.
b. General Provisions:
(1) An overlay district site plan development permit shall be required for:
(A) All uses within the Town Center Overlay District, except for single-family detached residential, when new construction or expansion of
existing structures or area of use or operation is proposed.
(B) Any use, based upon a determination of the Director of Development Services that is a more intense use than the preceding approved use
which would result in a potential for a significant impact upon its surroundings.
(2) For projects requiring a site plan development permit, no building or grading permit of any kind shall be issued for any such development until
the site plan development permit has been approved, except as herein provided.
(A) Grading permits may be issued prior to approval of a development permit by the City Engineer or designee, subject to all applicable site
grading regulations and application procedures of title 8, chapter 5 of this Code, and
(B) Determination by the Director of Development Services or a designee that the site development plan is in substantial conformance with all
applicable zoning regulations, and
Any grading permit issued prior to approval of the site plan development permit is at the applicant's own risk and final grades will need to comply
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 453/687
with any changes necessary for the site development approval. Structures not required to obtain a site plan development permit shall be
required to obtain the appropriate building and grading permits prior to construction of the structure.
(3) The Director of Development Services or his designee may deem an overlay district site plan as preliminarily approved by staff, and then send
the application materials to the Mayor, City Council, and Plan and Zoning Commission for their individual review. If two (2) or more members of
the Council and commission inform the Director of Development Services or his designee of their desire to not approve the application request,
the request is then placed on the next available agenda for consideration by the full commission. Their recommendation is then forwarded to the
next available Council agenda for final action. If, however, there are less than two (2) objections from the Council and commission, the
application may be approved administratively by the Director of Development Services at an administrative hearing that has been advertised by
posting a notice in the designated area forty eight (48) hours before the hearing.
(4) The Director of Development Services or his designee shall have the discretion to refer any overlay district site plan request to the next
available agenda for consideration by the commission, whose recommendation will be forwarded to the next available Council agenda for final
action.
c. Application: Application for an overlay district site plan development permit shall be made on the prescribed form(s) provided by the Development
Services Department and shall require the approval of the Director of Development Services or his or her designee. The application shall be
accompanied by the prescribed number of copies of a project plan and such other detailed elevations, plans and other information as may be
required to adequately evaluate the proposed development. The Director may also establish additional conditions to further the intent of this
section. All applications shall be signed by the owner of the property or person with the appropriate power of attorney.
d. Required Permit Findings: Overlay district site plan development permits shall only be granted if all of the following findings are made; or if
conditions and limitations, as the Development Services Director deems necessary, are imposed to allow it to make said findings. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services that the following findings can be made:
(1) That the proposed development or use is consistent with the West Des Moines comprehensive plan, overlay district guidelines, and applicable
specific plan.
(2) That the proposed development or use does assure compatibility of property uses within the zone and general area.
(3) That all applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(4) That there is adequate on site and off site public infrastructure to support the proposed development.
(5) That the proposed development or use has met all the requirements contained in this Code.
(6) That the proposed development or use be in keeping with the scale and nature of the surrounding neighborhood.
e. Duration: Upon use inauguration any overlay district site plan development permit is considered to run with the land, unless its duration is
conditioned at the time the site plan development permit is granted.
f. Appeals: Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the Director, a written request on forms prescribed by the Director
of Development Services for said appeal, along with the appropriate fee, shall be received and stamped filed by the Development Services
Department within a period of ten (10) business days following the Director's decision. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a request, the
Director shall schedule a public hearing on the matter of the appeal before the commission in order for the commission to review and render a
decision on said appeal. The decision of the commission is appealable to the Board of Adjustment.
Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the commission on an appeal, a written request on forms prescribed by the
Director of Development Services for said appeal, along with the appropriate fee, shall be received and stamped filed by the Development
Services Department within a period of ten (10) business days following the commission's decision. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a
request, the Director shall schedule a public hearing of the Board of Adjustment to review and render a decision on said appeal.
Only such items considered under appeal by the commission shall be considered by the Board of Adjustment during its review of the appeal of the
commission's decision. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
7. Extension Of Entitlement:
a. Purpose: The extension of entitlement procedure is intended to provide a method to extend the time originally allowed for use inauguration of a
previously approved project that has not expired. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1709, 9-25-2006; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
b. General Provisions:
(1) Entitlements Except Permitted Conditional Use Permits: The City Council or Director of Community Development, if properly authorized, may
grant time extensions for any entitlement in this title as provided herein except permitted conditional use permit entitlements, unless stated
otherwise in the conditions of approval. The time limits for any extension of an entitlement shall be at the discretion of the City Council or
Director and shall be determined on a case by case basis.
(2) Permitted Conditional Use Permit Entitlements: The Board of Adjustment or Director of Community Development, if properly authorized, may
grant time extensions for permitted conditional use permit entitlement in this title, unless stated otherwise in the conditions of approval. The time
limits for any extension of an entitlement shall be at the discretion of the Board of Adjustment or Director and shall be determined on a case by
case basis. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001; amd. Ord. 1709, 9-25-2006; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
c. Applications: Such extensions shall be requested of the Community Development Department in writing, accompanied by the appropriate fee, on
or before the date of expiration of the entitlement. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1709, 9-25-2006; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
d. Required Findings: The City Council, Board of Adjustment, or Director may grant the extension only after finding that: (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001; amd.
Ord. 1709, 9-25-2006; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
(1) There have been no changes to the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan or zoning regulations applicable to the project since the approval of
the entitlement; and
(2) There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings which affect how the standards of the Comprehensive Plan or
zoning regulations apply to the project; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 454/687
(3) There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings which detrimentally affect the environment; and
(4) That substantial site work could not be completed because of circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. (This finding is not applicable
to time extensions for a continuation of a use of a previously approved entitlement that as part of its approval allowed the filing of a time
extension at a specified time or intervals of time.)
e. Continuance Of A Permit During Application Renewal Process: Unless otherwise provided in the conditions of the permit, permits being processed
for renewal (time extensions) shall remain in full force and effect until the renewal request is acted on and all administrative appeals have been
exhausted, provided that the renewal application was accepted as complete by the Community Development Department prior to the expiration of
the permit. All the terms and conditions of the original permit must be followed at all times. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1709, 9-25-2006;
Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
9-1-9: FILING AND PROCESSING OF APPLICATION REQUESTS:
A. Application requests shall be filed with the Community Development Department. No application request shall be accepted for filing and processing
unless it conforms to the requirements of this title, contains in a full, true and correct form the required materials and information prescribed by the
forms supplied by the Community Development Department and is accompanied by the appropriate fees. The City staff may, after conferring with the
applicant and with the approval of the City Council or Board of Adjustment, refer any application request to an independent and qualified consultant for
review and evaluation of issues beyond the expertise of City staff. The costs for all such consultant work shall be borne by the applicant and are
independent of the fees paid to the Community Development Department for processing of the requests. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
1. Application Process: Applications may be filed subject to the following provisions: (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
a. Permit: An application for an entitlement, including extension, may be filed by the owner of the property, a person with a power of attorney from the
owner of the property, or the Director of Community Development upon resolution of the commission, Board of Adjustment, or City Council. (Ord.
1454, 9-17-2001)
b. Preapplication: Prior to submission of a permit application, a preapplication review may be conducted by the Department of Community
Development to consider a proposed project. Upon submittal of a preapplication, staff will evaluate the preapplication to ensure compliance with
applicable City regulations, indicate major problems, and identify additional required information. When the preapplication review is completed by
staff, the applicant will receive a written response which will include a specific evaluation of the proposed project. This evaluation is preliminary in
nature and shall not be considered an intention to approve or deny any particular project and is not intended to be inclusive of the comments but
only to identify major areas of concern. The City reserves the right to supplement additional comments that may be generated during the formal
review of the application.
c. Content Of Applications: The content of applications shall be determined by the Community Development Department as indicated under the
appropriate entitlement. Site plans and elevations in color, with building materials identified, floor plans and samples of exterior finishing materials
may be required as part of the permit procedure along with any other information deemed necessary for the City's review.
d. Determination Of Completeness: Within thirty (30) days of the date of acceptance of an application for an entitlement, the Director of Community
Development or his designee shall determine whether an application includes the information required by this section and shall notify the applicant
of the results of that determination. The applicant shall be informed by letter that either the application is complete or that the application is
incomplete and that additional information, specified in the letter, must be provided to make the application complete. Failure of the Director or his
designee to respond within thirty (30) days of acceptance of an application with a determination as to completeness shall be deemed as a
determination that the application is complete.
If an applicant is notified that a submitted application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant for preparation and submittal of the required
additional information shall be excluded from the period within which the Director or his designee must complete the determination of
completeness. The time available to an applicant for preparation and submittal of additional information is limited by subsection A1g, "Applications
Deemed Withdrawn", of this section. Submittal of the additional staff requested information establishes a new thirty (30) day period for a
determination of completeness.
e. Waivers Of Content: The Director of Community Development may find that unusual characteristics of a project site or the nature of a project
make it not feasible or unnecessary for the applicant to submit all of the information for an application required by this title. In such cases, the
Director may waive or reduce the requirements if it is also found that the absence of such information will not inhibit the City's ability to evaluate
the compliance of the proposed project with the standards of this title and any other requirements of this Code. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
f. Appeal Of Determination Of Completeness: If the Director of Community Development determines that an application is incomplete, the applicant
shall have the right to appeal that determination to the commission for site plan, major modification, or minor modification entitlements or the Board
of Adjustment for permitted conditional use entitlements.
A written request for said appeal shall be received and stamped filed by the Community Development Department within a period of ten (10)
business days following the issuance of the notice of incompleteness by the department. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a request, the
Director shall schedule a hearing of the commission to review and render a decision on said appeal.
Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the commission or Board of Adjustment, a written request for said appeal
shall be received and stamped filed by the Department of Community Development within a period of ten (10) business days following the
commission's or Board of Adjustment's decision. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a request, the Director shall schedule a hearing of the
City Council to review and render a decision on appeals of the commission. Appeals of the Board of Adjustment's decisions are heard in the
District Court of Iowa.
Only such items considered under appeal by the commission shall be considered by the City Council during its review of the appeal of the
commission's decision. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
g. Applications Deemed Withdrawn: Any application received shall be deemed withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of
additional requested information from the applicant, and if the applicant has not communicated in writing with the City and made reasonable
progress within ninety (90) days from the last written notification from the City to the applicant. The application fee is nonrefundable. Any
application deemed withdrawn shall require submission of a new application and fees to begin the review and approval process.
h. Development Review Meeting: Once an application has been acknowledged as complete by the City, a development review meeting may be held
among various governmental agencies, e.g., City departments, waterworks, Parks and Recreation Department, school district, etc., to review the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 455/687
application with the applicant. This meeting may result in recommendations by affected public agencies for changes to the application. Preliminary
conditions will be discussed at the meeting. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
i. Hearing: After completion of a staff report, the Director of Community Development shall set the project for a hearing before the commission and
City Council for site plan, major modification, or minor modification entitlements or the Board of Adjustment for permitted conditional use
entitlements in accordance with section 9-1-10 of this chapter.
j. Fees: Each application request for any purpose, including appeals, shall be accompanied by the fee specified by City Council or Board of
Adjustment resolution before it is accepted for filing and processing. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
2. Vesting Of Entitlement: An entitlement shall remain in effect so long as:
a. Substantial Site Work Defined: "Substantial site work" shall be defined as the point at which the site work has progressed beyond grading and
completion of structural foundations and twenty five percent (25%) of the total building area has occurred above grade within twenty four (24)
months of the effective date of the approval, or a greater time period authorized by the original entitlement, or by approval of an extension of the
original entitlement.
b. Nonbuilding Projects: The project is completed as set forth in subsection A4 of this section, project completion, within twelve (12) months or
greater period authorized by an entitlement or approval of an extension of entitlement.
c. Resource Extraction Operations: In the case of a resource extraction operation, the vesting of the entitlement shall occur when extraction
operations authorized by the entitlement have been commenced. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
3. Lapse Of Entitlement: In the event that any of the circumstances listed in subsection A3a(1) or A3a(2) of this section occur, an entitlement shall be
deemed to have lapsed. No use of land or structure, the entitlement for which has lapsed pursuant to this subsection, shall be reactivated,
reestablished, or used unless a new entitlement is first obtained.
a. Completed Projects: When a project has been completed or an authorized use not involving construction has been established, subsection A4,
"Project Completion", of this section, the entitlement which authorized the project shall remain valid and in force, including any conditions of
approval adopted in connection therewith, unless:
(1) An existing legally approved use or structure is removed from the site, and the site remains vacant for a period exceeding six (6) consecutive
months, in which case the right shall lapse; or
(2) A use or structure authorized through an entitlement approval remains vacant and unused for its authorized purpose, or is abandoned or
discontinued for a period greater than twelve (12) consecutive months, the entitlement shall lapse.
b. Partially Completed Projects: Until development rights have been vested, an entitlement shall remain valid so long as the building permit remains
valid.
4. Project Completion: A development project is considered completed when:
a. All structures in a single-family detached project have passed a final building inspection by the building official, and site improvements or off site
works have been completed and any bonds guaranteeing improvements have been released or continued at the discretion of the Public Works
Director.
b. A certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official verifying that all single-family attached, multi-family, commercial, office or
industrial structures, and site improvements or off site work have been completed and any bonds guaranteeing improvements have been released
or continued at the discretion of the Public Works Director.
c. When the Director of Community Development verifies that a use or activity, not involving a building or grading permit, has occurred on the subject
site in accordance with all applicable provisions of this title and any adopted conditions.
5. Occupancy Or Use Of Partially Completed Projects: Multiple building projects, including, but not limited to, apartments or office complexes or
shopping centers, may be granted certificates of occupancy for individual completed buildings in advance of the completion of the entire project
when:
a. Individual buildings, but not necessarily all buildings, are completed pursuant to subsection A4 of this section; and
b. The Director of Community Development determines that the completed structures are capable of functioning independently from structures and
site improvements remaining to be completed; and
c. Occupancy of individual structures will not inhibit the completion of the total project; and
d. Partial occupancy during completion will not have a potential adverse effect on persons in the area or nearby properties. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-10: NOTICE AND HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. Notice For Public Hearings: Whenever a public hearing is required by the planning and zoning commission, the board of adjustment, and the city
council under this title before the application can be acted upon, the community development department shall set a date, time and place for the matter
to be heard and shall give notice of said hearing by mailing a written notice, postage prepaid, containing the date, time and place of hearing, not less
than four (4) calendar days and not more than twenty (20) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, to the applicant, the owner of the property
involved, and to the owners of the property situated within a radius of three hundred seventy feet (370'), including public right of way, of the exterior
boundaries of the parcel(s) on which the proposed use is to be located. Names and addresses shall be obtained by the applicant from the last
equalized assessment roll. In addition to the mailed notice, a notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance
with the Iowa Code. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
B. Hearing Procedures: The decision making authority(s) or the advisory body shall hold at least one hearing on any duly filed application that requires a
discretionary decision. All public hearings as defined in this title shall be conducted in accordance with the Iowa Code and this title. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-
1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 456/687
C. Hearing Quorum: A quorum for a hearing before the commission, board of adjustment, or the city council shall consist of four (4), three (3), and three
(3) members respectively. The approval of any decision or permit, or other matters brought before the respective body, requires the concurrence of a
majority of the quorum except in those cases where state law or the rules of procedure for the respective body state otherwise. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
D. Referrals: A decision making authority may refer a matter back to the preceding hearing body for a further report, information or study.
E. Continued Matters: If it is necessary to continue the hearing or decision on any matter before the decision making authority, the person presiding at the
hearing shall, before adjournment thereof, publicly announce the date, time and place to which the matter will be continued. No further notice need be
given. If no date is set for a continued hearing, then new hearing notice is required. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
F. Decisions:
1. Decision Options: Either the director of community development, the commission, the board of adjustment, or the city council, as the case may be,
hearing a discretionary matter may approve, deny or modify, wholly or partly, the request being reviewed. The authority may impose such conditions
and limitations as it deems necessary to assure that the general purpose and intent of this title and its various chapters will be observed, and that the
public interest, health, safety, convenience and welfare will be served. In absence of any provision to the contrary in a decision granting a request,
said request is granted as set forth in the application. All conditions and restrictions applied to a decision on a project not appealed shall
automatically continue to govern and limit the subject use or structure for the duration of the entitlement. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
2. Notice Of Decision: Not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the day a decision is rendered, the director of community development shall
send, by regular United States mail, the decision making authority's decision in a resolution or letter form to be mailed to the applicant or appellant,
as the case may be, in care of the address appearing on the application or such other address designated in writing by the applicant or appellant.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
3. Finality Of Decision: An administrative decision or a decision of the director of community development, the commission, the board of adjustment, or
the city council, shall become final and conclusive at the expiration of the decision's appeal period unless, prior to the expiration of said period of
appeal, an appeal in proper form and with the appropriate fees is duly filed with the department of community development. The filing of such an
appeal shall automatically stay all proceedings in furtherance of the subject application request. Neither the applicant nor any enforcement agency
may rely on an authority's decision until the expiration of the decision's appeal period or until the appeal has been resolved, whichever period expires
later. (Ord. 1607, 10-25-2004)
4. City Council Review Of Minor Modifications: If a minor modification of a project is approved or conditionally approved, the city council may decide,
within the appeal period of ten (10) business days, whether to review the project and the conditions imposed by the director of community
development or the commission.
If the city council decides to review the project and conditions, it shall set the matter for a public hearing as provided in this section and hear the
matter or direct the commission to hear the matter upon written notice to the applicant.
At that hearing, the city council or the commission may add, modify or delete conditions when the council or commission, as the case may be,
determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the project conforms to conditions imposed upon the property and applicable city
ordinances, comprehensive plan and other policies.
If the city council does not act within the ten (10) business day appeal period, the decision of the commission or director of community development
shall be deemed final. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
5. Implementation: The director of community development shall be responsible for reviewing the decisions mentioned in this chapter and any other
paper or document required by the commission, the board of adjustment, or the city council in order to discharge his duties and responsibilities under
this title and chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to ensure that all conditions placed on a permit are met. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
G. Reapplication: An application request may be denied with prejudice. If such denial is not appealed, then no further application for the denied request
shall be filed in whole or in part for the ensuing eighteen (18) months except as otherwise specified at the time of denial. An application request may be
denied with prejudice on the grounds that two (2) or more similar application requests have been denied in the past two (2) years, or that other good
cause exists for limiting the filing of an application with respect to the property. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-11: MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION FOR CAUSE:
A. Modification, Suspension And Revocation: Any permit or variance heretofore or hereafter granted may be modified or revoked, or its use suspended by
the decision making authority through the public hearing process for any of the following reasons:
1. That the term(s) or condition(s) of the permit or variance has not been complied with;
2. That the property subject to the permit or variance, or any portion thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or
regulation;
3. That the use for which the variance or permit was granted has been exercised for at least twelve (12) consecutive months or has ceased to exist, or
has been abandoned;
4. That the use for which the permit or variance was granted has been exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals or general
welfare or as to constitute a nuisance;
5. That changes in technology, or in the type or amount of development in the vicinity of the use, or other good cause warrants modification of
conditions of operation or imposition of additional conditions of operation to assure that the use remains compatible with existing and potential uses
of other property within the general area in which the use is located. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 457/687
B. Nonwaiver: The failure of the Director of Community Development, the commission, the Board of Adjustment, or the City Council to revoke a variance or
permit or suspend its use whenever cause therefor exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for
revocation or suspension of the use. (Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001)
C. Prohibition: No person shall carry on any of the operations authorized to be performed under the terms of any permit during any period of suspension
thereof, or after the revocation thereof, or pending a judgment of court upon any application for writ taken to review the decision order of the final
appeal body in the City in suspending or revoking such permit; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
performance of such operations as may be necessary in connection with a diligent and bona fide effort to cure and remedy the default, noncompliance
or violation, for which a suspension of the permit was ordered by the City, or such operations as may be required by other laws and regulations for the
safety of persons and protection and preservation of property. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-12: EFFECT OF CHANGE OF ZONING REGULATIONS:
A. Uses Requiring Entitlements: Any construction, expansion or alteration of a use of land or structures and any approved entitlement on the date of
adoption of an ordinance amendment may be completed as authorized in the entitlement and in accordance with this title.
B. Due Only To Changes In The Type Of Permit Required: Whenever adoption of this title or an amendment thereto results only in a requirement for a
different permit for the same existing use, the property being used shall be governed by the following provisions:
1. If the use affected is existing lawfully as a permitted use of any kind, the existing use is hereby conforming without any further action. Any
modification or expansions of the use, change of use, terms of use, or additional use shall conform to this title as it may be modified, including
requirements for a new type of entitlement.
2. If the use affected is under an entitlement that has an expiration date or clause and the new regulation requires a different entitlement, the use may
continue until the expiration date or clause specified in the entitlement, at which time one of the following actions shall occur:
a. The applicant may file for the required entitlement or renewal under this title;
b. The entitlement expires and the use shall terminate. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-1-13: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
Requirements for floodplain development permits, and all associated information, provisions, and stipulations shall be as described in the floodplain
management ordinance adopted in its entirety in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
9-1-14: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authority: The City Council may, from time to time on its own action or on petition, after public notice and hearing as provided by law and after report by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently established, and such
amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of a majority of all the members of the City Council. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
B. Petition For Amendment: Whenever any person desires that any amendment or change be made in this title, including the text and/or zone plan, as to
any property in the City, and there shall be presented to the Director of Development Services a petition requesting such change or amendment and
clearly describing the property and its boundaries as to which the change or amendment is desired, duly signed by the owners of fifty percent (50%) of
the area of all real estate included within the boundaries of said tract as described in said petition, and in addition, duly signed by the owners of fifty
percent (50%) of the area of all real estate lying outside of said tract but within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the boundaries thereof and intervening
streets and alleys not to be included in computing such two hundred fifty feet (250'), it shall be the duty of the Council to vote upon such petition within
ninety (90) days after the filing of the report from the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 2255, 10-16-2017)
C. Amendment Disapproval Or Protest: In case the proposed amendment, supplement or change be disapproved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, or a protest be presented duly signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the area of the lots included in such
proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof, extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed two hundred feet (200')
therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto, extending the depth of one lot nor not to exceed two hundred feet (200') from the street frontage of
such opposite lots, such amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the
Council. Whenever any petition for an amendment, supplement or change of the zoning or regulations herein contained or subsequently established
shall have been denied by the City Council, then no new petition covering the same property to the same property or the same property and additional
property shall be filed with or considered by the City Council until one year shall have elapsed from the date of action by the City Council on the first
petition. In the event the appellant withdraws the petition for rezoning prior to final action by the City Council, no new petition covering the same
property or the same property and additional property shall be filed with or considered by the City Council until six (6) months shall have elapsed from
the date of withdrawal.
D. Fee: Before any action shall be taken as provided in this section, the party or parties proposing or recommending a change in the district regulations or
district boundaries shall deposit with the City the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the approximate costs of this procedure and under no
conditions shall said sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of said amendment to be enacted into law. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-15: ENFORCEMENT:
The Director of Community Development is hereby designated and ordered to enforce this title. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 458/687
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this title, the Director of Community
Development, in addition to other remedies, shall institute any proper action or proceedings in the name of the City to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-16: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title, upon
conviction, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. In the event that the City seeks court intervention for violation of
any provision of this title, the City may seek reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and administrative costs. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
Chapter 2
ZONING RULES AND DEFINITIONS
9-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
A. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
B. The word shall is mandatory, the word may is permissive.
C. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.
D. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel", and all other words or phrases used to denote an individual site which complies with the minimum
provisions of this title. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS: Living quarters within an accessory building for the sole use of persons fully employed on the premises or for the
temporary use by guests of the occupants of the premises.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure, equipment or building containing a subordinate use or serving a purpose customarily incidental to the primary
use of the principal building on the lot. Accessory structures must be a permanent structure, complying with all applicable Fire and Building Codes and do
not include tents as defined herein.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, DETACHED: A structure or building that is an independent structure and meets or exceeds the minimum separation distance
for the zoning district as noted in chapter 7 of this title. Detached accessory structures or buildings include but are not limited to garages, sheds, carports,
equipment and trash enclosures, fences, pools and gazebos.
ACCESSORY USE: A use subordinate to or serving a purpose customarily incidental to the primary use.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including animal husbandry, apiculture, dairying, farming, floriculture, forestry, groves,
horticulture, orchards, poultry husbandry, ranching, viticulture, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or sorting the produce; however, the
operation of the accessory uses shall be subordinate to that of the normal agricultural activities.
AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION, CROPS: A commercial establishment (farms, orchards, greenhouses, nurseries) primarily engaged in the production of
crops (grains, fruits, and vegetables), plants, vines, and trees for sale or for the production of other products.
AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION, LIVESTOCK AND ANIMAL SPECIALTIES: A commercial establishment (farms, ranches, dairies, feedlots, egg production
or broiler facilities, hatcheries, and apiaries) primarily engaged in the keeping of animals for sale or for the production of animal products.
AIRPORT: The Des Moines Municipal Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The reference point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea level, which elevation is established to
be nine hundred fifty eight feet (958') mean sea level (MSL).
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or tree or use of land which would exceed the Federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 Code of Federal
Regulations sections 77.21, 77.23, and 77.25 as revised March 4, 1972, and which obstruct the air space required for the flight of aircraft and landing or
takeoff at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of an aircraft.
AIRPORT PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary
surface extends two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part
77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on
the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
AIRSPACE HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in chapter 13 of this title and shown on the airport hazard and
height (overlay) zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
ALLEY: Any public space or thoroughfare less than twenty feet (20') but no less than ten feet (10') in width which has been dedicated or deeded to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 459/687
public for public use.
AMENDMENT: A change in the wording, context or substance of this title, or a change in the zoning or district boundaries of the "official zoning map", a
part of this title, when adopted by ordinance passed by the proper authoritative body in the manner prescribed by law.
ANTIQUE STORE: Antiques are items belonging to the past. The items sold, to include collectibles, are items that are collected or desirable because of
craftsmanship, age, rarity, personal emotion connection, or other unique features, may be part of a group of similar items and generally are more valuable
than their original worth. Stores typically are organized to provide for one point of sale, even if individual stalls are rented. For this definition these stores
do not include flea markets, secondhand stores or used merchandise stores as defined elsewhere in this section. This definition does not include a
business which primarily engages in selling new merchandise, parts, or services.
APARTMENT HOTEL: A building designed for or containing both individual guestrooms or suites of rooms and rooms or suites of rooms for dwelling units
(see definition of dwelling, multi-family).
APARTMENT HOUSE OR BUILDING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is
occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building, and
shall include flats and apartments.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM): An automated device that performs banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling
financial institution.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles
or their parts. The presence on any lot, parcel or tract of land, of five (5) or more vehicles which for a period exceeding thirty (30) days have not been
capable of operating under their own power, and from which parts have been removed or are to be removed for reuse, salvage, or sale, shall constitute
prima facie evidence of an automobile wrecking yard.
BAR OR SALOON: Any place devoted primarily to the selling, serving or dispensing and drinking of malt, vinous, or other alcoholic beverages, or any
place where any sign is exhibited or displayed indicating that alcoholic beverages are obtainable within or thereon, and where such beverages are
consumed on the premises (see also definitions of cocktail lounge, cabaret; nightclub and tavern).
BASEMENT: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height
regulation, providing the finished floor level directly above is not more than six feet (6') above grade (see definitions of basement walkout, cellar, and
story).
BASEMENT WALKOUT: A basement having a portion of its finished floor not more than four feet (4') below the finished yard grade at any of its exterior
walls and having not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the vertical height of an exterior wall, which has a ground level exit to the outside, above ground. A
walkout basement shall be considered the ground floor level of the building and shall be counted as a story (see definitions of basement, cellar, and story).
BEER PARLOR (TAPROOM): An area within a brewery devoted to the sale and consumption of a limited variety of malt beverages typically brewed on site
(SIC 5813 taprooms and beer parlors and SIC 2082 manufacturing of malt beverages). This definition only applies to taprooms that are ancillary to and
included in a brewery, with the brewery being the primary use. Any other establishment for the sale and consumption of beer will be considered a bar for
the purposes of this definition.
BILLBOARD: All structures, regardless of the base or materials used in construction of the same, that are erected, maintained or used for public display of
posters, painted signs, wall signs, whether the structure be placed on the wall or painted on the wall itself, pictures or other pictorial reading matter which
advertises a business or attraction which is not carried on or manufactured in or upon the premises upon which said signs or billboards are located.
BLOCK: All that property frontage along one thoroughfare lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, railroad right-of-way,
waterway, golf course, campus, park or other similar open space.
BOARD: The Board of Adjustment1.
BOUNDARY OF DISTRICT: The centerline of a street or right-of-way or the centerline of the alleyway, between the rear or side property lines or, where no
alley or passageway exists, the rear or side property lines of all lots bordering on any district limits or any district boundary shown on the maps adopted by
this title.
BREWERY: A business that produces brews, ales, beer, meads and/or similar beverages on site (SIC 2082 manufacturing of malt beverages).
BUILDING: A building is any structure used or intended for sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the average finished ground grade at the building line to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or
to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: The extreme overall dimensions of a building as determined from its exterior walls or any part of a primary structural support or
component, which is nearest to the property line. Horizontally projecting roof overhangs and chimneys into the setback up to two feet (2') shall be
permitted, provided no part of a side of a building for residential occupancy which is not attached to another building shall be closer than five feet (5') to a
lot line or within ten feet (10') of another building.
BUILDING SITE: The ground area of one lot; or the ground area of two (2) or more lots which have been combined for the use of one building or permitted
group of buildings, together with all open spaces required by this title (see definition of lot).
BULK STATIONS: Distributing stations, commonly known as bulk or tank stations, used for the storage and distribution of flammable liquids or liquefied
petroleum products, where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks is more than twelve thousand (12,000) gallons.
BUSINESS: See definition of place of business.
CAMPGROUND (SPORTING AND RECREATIONAL CAMPS): Permanent buildings, temporary buildings or vehicles including, but not limited to, cabins,
tents, camp trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, or similar movable or temporary sleeping quarters of any kind established or maintained as a temporary
living quarter for recreation, religious, education or vacation purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 460/687
CAR WASH: A building or area that provides facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing or waxing of motor vehicles.
CARPORT: An accessory structure serving as a covered parking area for motor vehicles. When a carport has wall enclosures on more than two (2) sides
that keep out the elements, it ceases to be a carport and will be considered a garage and must comply with fire separation requirements based on its
proximity from the primary structure.
CELLAR: That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade (as defined in this title) and so located that the vertical
distance from grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling (see definition of story).
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead, including mausoleums and columbariums when operated in conjunction with and
within the boundary of such cemetery.
CENTERLINE, PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE: The line running parallel with the thoroughfare right-of-way which is half the distance between the extreme
edges of the official right-of-way width.
CERTIFIED SURVEY: A sketch, plan, map, or other exhibit bearing a written statement of its accuracy or conformity to specified standards which is signed
and sealed by a registered surveyor.
CHANNEL: Any natural or artificial watercourse exhibiting definite banks, boundaries, and beds, and which contains visible evidence of flow or occurrence
of water.
CHANNEL FLOW: That water and material discharge which moves within the limits of the defined channel.
CHURCH: Any building or site whose primary use is public religious worship.
CLUB: An association or persons for some common nonprofit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is
customarily carried on as a business.
COCKTAIL LOUNGE, CABARET: Any place of business, other than a "nightclub", located in and accessory to a hotel, motel, or restaurant, where liquor,
beer or wine is sold for consumption on the premises, where music or other entertainment is limited to a piano bar or other one person performance and
dancing is prohibited (see also definitions of tavern, and nightclub).
COFFEE SHOP: An establishment primarily selling coffee and tea products; the business has a limited menu within which nothing is considered a meal;
there is little or no table service; the products are for consumption on or off premises; and it is characterized by a large carryout clientele. The sale of other
food, beverages, or merchandise is incidental to the sale of the specialty beverage. Patrons generally order at a cash register and pay before they eat.
This establishment is not a stand alone facility, but is generally located within small shopping centers.
COMMERCIAL USE: The barter, exchange, sale, service or trade of goods, materials, or services, either tangible or intangible for financial, material or
monetary gain.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission2.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: All references to the "Community Development Department", "Department of Community Development", or any other
variation of these terms in this Code shall mean "Department of Development Services". All references to the "Director of Community Development",
"Community Development Director", and "Director of Development Services", "Development Services Director", or any variation of these terms in this
Code shall mean "Development Planning and Inspection Manager or his/her designee".
CONDITIONAL PERMIT: A permit issued in view of specified conditions, limitations or restrictions, and which is subject to review or cancellation by the
issuing department.
CONVENIENCE STORES: A retail establishment that offers for sale convenience goods such as prepackaged food products, limited on site prepared food
or fresh food, beer and alcohol, tobacco, periodicals, and miscellaneous household goods and automobile accessories. Convenience stores may have
extended hours. Convenience stores may or may not sell automobile fuel. Convenience stores as defined here do not include any type of automobile
repair or parts sales and are not considered to be grocery stores.
COUNCIL: The City Council of West Des Moines.
COURT: A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
CROWN OF ROAD: The grade at the centerline of the pavement within a public thoroughfare, or where no pavement exists, grade at the right-of-way
centerline.
DELAYED DEPOSIT SERVICES BUSINESS: A person or individual, group of individuals, partnership, association, corporation, or any other business unit
or legal entity who for a fee does either of the following:
A. Accepts a check, draft, share draft, or other instrument for the payment of money dated subsequent to the date it was written.
B. Accepts a check, draft, share draft, or other instrument for the payment of money dated on the date it was written and holds it for a period of time
prior to deposit or presentment pursuant to an agreement with, or any representation made to, the maker of the check, draft, or other instrument
whether express or implied.
DETACHED TOWNHOME: A single-family dwelling unit, individually owned and not part of two (2) or more units in the same structure. There is community
ownership and maintenance of grounds, streets, and other areas of common interest by a master property owners' association. Each dwelling unit may or
may not be constructed on separate lots, but all have street frontage and separate entrances.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DISTILLERY: A business that produces an alcoholic product by the process of distillation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 461/687
DISTRICT: A section or sections of land area, depicted on the official zoning map, within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and
premises or the area of buildings and premises are uniform.
DOG KENNEL: Any premises on which five (5) or more dogs, six (6) months old or older, are kept or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and
which are kept under constant restraint.
DRIVE-IN/DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: Any portion of a building or structure from which business is transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly
with customers located in a motor vehicle during such business transactions.
DUMP: A premises used for the disposal of "clean" type fill or refuse such as dirt, rocks, cans, tree branches and similar materials, but not including
organic matter of any type such as garbage or dead animals or portions thereof.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building or buildings on a common lot, containing three (3) or more dwelling units of which at least one unit is located over
another unit, commonly known as an apartment building or condominium building, but does not include single-family attached dwellings as defined herein.
Each individual multi-family dwelling unit may be occupied by a single "family", as defined herein, or by any number of individuals living together as a
single housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises, as distinguished from a hotel.
DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT: A building, a portion of a building or one or more habitable rooms providing living facilities including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, but do not include hotels, motels, and nursing or convalescent homes.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A building with at least two (2) single-family dwelling units attached in a row, with no unit located over another
unit, and designed for and used exclusively for residential purposes by one family per dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY BI-ATTACHED: A building designed for and used exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each
other and containing two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A detached building, on a building site, designed for and used exclusively for residential purposes by one
family and containing one dwelling unit.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION: A machine that is considered a fuel pump providing electrical power, solely for charging electric vehicles on
site.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION - RENEWABLE ENERGY: An electric vehicle charging station that generates the majority of the electrical
power it provides by wind or solar generation.
ENCROACHMENT LINE OR LIMIT: The boundary line which delineates the floodway and designates the width of the channel and minimum width of
overbank areas needed for conveying the regulatory flood.
EVENT VENUE: A commercial facility for hosting functions with the option of having food or drink regardless whether such is provided during the event,
including, but not limited to, weddings, receptions, banquets, anniversaries, and similar celebrations. May also be used for meeting space, conferences, or
other assembly uses. A small event venue is five thousand (5,000) gross square feet or less in size. A large event venue is over five thousand (5,000)
gross square feet in size. A commercial facility is one that charges a fee to use the space, charges an entry fee or cover charge to attend the event, or
charges money for food and/or beverages. See chapters 10, "Performance Standards", and 15, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title for further
regulations. Does not include SIC 58 eating and drinking places.
FIRM: See definition of flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
FACTORY BUILT OR MODULAR STRUCTURE: A structure, which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building site. For the purpose of this title, a factory built or modular structure would
not include a manufactured or mobile home constructed under the authority of 42 USC section 5403 (United States Code - Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards).
FAMILY: A. Individuals who live together as a single housekeeping unit and do their cooking on the premises. The definition of "family" does not include
the following:
1. More than eight (8) people who are:
a. Residents of a "family home" as defined in section 414.22, 414.30 and 414.31 of the Iowa Code and this section; or
b. "Handicapped" as defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 USC section 3602(h). This definition does not include those persons currently illegally
using or addicted to a "controlled substance" as defined in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC section 802(6).
2. Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, coterie, or like organization;
3. Substance abuse rehabilitation facility; and
4. Any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement as a result of criminal offenses.
FAMILY HOME: A community based residential home which is licensed as a residential care facility under chapter 135C of the Iowa Code or as a child
foster care facility under chapter 237 of the Iowa Code to provide room and board, personal care, habilitation services, and supervision in a family
environment exclusively for not more than eight (8) persons with a developmental disability or brain injury and any necessary support personnel. However,
family home does not mean an individual foster care family home licensed under chapter 237 of the Iowa Code.
FARM: An area comprising ten (10) acres or more which is used for agriculture.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 462/687
FILLING STATION: See definition of gas station.
FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, lettering, patterns, or symbols.
FLAGPOLE: A ground mounted independent structure, used to display a flag.
FLEA MARKET: A market for secondhand articles where sellers or vendors typically have individual stalls with their own point of sale. A fee to enter the
market may or may not be charged.
FLOOD: Any rise in channel flow which results in water or material exceeding channel banks, overflowing, and inundating areas adjacent to the channel
not ordinarily covered by flow.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The map produced by the Federal Insurance Administration showing, within the City of West Des Moines,
expected flood areas, and such other notations as are necessary to establish actuarial rates for the sale of flood insurance within the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: A study initiated, funded and published by the Federal Insurance Administration for the purpose of evaluating in detail the
existence and severity of flood hazards; providing the City with the necessary information for adopting a floodplain management program; and establishing
actuarial flood insurance rates.
FLOOD PROFILE: A graph showing longitudinal sections of a designed waterway and the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to
any location along the watercourse.
FLOOD STAGE: The height or elevation of a flood as referred to mean sea level (MSL) datum (0.00 City datum equals 773.84 MSL).
FLOODPLAIN, GENERAL: Any area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, lake or quarry which has been or hereafter may be covered by floodwaters.
The floodplain shall be composed of the floodway and the floodway fringe.
FLOODPROOFING: Any structural or nonstructural feature, addition, change, or adjustment to buildings, structures and properties primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damage to land, water, sanitary facilities, buildings, structures, and contents of buildings. Such measures shall be
designated consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, durations, rates of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. Floodproofing measures may include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Anchorage to resist flotation.
B. Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters.
C. Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
D. Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls.
E. Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation.
F. Cutoff valves on sewer lines or elimination of gravity flow basement drains.
G. Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris; construction of any type so as to prevent the entrance of
floodwaters.
H. Pumping facilities for subsurface external foundation walls and basement floor pressures, or installation of pumps to lower water levels inside
structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of any watercourse and the adjacent portion of the floodplain that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a specified height at any point assuming equal conveyance reduction outside the
channel from the two (2) sides of the floodplain.
FLOODWAY BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP: The map produced by the Federal Insurance Administration showing under the 100-year flood
conditions, boundaries of the floodway, floodway fringe, and floodplain for watercourses in the community.
FLOODWAY FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain landward of the encroachment limit which shall from time to time be inundated by floodwaters.
Flooding in the fringe area is generally characterized by shallower and slower moving floodwaters.
FREEBOARD: A safety factor indicating the height above a projected flood occurrence level to which a levee or floodwall is constructed.
FRONTAGE: The distance of a front lot line as measured along the public thoroughfare (see definition of lot lines: front).
FUEL PUMP: A machine that is used to dispense fuel.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY: A structure, or a series of structures under one roof, and under one ownership, used primarily for storage of vehicles by three (3)
or more owners or occupants of property in the vicinity.
GARAGE, MECHANICAL: A structure in which major mechanical repair or rebuilding of motor powered vehicles is performed for commercial gain and in
which the storage, care and minor servicing is an accessory use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 463/687
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building, or a portion of a building, not more than one thousand (1,000) square feet in area, in which only motor vehicles used by
the tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any garage other than a private garage.
GARDEN, COMMERCIAL: See definition of agriculture production, crops.
GARDEN, COMMUNITY: A piece of ground on public or private property where vegetables, fruits, herbs or ornamental plants are cultivated for the use of
others in addition to the owner or tenant, but not intended for commercial production.
GARDEN, RECREATIONAL: A piece of ground on private property where vegetables, fruits, herbs or ornamental plants are cultivated for the personal use
of the owner or tenant.
GAS STATION: A structure designed or used for the retail sale or supply of fuels, lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities or accessories for
motor vehicles and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities or accessories on or in such vehicles, but not
including space or facilities for the storage, painting, repair, refinishing, bodywork or other major servicing of motor vehicles.
GRADE: The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet (5') of a sidewalk,
alley or other public way, the aboveground level shall be measured at the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way.
GREENHOUSE: A building or accessory structure constructed chiefly of glass or other hard translucent material, which is devoted to the protection or
cultivation of flowers or other tender plants. Greenhouses constructed of light weight translucent materials such as fabric or plastic are hoop houses and
are considered seasonal in nature.
HALF STORY: A story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the
floor area of the floor immediately below it.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING: See definition of building, height of.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local Inventory of Historic Places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession conducted solely by the resident occupants at their place of residence, involving primarily service and
limited sale of commodities upon the premises.
HOOP HOUSE: A building or accessory structure constructed of a framework of hoops or bows and covered by light weight translucent materials, which is
devoted only to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants and are considered seasonal in nature (in service up to 180 days). Hoop
houses cannot be utilized for the storage of items or vehicles. Semi-opaque or opaque material cannot be utilized as a covering material.
HOSPITAL: An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary and emergency service of a medical or surgical nature to injured persons and patients,
other than persons suffering from a lingering mental sickness, disease, disorder or ailment.
HOTEL: Any commercial building containing six (6) or more guestrooms intended or designed to be used or which are used, rented or hired out to be
occupied by transient persons, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. These facilities customarily provide maid service, upkeep of
furniture and bed linens and a twenty four (24) hour staffed front desk service.
IMPROVEMENT, SUBSTANTIAL: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is started, or b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not,
however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
JUNK: Old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors and other such vehicles and parts thereof, wagons and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof,
scrap, used building material, scrap contractor's equipment, tanks, casks, cans, barrels, boxes, drums, piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags,
paper excelsior, hair, mattresses, beds or bedding, or any other kind of scrap or waste material which is stored, kept, handled or displayed for barter,
resale, reuse, salvage, stripping, or trade (see also definition of trash).
JUNKYARD: Any area where junk is bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled or handled, including house wrecking yards, used lumber
yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking or structural steel material and equipment; but not including areas where such uses are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 464/687
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials necessary as a part of
manufacturing operations.
KENNEL: See definition of dog kennel.
KITCHEN: Any room or portion of a building used, intended or designed to be used for cooking and other preparation of food, including any room having a
sink and provisions for either a gas or electric stove.
LOADING SPACE: Any off street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking (less than
24 hours) of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LONG TERM RENTAL: Lodging within a dwelling unit available for use or is used to accommodate guests paying a fee or other compensation for a period
greater than thirty one (31) consecutive days.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development.
LOT LINES: A. Front: The line separating the front of the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, either of the two (2) lot lines separating the front of
the lot and public street right-of-way may be considered the front lot line.
B. Rear: The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In case of an interior triangular or gore shaped lot, it
shall mean a straight line ten feet (10') in length which:
1. Is parallel to the front lot line or its chord.
2. Intersects the two (2) other lot lines at points most distant from the front lot line.
C. Side: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT MEASUREMENTS: A. Area: The gross area, exclusive of streets or other public rights-of-way, within the boundary lines of a lot.
B. Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines as measured perpendicular to the midpoint of the mean front lot line. In the
case of an interior triangular or gore shaped lot, the depth shall be the horizontal distance between the midpoints at the front and rear lot lines.
C. Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured perpendicular to the line compromising the lot depth at its point of intersection
with the required minimum front setback. Where the lot width is decreasing from front to rear, the horizontal distance between the side lot lines as
described above shall be measured at its point of intersection with the required minimum rear setback.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the deed of which is recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by
metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT TYPES: A. Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, and having the street right-of-way abut the front and one or more
side lines of the lot.
B. Double Frontage Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street or public thoroughfare which do not intersect one another.
C. Flag Lot: A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor.
D. Interior Lot: A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on but one street or public thoroughfare.
E. Key Lot: A lot so subdivided as to have its side lines coincide with the rear lot lines of adjacent lots on either or both sides of the aforesaid key lots.
F. Reversed Frontage Lot: A corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first interior lot to its rear.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection
9-12-5B4a of this title; and
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage; and
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot (1')
above the 100-year flood level; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 465/687
D. The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies subsections A, B, C and D of this definition, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest
enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
MAIL BOX: A public or private box for U.S. mail purposes. This definition does not include courier services (SIC 4215).
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME: A structure which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 USC section 5403 (United States
Code - Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards) and is intended to be long term living quarters, permitted and taxed as real property. It is
not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and
which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A manufactured or mobile home must be on a permanent foundation
with permanent connections to utility services. Mobile homes constructed prior to 1976 shall be considered this type of structure.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land under common ownership upon which two (2) or more manufactured
or mobile homes reside as a land-leased community. A manufactured or mobile home park does not include manufactured or mobile homes or park homes
placed on a temporary basis due to a disaster emergency.
MARIJUANA: The plant Cannabis Sativa L. or Cannabis Indica or any other plant that contains tetrahydrocannabinol.
MEMBRANE STRUCTURE: A building or accessory structure constructed partially or completely with a fabric membrane supported by air, cables,
structural frames or tensile frames, which is devoted to the protection of bulk materials such as gravel, road stone, roadway salt, sand, soil, etc., and is
considered permanent in nature (in service greater than 180 days). A tent or hoop house, as defined elsewhere in this title, shall not be considered a
membrane structure. See chapter 10 of this title for specific requirements for membrane structures.
MENTAL INSTITUTION, HOSPITAL OR HOME: An institution specializing in giving clinical and psychiatric aid and treatment to and in conjunction with the
housing of persons and patients suffering from a temporary or lingering mental ailment, disorder or sickness.
MOTEL OR MOTOR HOTEL: A commercial building or group of two (2) or more buildings designed to provide sleeping accommodation for transient
persons or overnight guests, with garage attached or parking facilities conveniently located to each such unit. These facilities customarily provide maid
service, upkeep of furniture and bed linens and a twenty four (24) hour staffed front desk service.
NIGHTCLUB: Any place of business located within any building or establishment, established and operated for the purpose of supplying entertainment or
music, or both, and providing meals and refreshments prepared on the premises, having a seating capacity of not less than forty (40) people at tables,
providing a dance floor containing not less than three hundred eight (308) square feet, and serving beer, wine or liquor for consumption on the premises.
NONCONFORMING USE: The use of a building or a land or any portion thereof, which was lawfully established and maintained but which, because of the
application of this title to it, no longer conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.
NONPROFIT INSTITUTION: A nonprofit establishment maintained and operated by a society, corporation, individual, foundation or public agency for the
purpose of providing charitable, social, educational or similar services to the public, groups or individuals. Cooperative nonprofit associations, performing a
service normally associated with retail sales or trade such as cooperative groceries, granaries, equipment sales, etc., shall not be considered a nonprofit
institution under this title.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: A building or structure having accommodations and where care is provided for invalid, infirm, aged,
convalescent, or physically disabled persons, not including insane or other mental cases, inebriated or contagious cases.
OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, dike, embankment, structure, building, wall, wharf, pile, abutment, projection, levee, excavation, channel rectification, bridge,
conduit, culvert, wire, fence, refuse, fill, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or floodplain area which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water or that is placed where the flow
of water might carry the same downstream, to the damage of life or property.
OFF STREET PARKING: A land surface or facility located off of a street or alley constructed to provide vehicle parking and loading area for day to day use
by owners, tenants, patrons and employees of office, commercial or industrial establishments; and residents, owners, and visitors of residential
developments and apartment complexes; and driveways or private garages associated with individual homes. Said "off street parking" area shall include
parking spaces, vehicle and pedestrian aisles, access drives and any required landscape islands and pods.
OUTDOOR STORAGE YARD: That portion of a site used or intended for the storage, stockpiling, safekeeping and loading and unloading of materials,
operable vehicles or equipment necessary to achieve the purpose of the primary use and which are not being specifically displayed as merchandise or for
the purpose of outdoor display and marketing of goods associated with retail establishments (see definition of outside display areas).
OUTSIDE DISPLAY AREAS: A defined area generally outside of a primary enclosed structure but located upon the same lot which is used for the
placement of equipment for sale or lease or the advertising of merchandise or goods vended within the contiguous business or organization. Bulk storage
of retail merchandise being sold within an establishment such as, but not limited to, bagged mulch and soil products through a garden center associated
with a home improvement store, shall be interpreted to be an allowable component of outside display areas.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: A district which overlays and acts in conjunction with the underlying zoning district or districts.
PARK HOME OR PARK MODEL: A trailer which is four hundred (400) or less square feet in gross trailer area, certified by their manufacturers as
complying with the ANSI A119.5 standard for recreational park trailers or constructed to comply with 2018 International Residential Code, appendix V, and
is intended for long term placement of temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or seasonal use purposes only, permitted and taxed as a trailer.
A park home may have wheels and is not placed on a permanent foundation, however must be anchored to the ground to resist Code designated wind
forces. Park homes will not have permanent connections to utility services.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open area, other than a street or alley, which is used for the temporary parking of more than four (4) automobiles and is
available for public use whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: An area other than a street or alley, reserved for the parking of a private transportation vehicle, such space having a
dimension of not less than nine feet (9') in width by nineteen feet (19') in depth, plus such additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and
egress.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 466/687
PAWNSHOP: A place of business of a "pawnbroker" as defined in section 3-8-1 of this Code.
PERSON: A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and also includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any vehicle, building, structure, yard, area, lot, premises, or part thereof, or any other place in or on which one or more persons
engage in a gainful occupation.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission3.
PREMISES: Any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land, building or buildings, structure or structures, used publicly or privately as a place of business, dwelling or
meeting place.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building situated or to be placed nearest the front property line and the use of which conforms to the primary use permitted by
the zoning classification in which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or structures, as distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE: Any right-of-way under the jurisdiction and maintenance of the governmental agencies of the Federal, State and Municipal
government; which may be used by the public in general; and which serves as the frontage street to the abutting property (see definition of street).
PUBLIC UTILITY STRUCTURE: Shall mean any above ground structure, except a tower, antenna or utility pole and associated appurtenances, which is
placed on a site in a permanent manner to facilitate the provision of utility services to the benefit of the public.
REACH: A term describing a longitudinal section of a stream, river or watercourse.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY: A public or private building, structure, enclosure, field or defined area used for a specific purpose or function usually related to
a competitive or sporting activity, exercise or relaxation.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A single chassis trailer or motor vehicle which is four hundred (400) or less square feet when measured at the largest
horizontal projection and is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable, permitted and taxed as a trailer or motor vehicle. Recreational vehicles
are designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational or camping, travel or seasonal use purposes only. Recreational vehicles will not have
permanent connections to utility services.
REGULATORY FLOOD: For purposes of this title, the regulatory flood is designated as the 100-year return frequency flood which is a flood having a one
percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation indicated on the FIRM and determined from flood profiles contained in the West Des Moines flood
insurance study, the Jordan Creek floodplain study and other available studies as being the elevation of the 100-year flood.
RESIDENTIAL: The term "residential" or "residence" is applied herein to any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, or piece of land or any building used exclusively
for family dwelling purposes or intended to be used, including concomitant uses specified herein.
REST HOME: A home operated as a boarding home, and in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are furnished to convalescents, invalids
and aged persons; but in which no persons suffering from a mental sickness, disease, disorder or ailment or from a contagious or communicable disease
are kept, and in which no surgical or other primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanatoriums or hospitals are performed.
RESTAURANT: A building, room or rooms, not operated as a dining room in connection with a hotel, motel or other multiple dwelling, where food is
prepared and served to a group of families, a club or to the public and for consumption on the premises.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food, frozen desserts, or beverages in ready to consume
individual servings, for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carryout, and where either: a) foods, frozen desserts or beverages are
usually served in paper, plastic or other disposable containers, and where customers are not served their food, frozen dessert or beverage by a restaurant
employee at the same table or counter where the items are consumed; or b) the establishment includes a drive-up or drive-through service facility or offers
curb service.
RESUBDIVISION: Any change in the shape or size of any lot, tract or parcel of land previously platted for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
sale, rent, lease, building development, anchorages or other use. Any change in the shape or size of any lot, tract or parcel of land previously approved for
building purposes whether immediate or future and regardless whether or not the same is vacant or improved in whole or in part, for sale, rent, lease,
building development, anchorage or other use.
RUNWAY: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
RUNWAYS 12L, 3OR: The runways of the Des Moines Municipal Airport with hazard zones which impact the City of West Des Moines.
SANATORIUM: A health station or retreat or other place where resident patients are kept, and where medical or surgical treatment is given to persons
suffering from a sickness, disease, disorder or ailment other than a mental sickness, disease, disorder or ailment, but which does not specialize in giving
clinical, temporary or emergency service.
SCOREBOARD: An on site structure used exclusively to transmit to patrons of a stadium or recreational facility information primarily related to the activity
occurring in the facility through the use of moving or static letters, numbers, images, designs, graphic representations or other visual or audio depictions.
SECTION: A section of this title or of a chapter of this title unless some other ordinance, Code or statute is indicated.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY (Miniwarehousing/Climate Controlled/Indoor Storage/Single- Or Multi-Story): A nonresidential building, portion of
building, or group of buildings with defined storage space or units rented to and accessible to the public for the storage of household and personal
property, operable vehicles, and recreational vehicles, including, but not limited to, RVs, boats, snowmobiles, enclosed or open air trailers, etc.
A. Exterior Unit Access: An exterior accessed self-storage facility generally consists of a long, single-story, simplified building structure with roll-up
doors and direct drive-up access to conventional outside units.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 467/687
B. Interior Unit Access: An interior accessed self-storage facility consists of a building with all units contained within that building and all units having an
access door from an interior hallway.
SERVICE STATION: See definition of gas station.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building respectively.
When two (2) or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property line of the lots so grouped shall be used in determining offsets.
SHORT TERM RENTAL: Lodging within a dwelling unit available for use or is used to accommodate guests paying a fee or other compensation for a
period of thirty one (31) consecutive days or less.
SIGN4: Every sign, billboard, freestanding sign, wall sign or roof sign as well as other signs of every description and character as defined herein and shall
include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person or firm
when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public.
SIGN, OFF SITE: A sign other than on site sign (see definition of billboard).
SIGN, ON SITE: A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located or to products, accommodations, services or activities on the
premises. On site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business.
SIGNS, NUMBER AND SURFACE AREA: For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or
displaying device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized
relationship of elements or where there is a reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign.
The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular geometric form or combinations of regular geometric forms
compromising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. Frames and structural members not bearing
advertising matter shall not be included in the computation of the surface area, except where such frames and structural members are used as an integral
primary or subsidiary portion of the graphic, literal, or numerical display, such as forming a picture frame to facilitate continuity or providing contrast to
emphasize the intended purpose of the sign.
SITE: See definition of lot.
SNOW MAINTENANCE FACILITY: A temporary facility to address the removal of snow.
SPECIAL PERMIT: The authorization of a zoning certificate for an unclassified or special use of a lot by the Board of Zoning Adjustment following a review
of the application for use by the Planning Commission. A special permit may be issued only for those uses listed under the "unclassified and special uses"
of this title.
STABLES:
Private: A building or structure used, or intended to be used for housing horses belonging to the owner of the property and for noncommercial
purposes.
Public And Riding Academy: A building or structure used or intended to be used, for the housing only of horses on a fee basis. Riding instructions
may be given in connection with a public stable or riding academy.
Riding Club: A building or structure used or intended to be used, for the housing only of horses by a group of persons for noncommercial purposes.
STADIUM: A place or venue used primarily for indoor or outdoor sports, concerts or other events consisting of a field or stage either partly or completely
surrounded by a tiered structure designed to allow spectators to stand or sit and view the event.
STANDARD PROJECT FLOOD: A hypothetical flood estimated by the corps of engineers, representing the critical flood runoff volume and peak discharge
that may be expected from the most severe combination of hydrological and meteorological conditions that are considered reasonably characteristic of the
geographic region.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet (6') above grade such basement or cellar shall be considered a story.
STORY, HALF: See definition of half story.
STREET: Any thoroughfare or public space not less than sixteen feet (16') in width which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street (see definition of lot lines: front).
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any replacement or change in the shape or size of any portion of a building or of the supporting members of a building or
structure such as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor joist, roof joist, or roof trusses, beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
SUBDIVISION: A division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots, plats, sites, or other subdivision of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, building development, anchorage, right-of-way dedication, or other use.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 468/687
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage" regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure
to correct existing violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which have been identified by the Local Code Enforcement
Officer and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or b) any alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a "historic structure".
TAPROOM (BEER PARLOR): An area within a brewery devoted to the sale and consumption of a limited variety of malt beverages (SIC 5813 taprooms
and beer parlors and SIC 2082 manufacturing of malt beverages). This definition only applies to taprooms that are ancillary to and included in a brewery,
with the brewery being the primary use. Any other establishment for the sale and consumption of beer will be considered a bar for the purposes of this
definition.
TASTING ROOM: Any portion of a distillery where either the sale or consumption of the distillery product by the glass occurs.
TAVERN: See definition of bar or saloon. Any place devoted primarily to the selling, serving or dispensing and drinking of malt, vinous, or other alcoholic
beverages or any place where any sign is exhibited or displayed indicating that alcoholic beverages are obtainable within or thereof, and where such
beverages are consumed on the premises (see also definitions of cocktail lounge, cabaret, and nightclub).
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: A structure intended to be limited in duration serving a permitted use on a lot. Temporary structures do
include tents as defined herein. Temporary structures approved under a permit are limited to the time period as noted in the permit.
TENT: Any structure or enclosure, the roof or one-half (1/2) or more of the sides of which are of silk, cotton, canvas or any light material, either attached to
a building or structure or unattached.
TINY HOME: A structure which is four hundred (400) or less square feet in floor area excluding any lofts, constructed to comply with the 2018 International
Residential Code, appendix V and is intended to be a single family dwelling, permitted and taxed as real property. A tiny home must be on a permanent
foundation with permanent connections to utility services. A structure of four hundred (400) or less square feet in floor area excluding any lofts that has any
wheels or axles attached to its body or frame would be defined as a park home.
TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling unit which is attached horizontally, and not vertically to one or more other dwelling units, wherein the land or lot beneath each
dwelling may be individually owned by the owner of the dwelling. A townhouse subdivision shall have common elements which are specified in or
determined under the rules and regulations set forth by recorded covenants. Covenants for a townhouse subdivision shall establish the guidelines for
maintenance of common elements and permit free movement through common areas by members of the homeowners' association (council of co-owners)
to assure access to the structural exterior of each townhouse unit by the individual unit owner.
TRAILER: Any structure used for temporary human habitation, business or storage purposes, having no permanent foundation, but is supported by
wheels, blocks, or jacks, and which is or was equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place.
TRANSIENT PERSON: Any person or persons who obtain lodging or the use of any lodging space for any period of thirty one (31) consecutive days or
less and whose permanent address for legal purposes is not the lodging unit occupied.
TRASH: Cuttings from vegetation, refuse, paper, bottles, rags (see also definition of junk).
USED MERCHANDISE STORE OR SECONDHAND MERCHANDISE STORE: A retail store that sells previously owned or used goods of recent or
modern vintage. The merchandise generally is less valuable than its original worth. This definition does not include antiques and collectibles or flea
markets.
VARIANCE: A modification of the specific regulations of this title granted by resolution of the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the terms of this title
for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same vicinity and zone.
VENDING MACHINE: Any unattended, product holding, automated, self-service device that dispenses goods, products or anything of value upon insertion
of money, token, credit or identification.
WATERFRONT: Any site shall be considered as waterfront premises providing any or all of its lot lines abut on or are contiguous to any body of water,
including creek, canal, lake, river of any other body of water, natural or artificial, not including a swimming pool, whether said lot line is front, rear or side.
YARD: An open space other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for landscaping or as otherwise provided
in this title.
YARD, FRONT: The yard area lying to the front of the principal building or between the front building line and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR: The yard area lying to the rear of the principal building, or between the rear building line and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: The yard area lying to the sides of the principal building or between the side building lines and the side lot lines.
ZONE: Any one of the classes of districts established by this title.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The Administrative Officer designated or appointed by the City of West Des Moines to administer and enforce the regulations
contained in this title.
ZONING CERTIFICATE: Written statement issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing buildings, structures, or uses consistent with the terms of this
title and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969; amd. Ord. 454, 1-11-1971; Ord. 510, 9-17-1973; Ord. 614, 7-10-
1978; Ord. 644, 10-22-1979; Ord. 652, 4-14-1980; Ord. 685, 2-1-1982; 1985 Code §§3-2.02, 6-7.03; Ord. 782, 3-10-1986; Ord. 799, 8-4-1986; Ord. 811, 2-
16-1987; Ord. 854, 7-11-1988; Ord. 923, 8-20-1990; 5-22-1991; 1993 Code; Ord. 1129, 5-8-1995; Ord. 1130, 5-8-1995; Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; Ord. 1675,
1-30-2006; Ord. 1677, 2-27-2006; Ord. 1816, 10-6-2008; Ord. 1860, 3-22-2010; Ord. 1898, 12-13-2010; Ord. 1901, 12-27-2010; Ord. 2080, 2-9-2015; Ord.
2085, 3-9-2015; Ord. 2112, 9-8-2015; Ord. 2113, 9-8-2015; Ord. 2123, 11-2-2015; Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016; Ord. 2162, 8-8-2016; Ord.
2169, 9-6-2016; Ord. 2176, 10-31-2016; Ord. 2201, 3-6-2017; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017; Ord. 2249, 9-18-2017; Ord. 2265, 12-11-2017; Ord. 2269, 1-8-2018;
Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018; Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018; Ord. 2292, 4-16-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 469/687
Chapter 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
9-3-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA. (Ord. 430, 8-11-
1969)
9-3-2: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this title imposes a greater restriction
than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control. Where, for a
specific land use, the requirements of any other ordinance of the city are more stringent or restrictive than the requirements set forth herein, nothing herein
shall be construed to waive compliance with the provisions of such other ordinance. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-3-3: SCOPE; MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
A. Conformance Required: Except as hereinafter specified, no building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used which does not comply with all of the district regulations established by this chapter for the
district in which the building or land is located.
B. Continuing Existing Uses: The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the enactment of this title may be continued even though such use may not
conform with the regulations of this title for the district in which it is located. Any use in existence at the adoption hereof which was not an authorized
"nonconforming use" under previous zoning ordinances, shall not be authorized to continue as a nonconforming use pursuant to this title, or
amendments hereto.
C. Building Permits: Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any building or
part thereof, for which approvals and required building permits have been granted before the effective date hereof, the construction in conformance
with such plans shall have been started prior to the effective date hereof and completion thereof carried on in a normal manner and not discontinued for
reasons other than those beyond the builder's control.
D. Exceptions And Modifications:
1. Exceptions And Modifications Enumerated: The regulations specified in this title shall be subject to the following exceptions and interpretations: (Ord.
430, 8-11-1969)
a. Use Of Existing Lots Of Record: In any district where dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling may be located on any lot or plot of official
record as of the effective date hereof irrespective of its area or width, and in addition, any two-family dwelling may be located on any lot or plot in
any residential high density district (RH) that has lot width of not less than sixty feet (60') and is of official record as of the effective date hereof;
provided, however: (Ord. 1289, 3-9-1998)
(1) The sum of the side yard width of any such lot or plot need not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the width of the lot, but in no case less than ten
percent (10%) of the width of the lot for any one side yard.
(2) The depth of the rear yard of any such lot shall not be less than twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, but in no case less than ten feet
(10').
b. Structures Permitted Above Height Limit: The building height limitations of this title shall be modified as follows: (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
(1) Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, penthouses, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers,
ornamental towers and spires, radio or television towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in accordance with
existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the city.
(2) Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals, sanatoriums or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding sixty feet (60'), and churches and temples, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy five feet
(75') if the building is set back from each property line at least one foot (1') for each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise provided in the district in which the building is built. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969; amd. 1993 Code)
(3) The height of any building, tower, sign or any attachment to any structure shall not exceed maximum elevations as delineated within chapter 13
of this title and prescribed for each airport hazard and height (overlay) zone unless a variance is granted through proper procedures as specified
in this title. (Ord. 652, 4-14-1980)
c. Area Requirements: In any district, and for building purposes, where either public water, public sanitary sewer or both of the aforementioned are
not available, the minimum lot area and frontage requirements shall be:
(1) All lots, except those of ten (10) acres or more, shall be provided with access and connections to public water mains.
(2) Any lot or lots which cannot be reasonably served by a public sanitary sewer system shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred twenty five
feet (125') and an area of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, or the minimum permitted by this title, whichever is larger, for the
district of which said parcel is a part. (Ord. 614, 7-10-1978)
d. Double Frontage Lots: Buildings on through lots and extending through from street to street shall provide the required front yard on both streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 470/687
e. Exceptions To Yard Requirements: Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed with any building or structure, except for a
permitted accessory building.
f. Exceptions To Prohibited Uses: The city council may, by special permit after public hearing, authorize the location of any of the following buildings
or uses in any district from which they are prohibited by this title:
Any public building erected and used by any department of the city, township, county, state or federal government.
Airport or landing field.
Community building or recreation field.
Country clubs and golf courses.
Hospitals, nonprofit fraternal institutions, provided they are used solely for fraternal purposes, and institutions of an educational, religious or
philanthropic character; provided, that the building shall be set back from all yard lines a distance of not less than two feet (2') for each foot of
building height.
Nurseries and greenhouses.
Preschools.
Public and private cemeteries.
Temporary or seasonal amusement enterprises.
2. Special Permit Approval: Before issuance of any special permit for any of the above buildings or uses, the city council shall refer the proposed
application to the city planning and zoning commission, which commission shall be given forty five (45) days in which to make a report regarding the
effect of such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utility facilities and other matters pertaining
to the general welfare. No action shall be taken upon any application for a proposed building or use above referred to until and unless the report of
the planning and zoning commission has been filed; provided, however, that if no report is received from the planning and zoning commission within
forty five (45) days, it shall be assumed that approval of the application has been given by the said commission. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-3-4: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES, USES OF LAND, OR USES OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
A. Purpose:
1. The city of West Des Moines intends that buildings and structures, and the uses of land, buildings, and structures which do not comply with the
regulations provided in this title for the district in which the structure, building, use, or land is located eventually will be discontinued, removed, or
replaced. The purpose of this section is to provide regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses and to specify conditions or
circumstances where those nonconforming buildings, structures, or uses shall be permitted to continue.
2. Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building, structure, or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by the appropriate authority.
3. To be a legal nonconforming structure, building, lot, or use, the same must have been lawfully established on or before the effective date of this title
and must have been in active use. The provisions of this section also shall apply to buildings, structures, uses of buildings or structures, or uses of
land which hereafter become nonconforming due to the adoption of this title, amendments thereto, or rezonings.
4. Landowners shall bear the burden of proof to show that a lot, use of land, structure, use of structure, or characteristic of use of land that is
nonconforming with the current zoning ordinances in force on the subject land comes under one or more of the exceptions to the zoning
requirements provided in this section and that such otherwise nonconforming lot, use of land, structure, use of structure, or characteristic of use of
land was lawfully established on the subject property. Conformity or nonconformity runs with the land, not with the owner.
B. Five Basic Categories Of Nonconformity Are Recognized:
1. Nonconforming lots of record: These lots were legal when they were subdivided but do not meet the current requirements for width, depth, area,
access, or other requirements.
2. Nonconforming use of land: These are land uses that would not be permitted under current regulations, but which were established before the
regulations went into effect.
3. Nonconforming structures: These are buildings or structures that were legal at the time they were constructed, but encroach into the current yard
setbacks or exceed the current height or area limitations.
4. Nonconforming uses of structures: These are uses of buildings or land and buildings that would not be permitted under current regulations but which
were established before the regulations went into effect.
5. Nonconforming characteristics of use: This is a category that covers nonconformities to the parking, landscaping, signage or other requirements not
covered by the other categories.
C. Provisions:
1. Nonconforming Legal Lots Of Record:
a. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous street frontage in single ownership are of record as of the
effective date of this title, or amendments thereto, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by
this code, the lands involved may be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title, and no portion of said parcel shall be used
or occupied which does not meet lot width and area requirements, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 471/687
width or area below the requirements of this title. If such lots or parts of lots are to be considered an undivided parcel, the owner will be required to
either replat the lots in question or to legally tie the lots together by recording a lot tie form with the appropriate county recorder.
b. The use of existing legal lots of record will be governed by the provisions of subsection C1a of this section and all applicable regulations for the
district in which the lot is located.
2. Nonconforming Building Or Structure:
a. A nonconforming building or structure lawfully established on or before the effective date of this title may be maintained although it does not
conform to the area, height, yard, open space, landscaping, or visual clearance provisions of this title, except as otherwise provided in this section.
b. Repairs and nonstructural alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, for ordinary maintenance repairs including internal
and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the repair or replacement of doors, windows, nonbearing walls, fixtures, heating components,
wiring, plumbing, roofing or other nonstructural components provided that the cubic content or the footprint of the building or structure as it existed
prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendment of this title is not increased.
c. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be structurally altered or enlarged in any manner except to bring the structure in conformance with
all regulations of the district in which it is located.
d. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or in any part to any other location on the lot or another lot unless every portion
of such building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is or will be located.
e. The nonconforming use of a nonconforming building may be changed to a use permitted within the district in which the building is located upon the
approval of a site plan or permitted conditional use permit.
f. Nonconforming accessory uses and structures will be treated under this section subject to the provisions governing the principal nonconforming
uses, buildings, and structures set forth in this section.
g. Where nonconforming use status applies to a building and land in combination removal or destruction of the building shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
3. Nonconforming Use Of A Building Or Structure:
a. A nonconforming use of a building or structure lawfully established on or before the effective date of this title, may be continued although it does
not conform with the use provisions of this title, except as otherwise provided in this section.
b. Repairs and nonstructural alterations may be made to a building or structure which contains a nonconforming use for ordinary maintenance
repairs including internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the repair or replacement of doors, windows, nonbearing walls, fixtures,
heating components, wiring, plumbing, roofing or other nonstructural components provided that the cubic content or the footprint of the building or
structure as it existed prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendment of this title is not increased. (Ord. 1599, 9-13-2004)
c. When a building or structure contains a nonconforming use, structural alterations and additions only are permitted when the use of the entire
building or structure is changed to a use which conforms to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. Exception will be made for
single-family residential structures located in nonresidential zones. For those cases, alterations or additions may be made so long as the bulk and
setback regulations are met for the zone in which the residential structure is located and no additional dwelling units are constructed. Exception will
also be made for existing legal, nonconforming agricultural buildings and structures not located in the agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district.
For those cases, the building or structure may be expanded by up to twenty percent (20%) of its current size so long as expansion complies with
all standards for the agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district and with all other pertinent codes and regulations existing at the time of
expansion.
d. The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to a use of the same classification, a less intense use of the same classification,
or to a conforming use for the district in which the building or structure is located. Where a nonconforming use of a building or structure is changed
thusly, it shall not thereafter be changed to a more intensive use in that classification or to any other nonconforming use for the district in which the
building or structure is located. For those requests to change a nonconforming use to a less intense use of the same classification, the Director of
Community Development will determine the appropriateness of the change.
e. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall not, in any manner, be extended, expanded, or relocated in whole or in part to any
location unless the use of the entire building or structure is changed to a use which conforms to all of the regulations of the district in which it is
located. The nonconforming use of a part of a building or structure shall not be expanded within that building or structure.
(1) Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception will be made for single-family residential structures located in
nonresidential zones. For those cases, alterations or additions may be made so long as the bulk and setback regulations are met for the zone in
which the residential structure is located and no additional dwelling units are constructed.
(2) If a single-family residential structure located in a nonresidential zone is altered or enlarged as provided in subsection C3e(1) of this section,
such alteration or enlargement shall exempt adjacent landowners from further buffering requirements for the benefit of the altered or enlarged
property.
(3) Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception will be made for existing legal, nonconforming agricultural buildings and
structures not located in the Agricultural/Open Space (OS) Zoning District. For those cases, the building or structure may be expanded by up to
twenty percent (20%) of its current size so long as expansion complies with all standards for the Agricultural/Open Space (OS) Zoning District
and with all other pertinent codes and regulations existing at the time of expansion. (Ord. 1869, 6-1-2010)
f. In any building or structure where a nonconforming use existed, in whole or part of the building or structure, is discontinued, becomes vacant or
otherwise unoccupied for a continuous period of one year or more must thereafter be occupied by a use which conforms to the regulations of the
district in which the building or structure is located.
g. Where nonconforming use status applies to a building and land in combination, removal or damage greater than fifty percent (50%) of assessed
value of the building shall eliminate the conforming status of the land.
4. Nonconforming Uses Of Land:
a. Nonconforming uses of land where no building is involved, and which use is lawfully established prior to the effective date of this title, may be
continued, except as otherwise provided for in this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 472/687
b. Land which contains a nonconforming use, which does not have a building or structure thereon, may be maintained or repaired including gravel,
paving, surfacing, fences, screening, or drainageways, provided that the amount of land devoted to such use which lawfully existed as of the
effective date of this title, is not increased.
c. A nonconforming use of land shall not, in any manner, be expanded or extended on the same lot. (Ord. 1599, 9-13-2004)
d. If a nonconforming commercial, office, industrial or multi-family use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued for one year or is proposed to be
changed, any future or proposed use of such land shall be in conformance with the provisions of this title.
e. Single family detached residential uses in non-single family residential designated areas may be permitted upon application to the Director of
Development Services. The Director, or designee, may approve the permit if all of the following criteria are met:
(1) That the applicant provide clear and convincing evidence that a single family residence existed on the parcel any time within the past fifteen
(15) years from date of application.
(2) That the parcel is the same size and configuration as when the house existed.
(3) That no subdivision of the parcel is proposed or has been done to create a lot for the residential dwelling.
(4) That the properties immediately adjacent have not been developed in accordance with the current land use and zoning.
(5) That only one single family detached dwelling will be constructed on the parcel.
(6) That the property owner executes an acknowledgement which will be recorded with the respective county and which includes the following
provisions:
(A) Legal description provided by the property owner.
(B) That the dwelling will be constructed a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from the parcel's boundaries, including from the ultimate rightsof-
way of adjacent streets.
(C) That accessory structures will be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the parcel's boundaries and that no accessory structure will be
constructed in the front yard as defined in this title. Two (2) detached accessory structures or less, not to exceed a combined total of one
thousand (1,000) square feet regardless of size of the property will be located on the property.
(D) That no buffer will be required between an adjacent property and the subject parcel at time of development of the adjacent properties. If
desired, the burden of providing a buffer lies with the property owner of the subject parcel upon which the single family dwelling is constructed.
(E) A note of the Comprehensive Plan land use designation and zoning district of the subject property.
(F) Comprehensive Plan land use designation and zoning district of the adjacent properties is clearly identified.
(G) That if future utility infrastructure is to cross the property, an easement for the utility will be granted if the exact alignment is known. If future
utility infrastructure is anticipated to cross the property but the exact alignment is unknown, agreement that an easement for the utility shall be
granted at such time the alignment is determined. Acknowledgement that no structures will be constructed within an anticipated easement area.
(H) That development of the property for non-single family residential uses may not occur until the single-family residential use ceases.
(I) That no commercial activity will be allowed on the parcel unless one of the following applies:
(i) A home occupation permit approval is granted for a qualifying activity; or
(ii) With site plan and building permit approval the dwelling is converted to a commercial structure that complies with current codes and
regulations, including allowed uses as specified in the Zoning Code for the applicable zoning district.
(J) That the rebuilding and expansion provisions for single-family residential property in non-residential zones of this section applies to the
subject parcel.
(K) That the burden lies with the property owner to notify potential buyers of these provisions.
Upon a decision by the Director of Development Services, or designee, notice of the decision will be provided to the property owner in writing. If
the application is approved, the acknowledgement and a building permit will need to be submitted along with a copy of the notice of decision to
the chief building official, or designee.
Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the Director of Development Services or designee, a written request on
forms prescribed by the Director for said appeal, along with the appropriate fee, shall be received and stamped filed by the Development
Services Department within a period of ten (10) business days following the decision. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a request, the
Director shall schedule a public hearing on the matter of the appeal before the Board of Adjustment to review and render a decision on said
appeal. The decision of the board is appealable to the District Court. (Ord. 2246, 9-5-2017)
5. Nonconforming Characteristics Of Use:
a. Nonconforming characteristics of use due to changes in zoning provisions including, but not limited to, parking requirements, signs, landscaping,
lighting, building materials, buffering, which generally are addressed in development approvals will be addressed at the time a submittal is made to
the City for modification to the development.
b. Nonconforming characteristics of use which are in evidence because of failure to comply with the conditions of approval for a development will be
subject to Code enforcement actions available to the City to address the nonconformity and bring the development into compliance with this Code
or the conditions of its approval.
6. Reconstruction:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 473/687
a. Where a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed by catastrophe or act of God to the extent equaling fifty percent (50%) or
more of its total assessed value, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
b. Where an otherwise conforming building or structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged by catastrophe or act of God to the extent
equaling fifty percent (50%) or more of its total assessed value, it may be reconstructed to comply with all regulations, including use, of the district
in which it is located. An otherwise conforming building or structure containing a nonconforming use damaged to the extent less than fifty percent
(50%) of its assessed value may be reconstructed provided that the nonconforming use as it existed prior to the damage is not increased or
enlarged and provided that the reconstruction commences within one hundred eighty (180) days of the damaging incident and is diligently pursued
to its completion. (Ord. 1599, 9-13-2004)
c. Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception will be given to single-family detached residential uses in nonresidential
districts, where the residential building or detached accessory structure is damaged by catastrophe or act of God. Reconstruction of the structure
or building shall be permitted provided that there is no increase in the number of dwelling units. The reconstruction of the building or structure will
comply with all residential standards for the comparable district in which the structure or building was first constructed or a comparable residential
district, as determined by the director of development services, and with all other pertinent codes and regulations existing at the time of
reconstruction. Reconstruction must begin within one hundred eighty (180) days or the use will be deemed discontinued, abandoned, or vacated.
This exception will not be granted when nonaccidental causes, intentional acts by the owner, lessee, or other person such as arson, or by
circumstances of neglect where the building runs down or becomes dilapidated are in evidence. The only exception for nonaccidental causes shall
be for intentional demolition associated with a building permit to replace the structure with a new structure as provided in subsection C7f of this
section.
d. Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception will be given to existing legal, nonconforming agricultural buildings and
structures not located in the agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district, where said building or structure is damaged by catastrophe or act of God.
Reconstruction of the structure or building shall be permitted provided that the square footage of the structure or building is not enlarged or
increased beyond twenty percent (20%) of its predamaged size. The reconstruction of the building or structure will comply with all standards for the
agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district and with all other pertinent codes and regulations existing at the time of reconstruction. Reconstruction
must begin within one hundred eighty (180) days or the use will be deemed discontinued, abandoned, or vacated.
This exception will not be granted when nonaccidental causes, intentional acts by the owner, lessee, or other person such as arson, or by
circumstances of neglect where the building runs down or becomes dilapidated are in evidence. The only exception for nonaccidental causes shall
be for intentional demolition associated with a building permit to replace the structure with a new structure as provided in subsection C7e of this
section. (Ord. 1869, 6-1-2010)
7. Other Exceptions:
a. Exceptions may be granted upon application of a variance request to the board of adjustment for nonconforming uses to be allowed in structures,
buildings or land which were established on or before the effective date of this title, provided that the use is appropriate to the design, special
equipment, and intent of such a building or structure; the board is convinced that the use is of benefit and is appropriate to the neighborhood; that
the traffic generated is similar or less than that generated by the existing nonconforming use; that the structure, or the structure and land in
combination, cannot reasonably or economically be used for a conforming purpose; that the use will not be detrimental to the existing character of
development in the immediate neighborhood; that the use will not endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare; and that the use is
consistent with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1599, 9-13-2004)
b. For existing legal, nonconforming residential garages which do not conform to current standards regarding side yard setback and/or size only, the
nonconforming garage may be rebuilt in a rear yard with the same nonconforming size and/or side yard setback or at a minimum side yard setback
of three feet (3'), whichever is greater, within one hundred eighty (180) days of its destruction, provided that the area of nonconformity is not
increased and that in all other regards the garage meets accessory structure standards and regulations.
c. For existing nonconforming detached single-family uses, up to two (2) detached accessory structures not to exceed one thousand (1,000)
combined square feet may be permitted.
d. The acquisition of a portion of an otherwise conforming lot by the city or by the city for the benefit of a governmental agency under eminent domain
proceedings or by agreement under threat of eminent domain proceedings shall not cause such an otherwise conforming lot to become
nonconforming under this title.
e. Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception will be given to existing legal, nonconforming agricultural buildings and
structures not located in the agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district. Reconstruction or replacement of the structure or building shall be
permitted provided that no other nonconformity is increased, and the building square footage is not enlarged or increased by more than twenty
percent (20%) of its current size. The reconstruction of the building or structure shall comply with all other standards for the agricultural/open space
(OS) zoning district and with all other pertinent codes and regulations existing at the time of reconstruction. Reconstruction must begin within one
hundred eighty (180) days or the use will be deemed discontinued, abandoned, or vacated.
f. Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception will be given to existing legal, nonconforming single-family detached
residential buildings and detached accessory structures located in nonresidential zoning districts. Reconstruction or replacement of the structure or
building shall be permitted provided that there is no increase in the number of dwelling units. The reconstruction of the building or structure shall
comply with all residential standards for the comparable district in which the structure or building was first constructed or a comparable residential
district, as determined by the director of development services, and with all other pertinent codes and regulations existing at the time of
reconstruction. Reconstruction must begin within one hundred eighty (180) days or the use will be deemed discontinued, abandoned, or vacated.
(Ord. 1869, 6-1-2010)
8. Flood (Overlay) District:
a. For any structure or use of a structure or land made nonconforming by the adoption of a flood (overlay) district, such use may be expanded,
enlarged, altered or changed in any way which does not increase its nonconformity if:
(1) The structure or use is not nonconforming with respect to any underlying zoning district.
(2) The alteration does not represent an addition or repair exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the value of the structure at the time the structure
became nonconforming by virtue of this subsection, unless the structure or use is permanently changed to a conforming use. In the case of the
above stated fifty percent (50%) valuation rule such shall be measured on a cumulative basis rather than evaluating each alteration
independently against the maximum variation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 474/687
(3) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent normal and necessary maintenance or upkeep of any use made nonconforming by
virtue of a flood (overlay) district. (Ord. 1599, 9-13-2004)
9-3-5: STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED:
Except as herein provided, no lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residence purposes unless such lot abuts for at least forty feet (40')
on at least one street, or abuts common area formally established through a homeowners' association of which said lot owner has a legal interest. In
situations of hardship, a special permit may be issued for an exclusive unobstructed private easement of access or right of way of at least twenty feet (20')
wide to a street, and there shall be not more than one single-family dwelling for such frontage or easement; except, that a common easement of access at
least fifty feet (50') wide shall be provided for two (2) or more such single-family dwellings or for one or more two-family or multiple dwellings. (Ord. 430, 8-
11-1969; amd. 5-22-91)
9-3-6: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND GARAGES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2333 - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE AND BUILDINGS . Go to new ordinance.
9-3-7: YARDS:
A. Front Yard:
1. In any residential district there shall be a minimum front yard depth required as stated in the yard requirements for this particular district; provided,
however: a) any replat in any residential district adjacent to an existing plat with dwellings located thereon, the front yard depth for the lots in the
replat shall not be less than the smallest front yard depth of existing dwellings located within two hundred feet (200') of the replat, but in no event
shall the front yard depth be less than the smallest front yard depth of the existing dwelling immediately adjacent thereto which fronts on the same
side of the street; b) no front yard depth of any existing lot without a dwelling shall be less than the smallest front yard depth of any lot with existing
dwelling immediately adjacent thereto and within two hundred feet (200') fronting on the same side of the street. (Ord. 1289, 3-9-1998)
2. Nothing in this regulation shall be interpreted as to permit a front yard depth which is less than the minimum required front yard depth for the district
in which it is located. (Ord. 467, 9-13-1971)
B. Corner Lots:
1. For corner lots platted after the effective date hereof, the street side yard shall be equal in width to the minimum required side yard for the district in
which it is located, plus twenty feet (20'); i.e., for a minimum required side yard of ten feet (10') the street side yard shall be not less than thirty feet
(30'); provided, however, this regulation shall not be interpreted as to require a side street yard of greater width than the minimum required front yard
width.
2. For corner lots platted after the effective date hereof, the minimum required lot width shall be increased by an amount not less than twenty feet (20')
so as to allow for the additional required street side yard, i.e., for a minimum required lot width of sixty feet (60'), the minimum width of a corner lot
shall be not less than eighty feet (80').
3. On corner lots platted and of record at the time of the effective date hereof, the same regulations shall apply except that these regulations shall not
be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of the corner lot facing an intersecting street and of record or as shown by existing contract of
purchase at the time of the effective date hereof, to less than twenty eight feet (28') nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building.
4. On any corner lot, the depth of a front yard or side street yard abutting a "major street" shall be measured from the proposed right of way lines
shown on the official major street plan. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
C. Required Yard Cannot Be Reduced: No lot shall be reduced in size so as to make the width or total area of the lot, or any yard, or any other open
space, less than the minimum required by this title. No part of a yard or other open space provided about any building or structure for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this title shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space required under this title for another building or
structure. Off street parking and loading areas may occupy all or part of any required yard or open space except as specified in subsection 9-19-8I of
this title. (Ord. 1859, 2-22-2010)
D. Building Lines On Approved Plats: Whenever the plat of a land subdivision approved by the city council and on record in the office of the county
recorder and county auditor shows a setback building line along any frontage for the purpose of creating a front yard or side street yard line, the
building line thus shown shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line required in this title unless specific yard requirements in this title
require a greater setback. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-3-8: FENCES, WALLS AND VISION CLEARANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-3-9: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 475/687
9-3-10: BUFFERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-3-11: SIDEWALKS REQUIRED:
A. The intent and purpose of this section is to establish the regulations regarding the installation of public sidewalks and pathways in the city to ensure the
orderly and harmonious development of a citywide sidewalk system in existing and new developments in such a manner as to provide a
comprehensive sidewalk system that will safeguard the public's health, safety and general welfare.
B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, all dwellings, nonresidential buildings and uses, whether occupied or unoccupied, shall have, after
adoption hereof, a permanent sidewalk built for the entire width and/or length of the lot or lots upon which the dwelling, nonresidential building or use is
located, and the sidewalk(s) shall be built for the entire width and/or length of all sides of any lot or lots which abut a public street.
C. At such time that eighty percent (80%) of a plat or subdivision is developed, the property owner(s) of any undeveloped parcels, upon written notification
by the city, shall install the required sidewalk(s) on their property within one hundred twenty (120) days of the notification by the city. After expiration of
the one hundred twenty (120) day period, the city may take any legal action necessary to proceed with the installation of the sidewalk(s) and assess
the cost of the installation and any legal expenses, as allowed by law, as a lien against the property.
D. In the event that no grade has been set or there is no curb and gutter on the street upon which the sidewalk(s) is to be placed, the council may defer the
sidewalk requirement on application of the affected property owner(s) and upon the affected property owner(s) signing an agreement to install such a
sidewalk(s) within one hundred twenty (120) days after the property owner(s) has been notified that a curb and gutter has been installed and/or that the
grade has been set. The agreement shall be verified and placed on record in the office of the county recorder of the applicable county, and shall be a
covenant running with the land, and shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, and successors of the property owner.
E. At the discretion of the city council, the installation of any required sidewalk(s) may be deferred or waived when an off street bike/pedestrian trail has
been identified on the comprehensive plan or on the trail's master plan adjacent to the subject property. In the event that the sidewalk installation is
deferred or waived, the property owner shall provide assurances, acceptable to the city, for the cost equivalent to the cost of installing the public
sidewalk(s), that can be combined with other funding sources available to the city, for the installation of the off street bike/pedestrian trail.
F. When the strict application of standards or requirements established by this section would cause substantial hardship or impose unreasonable
restrictions regarding the installation of a sidewalk(s) because of natural or physical conditions or limitations not created by the property owner, the
council may grant such deferrals and/or waivers from these standards or requirements as may be necessary pursuant to the following procedure. At
such time when the conditions or limitations are eliminated, the property owner(s) will be required to install such sidewalk(s) within one hundred twenty
(120) days after written notification by the city.
The applicant under this subsection shall prepare an application on the appropriate prescribed form supplied by the community development
department for the review of the plan and zoning commission and/or the city council. The applicant may request a waiver or deferral of the sidewalk
installation requirement, which on any new development will be forwarded to the commission for its review and recommendation to the city council, and
all requests will be presented to the city council, who shall either approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove of the request based upon
criteria adopted by the city council.
The council shall establish criteria and specific design standards to assist in considering applications for deferrals and/or waivers. All such criteria and
specific design standards shall be established in such a way as to ensure the orderly and harmonious development of a citywide sidewalk system in
such a manner as will safeguard the public's health, safety and general welfare.
If the council rejects the request, the council will advise the applicant of any changes which are desired or that should have consideration before
approval will be given. The applicant shall then submit the revised original for certification by the city council. The city council, in approving or
disapproving any requests and in making requests for alterations or amendments to the request as presented, shall be governed by the general
policies as set out by this ordinance and by the criteria and specific design standards established by the council.
G. Any waiver or deferral that is granted by the city council shall be recorded by the city as a matter of public record at the office of the county recorder of
the applicable county.
H. The enforcement of this section shall be by special assessment pursuant to division IV of Iowa Code chapter 384. (Ord. 1178, 4-22-1996)
Chapter 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
A. These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the municipality.
2. To guide the future growth and development of the municipality in accordance with the comprehensive plan.
3. In order to classify, regulate and segregate uses of lands and buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 476/687
4. To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to promote safety from fire, flood, and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and
undue congestion of population, and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or altered.
5. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the municipality and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize
the conflicts among the uses of the land and buildings.
6. To protect and conserve open space through limits to the intensity of the use of a property, the area of yards, courts and open space. (Ord. 1190, 6-
17-1996)
9-4-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
A. The city is divided into twenty four (24) zoning districts, three (3) flood (overlay) districts, and four (4) airport hazard and height (overlay) districts. The
use, height and area regulations are uniform in each class of zoning district and overlay district, and said districts shall be known as:
ZONING DISTRICTS
OS Agricultural/open space district
RE Residential estate district
RS Residential single-family district
R-1 Single-family residential district
SF-CR Single-family commerce residential district
SF-VJ Residential district single-family Valley Junction
MH Manufactured housing district
RM Residential medium-density district
RH Residential high-density district
RC Regional commercial district
CMC Community commercial district
NC Neighborhood commercial district
CVC Convenience commercial district
SC Support commercial district
VJC Valley Junction commercial district
VJHB Valley Junction historic business district
WR Warehouse retail district
BP Business park district
VJLI Valley Junction light industrial district
LI Light industrial district
GI General industrial district
OF Office district
PCP Professional commerce park district
PUD Planned unit development district
FLOOD OVERLAY DISTRICTS
FW Floodway (overlay) district
FF Floodway fringe (overlay) district
FP General floodplain (overlay) district
AIRPORT HAZARD AND HEIGHT (OVERLAY) ZONES
AZ Approach zone (overlay)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 477/687
CZ Conical zone (overlay)
HZ Horizontal zone (overlay)
TZ Transitional zone (overlay)
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005)
9-4-3: DEFINITION OF DISTRICTS:
A. Categories And Purposes: The categories and purposes of land use zones that have been established within the municipality are as follows:
1. OS - Agricultural/Open Space District:
a. It is intended of this district to provide for areas that will be dominated by agricultural uses, grazing, nonfarm wooded areas and very large lot
estate or farm homes. To encourage the preservation of areas designated as agricultural/open space in a largely undeveloped state, allowable
dwelling units may be transferred to portions of the subject property which are not designated agricultural/open space. It is also intended that this
designation: 1) provide for very low-density farmland environment and housing/lifestyle choice; 2) retain land with significant topographical or other
physical constraints as open space; 3) provide a buffer between incompatible land uses; 4) provide for the controlled development of natural
resources; 5) provide for the preservation of areas with unique environmental resources; and 6) hold some land from urban development until such
time as development within urban services areas are approaching full development or the development of the property has a significant beneficial
effect for the city and furtherance of the policies of the comprehensive plan.
2. RE - Residential Estate District:
a. The purpose of this district is to promote a residential environment typified by larger lot single-family detached dwellings of an individual design.
The minimum lot size within a development or area shall be stipulated by a minimum lot size suffix that will be established for each RE district.
These low-density lots shall be grouped and be of such a number so as to form an identifiable neighborhood and image. Agricultural uses shall be
allowed as permitted in the applicable use matrix. Developments within this density range may lend themselves to development with septic
systems. However, all developments on septic systems shall be fitted with dry sewers to allow connection to the citywide sanitary system when it
becomes available. Septic systems shall only be allowed for developments located in areas that have soils and unit densities suitable for septic
systems. Areas with poor soils for septic systems and no available sewers shall not be developed until such time that adequate sanitary sewers for
the development are secured.
3. RS - Residential Single-Family District:
a. The purpose of this district is to encourage residential neighborhoods of exclusively single-family detached dwellings with a wide range of lot sizes.
Any development must have an overall density from 1.1 to 6.0 du/acre. Minimum lot sizes may be established for each RS district through the use
of a minimum lot size suffix. This land use zone is also intended to facilitate pedestrian access to schools, churches, parks, and neighborhood
convenience shopping.
4. R-1 - Single-Family Residential District:
a. The purpose of this district is to encourage residential neighborhoods of exclusively single-family detached dwellings with a minimum lot size of
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. No minimum lot suffixes shall be used with this district designation. This district is also intended
for public or private parks and playgrounds. Pedestrian access to schools, churches, and parks should be encouraged. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
5. SF-CR - Single-Family Commerce Residential District:
a. The purpose of this district is to recognize and encourage the existing and unique residential neighborhood in commerce as a neighborhood of
single-family detached dwellings with a minimum lot size of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. This land use zone is also intended
to address the physical constraints created by the topography and the Raccoon River flood plain. (Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998)
6. SF-VJ - Residential District Single-Family Valley Junction:
a. The purpose of this district is to recognize and encourage the existing and unique residential neighborhood in Valley Junction as a neighborhood
of single-family detached dwellings with a typical lot size of six thousand (6,000) square feet. This land use zone is also intended to address the
physical constraints created by the small lot size in this area. (Ord. 1419, 8-21-2000)
7. Reserved. (Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998)
8. MH - Manufactured Housing District:
a. The purpose of this district is to provide areas for manufactured and mobile home subdivisions and parks that will foster alternative housing
choices for the city's residents. The manufactured and mobile homes shall be grouped in subdivisions and parks of densities between 5.1 to 12.0
du/acre. Suffixes shall be used in the MH district to identify the maximum allowed density for the subject property.
9. RM - Residential Medium-Density District:
a. The purpose of this district is to foster a residential environment typified by single-family attached homes and low density multi-family dwellings.
Sites designated as such shall be oriented to arterial and collector streets, transit routes, convenience shopping, local and regional services, and
employment centers. This district is important to the housing market as it is geared to both owners and renters. The district allows for single-family
attached and multi-family dwelling units of no more than 12 du/acre. Suffixes shall be used in the RM district to identify the maximum allowed
density for the subject property.
10. RH - Residential High-Density District:
a. The purpose of this district is to provide for a relatively high-density residential environment. This land use category may be utilized as a transition
between commercial retail and office uses, and lower density residential uses. Developments within this land use district shall be oriented to
arterial or collector streets, transit routes, convenience shopping, local and regional services, and employment centers. This district allows single6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 478/687
family attached and multi-family dwellings of no greater than 18 du/acre. Higher densities may be permitted with the approval of the city council in
accordance with the provisions in the comprehensive plan.
11. RC - Regional Commercial District:
a. Regional commercial areas shall be designated to supply the shopping needs for comparison shopping for a variety of products ranging from
electronics, household goods, apparel, furniture, and sporting goods. Regional commercial areas will generally be composed of an enclosed mall
as the focal point for the area with at least seven hundred fifty thousand (750,000) square feet or more. A variety of commercial uses of various
sizes will be located in close proximity to the mall site. Although the regional commercial area will extend over a broad area and across streets,
unifying themes and/or architecture should be used to tie the area together. The Valley West mall area along University Avenue is the present
regional commercial area for the city. The need for another regional commercial area may develop in the future. The service area for a regional
commercial area is typically eight (8) miles or more. A regional commercial area should be a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) acres or larger.
Regional commercial areas should be located on arterial streets with direct freeway access.
12. CMC - Community Commercial District:
a. Community commercial areas shall be designated to supply daily and occasional shopping needs. The community commercial area shall serve a
similar function as a neighborhood commercial area plus the sale of goods such as appliances, hardware, etc. Each community commercial area
should be encouraged to include a variety merchandise store, one or more supermarkets, a drugstore, restaurants, banks and a large number and
variety of other stores. Community commercial areas may be large, may tend to expand across streets, and may be created in small incremental
additions. Individual commercial centers and uses within community commercial areas should be tied together by prominent common features
such as a tree type, roofing material and style, and architectural theme. The separation between community commercial areas should be three (3)
to five (5) miles. A community commercial area should range in size from fifteen (15) to fifty (50) acres. Community commercial areas should be
located at the intersection of either two (2) arterial or major collector streets. Primary access should not be taken off local residential streets.
13. NC - Neighborhood Commercial District:
a. Neighborhood commercial areas shall be designated to provide for small commercial centers and uses which provide a limited range of products
and services to the residents of the surrounding neighborhood. Typical uses would include professional offices, laundry and dry-cleaning
establishments, drugstores, a supermarket, beauty and barber shops, and other personal services. Because of their proximity to residential areas,
such centers or uses should be specifically designed and operated to be compatible with the adjacent residential development. Limitations on
design and operation would include building height and intensity, trip generation, architectural and signage controls suitable for a residential
neighborhood, increased landscaping and stricter control of noise and glare compared to larger commercial centers, and controls on hours of
operation and on delivery vehicles. Projects in this category will be limited to a height of one story and have a residential style roof design, e.g.,
mansard, pitched, gable, etc. Emphasis should be placed upon unrestricted pedestrian access to and from the surrounding residential areas. The
separation between a neighborhood commercial area and other community, neighborhood and convenience commercial areas should be one to
two (2) miles. A neighborhood commercial area should range in size from five (5) to fifteen (15) acres. Neighborhood commercial areas should be
located to have access from either arterial or major collector streets, and should avoid having local residential streets serve as their principal
access. No more than two (2) corners of an intersection should be devoted to a neighborhood commercial use. Strip centers should be avoided.
14. CVC - Convenience Commercial District:
a. Convenience commercial areas shall be designated to provide for single users commercial sites or small commercial centers and uses which
provide opportunities for the sale of most frequently purchased goods or services. Typical uses in this designation would be a convenience market,
professional offices, daycare centers, banks, and other personal services. Like neighborhood commercial designated areas, convenience
commercial areas shall be specifically designed and operated to be compatible with adjacent residential areas. Specifically, limitations on the
design and the operation of uses shall include architectural and building mass, hours of operation, delivery vehicles, noise and lighting control,
signage and traffic. Developments shall be limited to one story in height and have a residential exterior design, material and roof style. Projects
shall emphasize unrestricted pedestrian access to and from surrounding residential areas. The separation between a convenience commercial
area and other community, neighborhood and convenience commercial areas should be one and one-half (11/2) miles. A convenience commercial
area should range in size from one to five (5) acres. Convenience commercial areas should be located to have access from either arterial or major
collector streets, and should avoid having local residential streets serve as their principal access. No more than two (2) corners of an intersection
should be devoted to a convenience commercial use.
15. SC - Support Commercial District:
a. Support commercial areas shall be designated to provide for commercial centers and uses which are oriented toward the freeway motoring public
and/or employment centers. Typical uses would include hotels/motels, restaurants, gasoline service stations, professional offices, laundry and dry
cleaning establishments, banks, drugstores, office supply stores, convenience markets or other professional services. Support commercial areas
shall be sized to meet the needs of the motoring public and/or the employment center. Support commercial areas that are intended to provide
services to employment centers shall incorporate pedestrian orientation to and from the employment areas into their design.
16. VJC - Valley Junction Commercial District:
a. Valley Junction commercial areas shall be designated to provide for commercial uses which are oriented toward the motoring public along First
Street and Railroad Avenue. Typical uses would include restaurants, convenience gas stations (without repair service), professional offices,
laundry and dry cleaning establishments, banks, drugstores, office supply stores, or other service uses as defined by the Valley Junction
commercial land use matrix. Development of the Valley Junction commercial district area shall be in conformance with the Valley Junction subarea
plan and historic guidelines.
17. VJHB - Valley Junction Historic Business District:
a. The historic business district designation shall be utilized to denote the old downtown area of Valley Junction. Uses within this area shall include
professional offices, restaurants, specialty retail stores, and other personal services. Development of commercial property shall be in conformance
with the Valley Junction subarea plan and historic guidelines. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998)
18. WR - Warehouse Retail:
a. Warehouse retail areas shall be designated to provide areas for mixed use development of lighter industrial uses and the more intensive service,
retail, and wholesale commercial uses. Allowable uses include research and development; light distribution; wholesale or retail sale of industrial
supplies, building equipment and materials, home furnishings and home improvement; car dealerships; restaurants; and convenience stores. (Ord.
1629, 4-25-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 479/687
19. BP - Business Park District:
a. Business park areas shall be designated to provide desirable areas protected by performance, design and use controls regarding lot size, building
size, appearance, land coverage, parking and loading facilities, noise, dust, fumes, internal circulation and other environmental and functional
issues for a variety of office, research and development, warehouse and distribution, and light assembly and manufacturing uses. Included within
this category is a limited range of commercial uses located and designed to service the business park area. Business park areas should be
encouraged to be planned as a unit with compatibility of design, building materials, and landscaping acting as a unifying theme. Access to
business park areas should be off of arterial and/or collector roadways. Primary access should not be taken off of local residential streets. (Ord.
1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998; Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005)
20. VJLI - Valley Junction Light Industrial District:
a. The purpose of this district is to recognize and encourage the existing and unique light industrial neighborhood in Valley Junction as an area with a
typical lot size of seven thousand two hundred fifty (7,250) square feet. This land use is intended to address the physical constraints and
limitations created by the small lot sizes in this area in order to promote the future development and redevelopment of this unique area. Uses
allowed in this area are intended to be low impacting industrial uses that can coexist with residential uses in the neighborhood. (Ord. 1441, 4-2-
2001; amd. Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005)
21. LI - Light Industrial District:
a. Light industrial areas shall be designated to provide areas for most light industrial, and warehouse and distribution facilities. It is of special concern
to the city that there be an adequate variety of sizes and locations of light industrial parcels. Appropriate buffering as prescribed by the zoning
ordinance shall be established between light industrial areas and other uses, in particular, residential uses. Every effort should also be made to
encourage redevelopment of existing industrial areas. Access to light industrial areas should be off of arterial and/or collector streets.
22. GI - General Industrial District:
a. General industrial areas shall be designated to provide areas for light and heavy industrial uses, and warehouse and distribution facilities. In
particular, general industrial areas are intended to provide areas where outside storage and fabrication yards are allowed if properly mitigated,
including dust control and visual screening when deemed necessary. Appropriate buffering as prescribed by the zoning ordinance shall be
established between general industrial areas and other uses, in particular, residential uses. Every effort should also be made to encourage
redevelopment of existing industrial areas. Access to general industrial areas shall not be through residential areas. Access to general industrial
areas should be off of arterial and/or collector streets.
23. OF - Office District:
a. Office areas shall be designated to attract desirable and stable professional office development which will be in harmony with adjacent land uses.
Typical office uses include insurance, medical, law, real estate, finance and investment, and other services. Adequate landscape buffering shall be
provided between office uses and residential uses. Office uses immediately adjacent to single-family residential land uses should not exceed three
(3) stories in height unless adequate buffering and additional setbacks, as provided by the zoning ordinance, are provided. Primary access to
office areas should generally not be taken directly off of local residential streets. Limited support commercial uses such as sit down restaurants
and hotels/motels shall be allowed given specific design restrictions.
24. PCP - Professional Commerce Park District:
a. This district has been identified as an area for accommodating the management, research, design, marketing and production needs of those
professional-commerce enterprises which comply with the performance standards of the applicable sections of this Code for the abatement of all
obnoxious, detrimental or other generally unacceptable characteristics including ugliness of physical and natural properties; and for the
encouraged use of those contemporary, modern and futuristic design techniques which yield compatibility of one area to another as well as special
beauty. Further, in the interest of general community welfare, it is recognized that the community should be beautiful as well as financially
prosperous, spacious as well as efficient, physically balanced as well as regulated. This district shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use
which might violate the general welfare of the community; but that it shall be restricted and confined to only those integrated professionalcommerce
uses which produce net gain to the community in both aesthetic and material quality.
25. PUD - Planned Unit Development District:
a. This district shall allow the planned development of an area in which the proposed land uses, transportation elements, building densities,
arrangements, types, architecture and other development standards are set out in a unified plan. A planned unit development may consist of
mixed residential, commercial, office, industrial and public land uses. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998; Ord. 1441, 4-2-2001;
Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; Ord. 1860, 3-22-2010; Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017)
B. Overlay Districts:
1. Floodplain Overlay Districts:
a. The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the official flood (overlay) zoning map of the City, supported by elevations and documentation
contained in the West Des Moines Flood Insurance Study and the Jordan Creek Floodplain Study and further supported by the flood boundaries
and encroachment lines as delineated on the Federal flood insurance rate map (FIRM), the flood boundary and floodway map (FLOODWAY), and
plates 1 and 2 of the Jordan Creek Floodplain Study. All flood elevations, floodproofing elevations, requirements related to flood protection, shall
be drawn from the official flood (overlay) zoning map and its supporting documents, that, together with all notations, references, and other material
shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this title as if the notations, references and other matters set forth on said maps were all fully described
herein, the originals of which are properly attested and on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
b. Boundaries as indicated are based on elevation of the ground and elevation of the regulatory flood height through the reach affecting any given
property. Reference or interpretation to any individual parcel(s) shall be made by scaling distances on the official flood (overlay) map. Where a
parcel or parcels may be located on the boundary of a district or districts, and an exact determination shall be necessary as to inclusion or
exclusion from any flood district, or floodproofing requirements, the petitioner requesting such interpretation shall supply to the building inspector, a
certified topographical map of the property, prepared by a registered professional engineer, from which the building inspector may draw the proper
determination. In the case of a question as to the actual district (overlay) boundaries, elevation shall act as the final resolution determinant.
c. Elevations for minimum building height and floodproofing, as specified herein, shall always be drawn from the maps and supporting documents
accompanying the official flood (overlay) map, except in the case of the General Floodplain (Overlay) District, where specific flood elevation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 480/687
information is not provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. In the case of the FP District, the building inspector may require the person
seeking a permit to supply sufficient information allowing the City Engineer to reasonably ascertain the floodway and flood height affecting the
parcel for which a permit is sought.
2. Airport Hazard And Height (Overlay) Zones:
a. The boundaries of these zones are indicated upon the official airport hazard and height (overlay) map of the City, supported by zone boundaries
and elevations as delineated by the Federal Aviation Agency in conjunction with the authorities of the Des Moines International Airport. Boundaries
as indicated are based upon datum provided in section 9-13-2 of this title. Elevations for maximum structural height shall be determined by the City
inspector of buildings and shall meet all standards of height regulation as specified in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-4-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
The regulations set forth for any overlay zone shall modify the regulations for the primary district designation with which they are combined. All uses and
regulations of the primary district designation shall apply, except insofar as they are modified or augmented by the overlay zone regulations. (Ord. 1190, 6-
17-1996)
9-4-5: BOUNDARIES:
A. Zoning of a property shall be in compliance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City, and any specific standards and/or regulations identified in
the subareas of the plan. In situations where the Comprehensive Plan and the zoning of a property differ or conflict, the Comprehensive Plan shall be
the prevailing document. The zoning map, which is made a part of this title by reference, and all the notations, references and other matters shown
thereon, shall be as much a part of this title as if the notations, references and other matters set forth by said plan were all fully described herein, the
original of which is properly attested and is on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
B. The zoning district boundaries are either lot lines, section lines, or the centerlines of streets and alleys, unless otherwise shown. Where the districts
designated are bounded approximately by street, alley, or lot lines and are not dimensioned otherwise, the lot lines or the centerlines of streets and
alleys shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. Where uncertainty of district boundaries still exists, the Plan and Zoning Commission shall,
by written resolution, recommend the location of any district boundary to the City Council for its action and final decision. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-4-6: INTERIM USE OF PROPERTY:
While a property remains vacant, it may be used for the growing of crops, or organized community youth groups' recreational activities prior to
development in accordance with the provisions of this title, except that no structures shall be erected or constructed without proper permit. (Ord. 1190, 6-
17-1996)
Chapter 5
AGRICULTURAL/OPEN SPACE AND RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT
9-5-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL USE MATRIX. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-5-2: PURPOSE:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be generally recognized that the type of use is not so important as the manner in which the use is
accomplished. It would be impractical, if not impossible, to accurately enumerate all of the uses which would be beneficial or detrimental to the
community at large. It is also intended that the districts listed in this chapter shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use which could be
detrimental to the public health, welfare, and safety of the community or its citizens. While the City desires to encourage the development of the
community, it shall be done in a responsible manner consistent with the rules and regulations of the City and in accordance with the goals and policies
of the comprehensive plan.
B. The regulations set forth in this chapter specify the uses that are allowed in the various zones under this chapter. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-5-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
A. Uses shown in the matrix as "permitted" (P) are a permitted use in the applicable district, however, new construction or expansion of existing structures,
or expansion of the area of use or operation, except for single-family detached residential, shall require approval by the City Council through the site
plan review process. Upon the determination of the Director of Community Development, any use that is identified as a more intensive use than the
preceding approved use such that there would be a potential for a significant effect upon its surroundings shall be reviewed through the site plan review
process. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
B. Uses shown in the matrix as "permitted conditional use permit" (Pc) are permitted in the applicable district following review and approval through the
permitted conditional use permit (Pc) process. This requirement shall apply to new uses, as well as new construction and building expansions.
The use of a permitted conditional use permit (Pc) allows the City to regulate the intensity of development of a particular use, activity, or location. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 481/687
use of the permitted conditional use permit (Pc) process should not be seen as a means to prohibit uses but as a way to allow the City to secure more
information concerning a specific use and its operation. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
C. Each use is subject to all provisions of this title.
D. Where a proposed land use is not identified in this chapter, the Director of Community Development shall review the proposed use when requested to
do so by letter and, based upon the characteristics of the use, determine which of the uses listed in this chapter is equivalent to that proposed. The
proposed use, if determined to be equivalent to an allowed use, shall be subject to review through the process indicated within the matrix. It is further
the intent of this chapter to allow flexibility and diversity of land uses.
E. Prior to submission of a permit application for either a site plan development permit, a permitted conditional use permit (Pc) or a modification thereof,
the applicant may request that a preapplication review be conducted by the Department of Community Development to consider the proposed project.
Upon submittal of a preapplication, staff will evaluate the preapplication in light of applicable City regulations, indicate major problems, and identify
additional required information. In addition, staff will make a determination as to the appropriateness of the use in the proposed location. (Ord. 1190, 6-
17-1996)
9-5-4: SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS:
A. The following regulations shall be applied to the specific uses listed below in any district where that use is allowed. Any violations of the following zoning
regulations in this section may also be deemed to constitute nuisances, and may also be addressed pursuant to the provisions of title 4, chapter 4,
"Nuisances", of this Code.
1. The following vehicles and/or equipment, when parked or maintained within any area zoned for residential purposes, shall be defined as
"commercial or industrial storage" and shall constitute a violation of this title, unless determined by the City to be an accessory use of a home
occupation in accordance with the standards set forth in this subsection:
a. Any bus or motor driven passenger vehicle designed for the transport of over nine (9) persons.
b. Any ambulance equipped with life support systems and used to transport to medical facilities sick and injured persons who require emergency
medical care.
c. Any truck designed primarily for carrying livestock, merchandise, and freight of any kind and having a cargo capacity greater than two (2) tons
including dump trucks, flatbed trucks, stake trucks and garbage packers.
d. Any pickup truck with a cargo box length greater than eight feet (8'), and maximum cargo capacity greater than two (2) tons, provided no more
than one pickup truck used for commercial purposes shall be parked or maintained on the premises, regardless of size.
e. Any light delivery or panel delivery truck greater than twenty feet (20') in length or eight feet (8') in height, provided no more than one panel
delivery truck used for commercial purposes shall be parked or maintained on the premises, regardless of size.
f. Any trailer in excess of twelve feet (12') in overall length, except this subsection shall not be construed to include mobile homes or recreational
travel trailers, or trailers for personal recreational uses, regardless of length.
g. Any truck-tractor (semitruck) or road tractor.
h. Any backhoe, cement breaker, grader, end loader, dragline, or similar equipment intended to be used, or normally identified with commercial
construction, landscaping, residential construction, or commercial or industrial service purposes.
B. Storage Of Vehicles And Equipment: Storage of a "commercial or industrial vehicle or equipment", as defined in subsections A1b through A1f of this
section, on the premises of the resident occupant shall be permitted and considered an accessory use to a "home occupation" for the purposes of this
subsection; provided, any commercial or industrial vehicle parked or maintained on the premises shall be limited to a single rear axle; said commercial
or industrial vehicle or equipment is owned or operated by the resident occupant; the vehicle or equipment is stored in a standard garage constructed
and intended for the storage of passenger cars or vans with overhead door opening not greater than ten feet (10') in height and conforming to setback,
yard, height and size restrictions for accessory buildings and garages as specified in this title, and provided, there is no more than one garage on the
premises, the vehicle or equipment is concealed from public view at all times during storage, and no more than one vehicle and one item of equipment
as described in subsection A1h of this section used for commercial or industrial use is stored on the premises at any time.
1. This subsection shall not be interpreted to include the following:
a. Recreational vehicles and vans used for private, noncommercial transport and recreational activities which are used, owned or leased by the
person residing on the premises on which the vehicle is being parked and maintained;
b. Equipment actively engaged in legal construction work upon the premises where the equipment is maintained, and shall exclude such vehicles or
equipment only during the period of construction and a reasonable cleanup period thereafter not to exceed forty eight (48) hours;
c. Equipment and vehicles used as part of an on premises agricultural operation within an undeveloped area of greater than ten (10) acres and
zoned for residential purposes;
d. Equipment stored for private, noncommercial use for on premises landscape and lawn maintenance; and
e. Pickup trucks, light delivery, and panel trucks of a weight capacity and size less than the standards set forth in subsections A1d and A1e of this
section.
C. Multi-Family Entertainment And Service Centers: Multi-family entertainment and service centers shall be allowed as an accessory use when provided
as part of an apartment, condominium, townhouse project, or as an accessory use to a single-family development, and limited primarily to residents
and their guests. Multi-family entertainment and service centers shall be designed into the project or development to minimize the negative impact of
the use on the surrounding residential properties. (Ord. 2068, 11-17-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 482/687
D. Housing Rental: No "dwelling unit", residential unit or detached townhome or any portion thereof as defined in title 8, chapter 2, article A of this Code
and section 9-2-2, "Definitions", of this title shall be rented for a period of thirty one (31) days or less unless the dwelling unit, residential unit or
detached townhome is owner occupied, with the owner on site and present at the time of and for the duration of the rental.
All dwelling units, residential units and detached townhomes rented for a period of thirty one (31) days or less shall be subject to the requirements of
title 8, chapter 2, article A, "Building Code", of this Code, this title, and Iowa Code chapter 423A subject to the exemptions provided therein, and any
requirements imposed by the Iowa Department of Inspections and Appeals. (Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016)
E. Alternative Dwelling Units: The following may serve as dwellings on a short term or long term basis:
1. Manufactured Or Mobile Home: Is to be used as a place for long term residential occupancy: greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days in any calendar year.
a. Use matrix:
Zoning OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH VJHB
Manufactured or mobile home P P P P P P P
Second dwelling unit
b. Units located outside of a manufactured or mobile home park:
(1) Must meet the bulk regulations and setbacks of the zoning district where they are located.
(2) The appearance of the foundation must be visually compatible with the surrounding residential structures.
(3) Must meet the specific use regulations for residential districts related to enclosed garage space (subsection 9-10-4B of this title).
(4) Must meet the off street parking regulations for single-family detached dwellings (chapter 15 of this title).
2. Park Home Or Park Model: Is to be used for long term placement of a trailer intended for temporary residential occupancy for recreational, camping
or seasonal use: no more than one hundred eighty (180) (non-consecutive) days in any calendar year.
a. Use matrix:
Zoning
OS
RE
RS
R-1
SF-CR
SF-VJ
MH
RM
RH
VJHB
Park home or park model Pc
Second dwelling unit P P Pc Pc
Short term rental as part of an approved campground or recreational
vehicle park
Pc
Short term rental not part of an approved campground or recreational
vehicle park
b. Parking and drives:
(1) Must meet the off street parking regulations for single-family detached dwellings (chapter 15 of this title).
3. Recreational Vehicle:
a. Occupancy of a recreational vehicle is not an allowed use unless located in an approved campground or recreational vehicle park.
b. Recreational vehicles may be used for sleeping purposes only, for a time period of no more than thirty (30) (non-consecutive) days in any calendar
year, and only for non-paying guests of the occupant of a single family dwelling. A recreational vehicle must be located in conformance with all City
regulations governing parking and storage. Vehicles cannot be used for sleeping purposes when parked on any public or private street, off street
parking lot or loading area.
4. Tiny Home: Is to be used as a place for long term residential occupancy: greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days in any calendar
year.
a. Use matrix:
Zoning OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH VJHB
Tiny home P P P P P P P
Second dwelling unit P P Pc Pc
b. Parking and drives:
(1) Must meet the specific use regulations for residential districts related to enclosed garage space (subsection 9-10-4B of this title).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 483/687
(2) Must meet the off street parking regulations for single-family detached dwellings (chapter 15 of this title). (Ord. 2269, 1-8-2018)
9-5-5: USE CODES:
A. The City hereby adopts the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" (1987 edition) as prepared by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, as a
method of classifying and defining permitted uses in the zoning districts. Any subsequent supplements and amendments to the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual" (SIC) will be incorporated into the land use matrix. In all cases, except where noted by the lack of an SIC code number, the SIC
Manual will be used to define uses within a category.
Any application for a development permit shall be accompanied by such information as is deemed necessary by the Director of Community
Development in order to determine the applicable SIC code. The assignment of the appropriate classification shall determine the proper zoning district
for the intended use. The SIC code shall be used as a guide.
The determination of the Director of Community Development as to the proper classification of any use under said SIC designation shall be final,
subject to appeal as provided in this title. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-5-6: SUFFIXES TO ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. For the purpose of establishing the minimum lot size in the RE and RS districts, a numerical suffix shall follow the zoning district code. The numerical
suffix shall denote the minimum lot size within the subject property.
1. In the RS district, the lot size suffixes shall be identified in one thousand (1,000) square foot increments for minimum lot sizes between five thousand
(5,000) and fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. For lots greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size, the lot size suffix shall be
identified in five thousand (5,000) square foot increments.
2. In the RE district, the lot size suffixes shall identify the minimum lot size in acres and shall be denoted in one-acre increments up to lots of ten (10)
acres in size. Lot sizes of greater than ten (10) acres shall be denoted in five (5) acre increments.
3. Examples:
RS - 5 5,000 square feet
RS - 6 6,000 square feet
RS - 7 7,000 square feet
RS - 8 8,000 square feet
RS - 9 9,000 square feet
RS - 10 10,000 square feet
RS - 11 11,000 square feet
RS - 12 12,000 square feet
RS - 13 13,000 square feet
RS - 14 14,000 square feet
RS - 15 15,000 square feet
RS - 20 20,000 square feet
RS - 25 25,000 square feet
RS - 30 30,000 square feet
RS - 35 35,000 square feet
RS - 40 40,000 square feet
RE - 1A one acre
RE - 2A two acres
RE - 3A three acres
RE - 4A four acres
RE - 5A five acres
RE - 6A six acres
RE - 7A seven acres
Lot
Size Suffix
Minimum
Area Per Lot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 484/687
RE - 8A eight acres
RE - 9A nine acres
RE - 10A ten acres
RE - 15A fifteen acres
RE - 20A twenty acres
B. For the purpose of establishing the maximum density of single-family attached and multi-family developments in the RM and RH districts, and singlefamily
detached in the MH district, a numerical suffix shall follow the zoning district code. The numerical suffix shall denote the maximum density per
acre allowed within the subject property.
1. Examples:
RM - 4 4 dwellings per acre
RM - 6 6 dwellings per acre
RM - 8 8 dwellings per acre
RM - 10 10 dwellings per acre
RM - 12 12 dwellings per acre
RH - 8 8 dwellings per acre
RH - 10 10 dwellings per acre
RH - 12 12 dwellings per acre
RH - 14 14 dwellings per acre
RH - 16 16 dwellings per acre
RH - 18 18 dwellings per acre
MH - 6 6 dwellings per acre
MH - 8 8 dwellings per acre
MH - 10 10 dwellings per acre
MH - 12 12 dwellings per acre
C. Comprehensive Plan Suffixes:
1. To identify properties within any zoning district that has specific development standards or conditions identified within the Comprehensive Plan, a
suffix of (CP) will be included to notify individuals to refer to the Comprehensive Plan for further requirements.
2. As an example, single-family residential properties within the Buffalo Road Corridor Subarea of the Comprehensive Plan have a minimum lot size of
thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet (except for 5 properties in the area that are 10,000 square foot lots) and other development standards
identified in the Comprehensive Plan. Those properties would be identified as follows:
RS-13 (CP). (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2344 - GARAGE REQUIREMENT FOR MULTI-FAMILY CONDOMINIUM. Go to new
ordinance.
9-5-7: BUILDING FORM REGULATIONS AND ZONING DISTRICT COMPATIBILITY FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Intent:
1. The following sections designate the appropriate form and scale (and therefore, character) of residential development. This framework will allow for a
common understanding of development characteristics present in residential uses of and promote appropriate transition of different intensities within
the city.
2. Building form regulations are a set of design regulations for controlling building types and how they impact the public realm and the character of the
city. Building form regulations can control such things as: the mass of building; unit arrangement; the visibility and accessibility of building entrances
and public space along with certain accessory elements such as garages.
Lot
Size Suffix
Minimum
Area Per Lot
DU/Acre Suffix Permitted DU/Acre
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 485/687
3. Zoning district compatibility requirements designate that the intensity of any proposed residential development will be compatible with other existing
residential development in the area. Compatibility requirements compare the density of the proposed development with the surrounding developed
properties and place controls on density or building form to assure appropriate intensity transitioning.
B. Building Type:
1. Single-Family Detached (SF-D):
a. Unit Arrangements: One unit, no attachment.
b. Property Regime: Ownership of unit structure and real property. May have common property providing stormwater management or buffering
requirements. Maintenance and management may be provided by an association.
c. Garages: Minimum of one and one-half (11/2) car garage required (attached or detached).
Zoning: OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Single-family detached (SF-D) P P P P P P
2. Multi-Family Detached (MF-D):
a. Unit Arrangements: One unit, no attachment.
b. Property Regime: May have ownership of unit structure and real property or just unit envelope. Will have common property providing services to
units (i.e., utilities, access). Maintenance and management provided by an association.
c. Garages: Minimum of one and one-half (11/2) car garage required (attached or detached).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 486/687
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 487/687
Zoning: OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Multi-family detached (MF-D) P P
3. Multi-Family Attached Horizontal (MF-AH):
a. Unit Arrangements: Units are attached only horizontal, no stacked units. Units may be attached along side walls or attached along the side and
rear wall.
b. Property Regime:
(1) May have ownership of unit structure and real property (this is the typical ownership form for townhomes) or just unit envelope (this is the
typical ownership form for condominiums). Has common property providing services to units (i.e., utilities, access). Maintenance and
management provided by an association.
(2) One owner of building and property with no property ownership associated with the units (this is the typical ownership form for apartments).
Maintenance and management provided by the property manager.
c. Entry Type: Individual unit entry, no common entry element.
d. Garages: Minimum of one car garage per unit required (attached or detached) for the property regime in subsection B3b(1) of this section. No
garage requirement for the property regime in subsection B3b(2) of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 488/687
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 489/687
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 490/687
Zoning: OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Multi-family attached horizontal (MF-AH) P P
4. Multi-Family Attached Vertical (MF-AV):
a. Unit Arrangements: Units attached vertically. Units may be attached along side wall or rear wall.
b. Property Regime:
(1) Ownership of unit envelope (this is the typical ownership form for condominiums). Has common property providing services to units (i.e.,
utilities). Maintenance and management provided by an association.
(2) One owner of building and property with no property ownership associated with unit (this is the typical ownership form for apartments).
Maintenance and management provided by the property manager.
c. Entry Type:
(1) Individual: Individual unit entry, no common entry element.
(2) Shared: Some type of common entry element either conditioned or nonconditioned space.
d. Garages: Minimum of one car garage per unit required (attached or detached) for the property regime in subsection B4b(1) of this section. No
garage requirement for the property regime in subsection B4b(2) of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 491/687
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 492/687
Zoning: OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Multi-family attached vertical (MF-AV) P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 493/687
C. Zoning District Compatibility And Transitioning:
1. Transition Of Densities: To assure an appropriate transition in lot sizes or densities with other existing residential development in the area, any
residential development proposed for review and approval after the effective date hereof shall meet the following requirements:
a. The density of multi-family developments should not differ more than fifty percent (50%) from the average density of the developed properties
within two hundred feet (200') of the subject property.
b. Developed properties are defined as those properties that are zoned residential and platted as a detached unit residential subdivision prior to the
subject property obtaining final plat or site plan permit approval.
c. Proposed development that will not meet the density transition guidelines as noted above, shall mitigate the impact of the development by
transitioning the building form within the development as noted below.
2. Transition Of Building Form: To assure compatibility of residential developments that do not meet the density transition noted above, the number of
units per building, length of the building and the number of stories per building will be restricted according to the following:
a. Applicability: Building mass buffer will apply as follows:
(1) Will apply to medium or high density residentially zoned properties with plat or site plan permits approved after the effective date hereof.
(2) Will not apply to any property with a PUD in existence prior to the effective date hereof.
b. Multi-Family Zoning Districts; Building Mass Buffer: One hundred fifty feet (150') from any adjacent developed property where the proposed
development cannot meet the density transition as provided in subsection C1a of this section.
(1) Buffer is measured from the lower density property line and includes the ROW if a street separates the subject properties.
(2) Buffer will overlay any required setbacks, landscape buffer park or easements on the property.
c. Restrictions: Within the building mass buffer, the following shall apply:
(1) No more than six (6) attached units per building.
(2) No more than two (2) stories in height.
(3) Maximum building length (measured from foundation of parallel walls of greatest distance apart):
(A) Residential buildings: Maximum length of one hundred sixty feet (160').
(B) Garage buildings: Maximum length of one hundred feet (100').
(4) For every eight (8) garage bays, there must be a total garage building separation of no less than twenty feet (20').
(5) The above restrictions apply to the entirety of any building located fully or partially within the building mass buffer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 494/687
(Ord. 1961, 10-15-2012)
9-5-8: OPEN SPACE/AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL USE REGULATIONS:
A. Introduction: These matrices represent those uses in the applicable residential districts which are permitted (P), a permitted conditional use permit (Pc),
or not permitted (blank space). The applicable zoning district is identified at the top of the matrix and the uses are identified along the left side of the
matrix. (Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998)
B. Table Of Contents:
Table
1. Residential uses 5.1
2. Equestrian uses 5.2
3. Agricultural uses/animal keeping 5.3
4. Recreational uses 5.4
5. Other uses 5.5
6. Public administration 5.6
(Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
C. Use Matrices:
TABLE 5.1 RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family dwelling:
Attached P P
Detached P P P P P P P
Multi-family dwelling P P
Second dwelling unit P P Pc Pc
Mobile homes P P P P P P P
6515
Mobile home developments P P
Short term rental:
Owner occupied P P P P P P P P P
Not owner occupied
Long term rental P P P P P P P P P
805 Nursing and personal care P Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc P P P
8351
Child and day care services:
Childcare home - 5 children or less1 P P P P P P P
Child development home maximum 6 full time children (State license category
A or B)1
P P P P P P P
7+ full time children (child development home - State license category C)
7+ full time children (childcare center) Pc Pc Pc
Note:
1.In-home daycare uses require a home occupation permit issued by the City in addition to any State requirements.
OS Agricultural/Open Space District SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction Residential
Land Uses OS
RE
RS
R-1
SF-CR
SF-VJ
MH
RM
RH
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 495/687
RE Residential Estate District District
RS Residential Single-Family District MH Manufactured Housing District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District RM Residential Medium-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
TABLE 5.2 EQUESTRIAN USES
Land Uses OS
RE
RS
R-
1
SFCR
SFVJ
MH
RM
RH
Horse keeping, private, minimum 2 acres per horse required P P
0752
Animal special services except veterinary, horse only Pc
Pc
7999
Amusement and recreation services, not elsewhere classified, horse shows, horse
stables and commercial areas only
Pc
Pc
TABLE 5.3 AGRICULTURAL USES/ANIMAL KEEPING
Land Uses OS
RE
RS
R-1
SFCR
SFVJ
MH
RM
RH
Animal, wild by nature Pc
Pc
Dogs and cats P P P P P P P P P
Other household pets P P P P P P P P P
01 Agricultural production - crop production outdoors
011
Cash grains P P P P P P P P P
013
Field crops except cash grains P
016
Vegetables and melons
017
Fruit and tree nuts
019
General farms, primary crop production
018
Horticultural specialties - other than cultivation of marijuana P
- Cultivation of marijuana with or without a license as a medical cannabidiol
manufacturer
01 Agricultural production - crop production under cover
018
Horticultural specialties - other than cultivation of marijuana P
- Cultivation of marijuana as part of a licensed medical cannabidiol
manufacturer
Must comply with the State's medical cannabidiol regulations
- Cultivation of marijuana without a license as a medical cannabidiol
manufacturer
02 Agricultural production - livestock and animal specialties P Pc
0279-
9901
Apiary (bee and honey farm/ beekeeping) P P P P P P P
5421 Fruit and vegetable markets Pc
Pc
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 496/687
OS Agricultural/Open Space District SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction Residential
District
RE Residential Estate District
RS Residential Single-Family District MH Manufactured Housing District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District RM Residential Medium-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
TABLE 5.4 RECREATIONAL USES
Land Uses OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Parks, public P P P P P P P P P
Tennis courts, private P P P P P P P P P
Trails, pedestrian/biking P P P P P P P P P
7991 Physical fitness facilities Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
7992 Public golf course P P P P P P P P P
7997 Membership golf and country club P P P P P P P P P
7997 Membership sports and recreation clubs Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
7999 Miniature golf course and golf driving range P
TABLE 5.5 OTHER USES
Land Uses OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Accessory uses and structures (other than to agricultural or dwellings) P P P P P P P P P
Gardens, noncommercial P P P P P P P P P
Open storage
1381 Drilling oil and gas wells
491 Electric services P P P P P P P P P
493 Combination utility services P P P P P P P P P
494 Water supply P P P P P P P P P
4952 Sanitary services, sewerage systems P P P P P P P P P
6553 Cemeteries Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
7261 Funeral services and crematories Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
8211 Elementary and secondary school P P P P P P P P P
8322 Individual - family social services Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
8331 Job training - vocational rehabilitation services Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
8399 Social services not elsewhere classified Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
8661 Religious organizations Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
OS Agricultural/Open Space District SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction Residential
District
RE Residential Estate District
RS Residential Single-Family District MH Manufactured Housing District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District RM Residential Medium-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 497/687
TABLE 5.6 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
Land Uses OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
91 Executive, legislative, and general government, except finance Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
9211 Courts Pc
9221 Public order and safety Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
9222 Legal counsel
9223 Correctional institutions Pc
9224 Fire protection Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
9229 Public order and safety, not elsewhere classified Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
9331 Public finance, taxation and monetary policy Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
9441 Administration of human resource programs Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
951 Administration of environmental quality and housing programs Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
961 Administration of economic programs Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc
971 National security and international affairs
OS Agricultural/Open Space District SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction Residential
District
RE Residential Estate District
RS Residential Single-Family District MH Manufactured Housing District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District RM Residential Medium-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
(Ord. 1472, 3-18-2002; amd. Ord. 1575, 3-29-2004; Ord. 1618, 1-31-2005; Ord. 1816, 10-6-2008; Ord. 1817, 10-6-2008; Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2141,
4-4-2016; Ord. 2162, 8-8-2016; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017; Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
9-5-9: INDEX:
5.5 Accessory uses and structures (other than to agricultural or dwellings)
5.6 Administration of economic programs
5.6 Administration of environmental quality and housing programs
5.6 Administration of human resource programs
5.3 Animal husbandry
5.1 Bed and breakfast (SIC subsection of 7011)
5.5 Cemeteries
5.5 Churches, synagogues, and other buildings used for religious worship
5.6 Correctional institutions
5.6 Courts
5.3 Crops, commercial
5.1 Daycare facility (SIC 8351)
5.1 Dormitories/fraternities/sororities (SIC 7041)
5.6 Executive, legislative and general government except finance
5.6 Fire protection
5.5 Gardens, noncommercial
5.4 Golf course, except miniature golf courses (SIC 7992 and 7997, golf course membership)
5.4 Golf course related facilities such as clubhouses, driving ranges, etc. (SIC 7999, golf services except miniature golf)
Table Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 498/687
5.6 Governmental facilities
5.2 Horse keeping, private, minimum 2 acres per horse required
5.5 Individual and family social services
5.6 Legal counsel
5.1 Manufactured housing on nonpermanent foundations (SIC 6515)
5.1 Manufactured housing on permanent foundations
5.5 Mausoleums, accessory crematories and columbaria
5.6 National security and international affairs
5.1 Nursing or convalescent home (SIC 8059)
5.5 Oil wells (SIC 1381)
5.4 Parks, public
5.3 Produce stands, retail, crops grown on site (SIC 5431)
5.6 Public finance, taxation and monetary policy
5.6 Public order and safety
5.4 Recreational facility, private or membership
5.5 Schools, private
5.5 Schools, public
5.1 Second dwelling unit
5.1 Senior citizen/congregate housing (SIC 8051)
5.1 Single-family attached dwelling
5.1 Single-family detached dwelling
5.2 Stables, and commercial arenas (SIC 0752, horse only and 7999, horse shows)
5.5 Storage, open
5.4 Tennis courts, private
5.4 Trails, pedestrian/biking
5.5 Utility facilities, private/public
(Ord. 1575, 3-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
Chapter 6
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT
9-6-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the COMMERCIAL USE MATRIX. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-6-2: PURPOSE:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be generally recognized that the type of use is not so important as the manner in which the use is
accomplished. It would be impractical, if not impossible, to accurately enumerate all of the uses which would be beneficial or detrimental to the
community at large. It is also intended that the districts listed in this chapter shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use which could be
detrimental to the public health, welfare, and safety of the community or its citizens. While the City desires to encourage the development of the
community, it shall be done in a responsible manner consistent with the rules and regulations of the City and in accordance with the goals and policies
of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. The regulations set forth in this chapter specify the uses that are allowed in the various zones under this chapter. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-6-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
A. Uses shown in the matrix as "permitted" (P), are a permitted use in the applicable district; however, new construction or expansion of existing
structures, or expansion of the area of use or operation, shall require approval by the City Council through the site plan review process. Upon the
Table Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 499/687
determination of the Director of Community Development, any use that is identified as a more intensive use than the preceding approved use such that
there would be a potential for a significant effect upon its surroundings shall be reviewed through the site plan review process. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
B. Uses shown in the matrix as "permitted conditional use permit" (Pc) are permitted in the applicable district following review and approval through the
permitted conditional use permit (Pc) process. This requirement shall apply to new uses, as well as new construction and building expansions.
The use of a permitted conditional use permit (Pc) allows the City to regulate the intensity of development of a particular use, activity, or location. The
use of the permitted conditional use permit (Pc) process should not be seen as a means to prohibit uses but as a way to allow the City to secure more
information concerning a specific use and its operation. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
C. Each use is subject to all provisions of this title.
D. Where a proposed land use is not identified in this chapter, the Director of Community Development shall review the proposed use when requested to
do so by letter and, based upon the characteristics of the use, determine which of the uses listed in this chapter is equivalent to that proposed. The
proposed use, if determined to be equivalent to an allowed use, shall be subject to review through the process indicated within the matrix. It is further
the intent of this chapter to allow flexibility and diversity of land uses.
E. Prior to submission of a permit application for either a site plan development permit, a permitted conditional use permit (Pc) or a modification thereof,
the applicant may request that a preapplication review be conducted by the Department of Community Development to consider the proposed project.
Upon submittal of a preapplication, staff will evaluate the preapplication in light of applicable City regulations, indicate major problems, and identify
additional required information. In addition, staff will make a determination as to the appropriateness of the use in the proposed location. (Ord. 1190, 6-
17-1996)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2333 - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE AND BUILDINGS . Go to new ordinance.
9-6-4: SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS:
A. The following regulations shall be applied to the specific uses listed below in any district where that use is allowed:
1. Day nursery schools and childcare centers shall be allowed, provided that no building, structure or accessory use for property so used, is located no
closer than thirty feet (30') from any other principal building on any other lot in a residential district. In addition there must be an established and well
maintained, fenced play lot of no less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in area for the first twenty (20) or less children under care, with twenty
five (25) square feet added to such play lot area for each additional designated child capacity of the principal building.
2. The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse matter or water carried waste, and abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust,
smoke, gas, noise or similar nuisance, shall be employed for any use within this chapter. (Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016)
3. Unless allowed elsewhere in this title, residential uses shall be prohibited within the commercial, office and industrial districts. Residential uses
located above nonresidential uses and single-family detached dwellings in the Valley Junction Historical Business District and Valley Junction
Commercial District may be permitted in accordance with Building, Fire and Rental Codes. Residential uses are not allowed on the first floor of a
mixed-use building in the Valley Junction Historical Business District and Valley Junction Commercial District. Multi-family residential uses are
permitted within the Support Commercial Zoning District when incorporated and approved by the City Council as part of a mixed use building and/or
development. (Ord. 2258, 10-30-2017)
4. The maximum number of consecutive nights tents, camp trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, or similar movable or temporary sleeping quarters may
occupy a campground is fifteen (15). After fifteen (15) nights, the temporary sleeping quarters must be removed from the campground for a minimum
of three (3) consecutive nights. (Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016)
9-6-5: USE CODES:
A. The City hereby adopts the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" (1987 edition) as prepared by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, as a
method of classifying and defining permitted uses in the zoning districts. Any subsequent supplements and amendments to the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual" (SIC) will be incorporated into the land use matrix. In all cases, except where noted by the lack of an SIC code number, the SIC
Manual will be used to define uses within a category.
Any application for a development permit shall be accompanied by such information as is deemed necessary by the Director of Community
Development in order to determine the applicable SIC code. The assignment of the appropriate classification shall determine the proper zoning district
for the intended use. The SIC code shall be used as a guide.
The determination of the Director of Community Development as to the proper classification of any use shall be final, subject to appeal as provided in
this title. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2334 - APPLIANCE STORES. Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2349 - HOSPITALS. Go to new ordinance.
9-6-6: COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND INDUSTRIAL USE REGULATIONS:
A. Introduction: The following matrix represents those uses in the applicable zoning districts which are permitted (P), allowed with the approval of a
permitted conditional use permit (Pc), or not permitted (blank space). The applicable zoning district is identified at the top of the matrix and the uses,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 500/687
and their SIC codes, are identified along the left side of the matrix. For the ease of finding a particular subject in the matrix, a table of contents has
been included that identifies the subject areas and the page number of the beginning of that section in the matrix.
B. Table Of Contents:
Division A - Agricultural, Forestry, And Fishing SIC Major Group
Agricultural production - crops 01
Agricultural production - livestock and animal specialties 02
Agricultural services (except: exotic animal husbandry) 07
Animal service, except veterinary 075
Forestry 08
Fishing, hunting and trapping 09
Division B - Mining
Metal mining 10
Coal mining 12
Oil and gas extraction 13
Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic materials except fuels 14
Division C - Construction
Construction and contractors (offices only) 15,16,17
Construction and contractors' operations and storage yards 15,16,17
Division D - Manufacturing
Food and kindred products 20
Tobacco products 21
Textile mill products 22
Apparel and other finished products from fabrics and similar materials 23
Lumber and wood products 24
Furniture and fixtures 25
Paper and allied products 26
Printing, publishing and allied industries 27
Chemicals and allied products 28
Petroleum refining and related industries 29
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products 30
Leather and leather products 31
Stone, clay and glass products 32
Primary metal industries (e.g., blast furnaces, foundries, etc.) 33
Fabricated metal products, except machinery and transportation equipment 34
Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment 35
Electrical and electronic machinery, equipment, and supplies 36
Transportation equipment 37
Instruments and related products 38
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries 39
Division E - Transportation, Communication And Public Utilities
Railroad transportation 40
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 501/687
Local and suburban transit and interurban highway passenger transportation 41
Trucking and warehousing 42
U.S. postal service 43
Water transportation 44
Transportation by air 45
Pipelines 46
Transportation services 47
Communications 48
Electric, gas, and sanitary services 49
Division F - Wholesale Trade
Wholesale trade - durable goods 50
Wholesale trade - nondurable goods 51
Division G - Retail Trade
Building materials, hardware, garden supply and mobile home dealers 52
General merchandise stores 53
Food stores 54
Automobile dealers and service stations 55
Apparel and accessory stores 56
Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment stores 57
Eating and drinking places 58
Miscellaneous retail 59
Division H - Finance, Insurance, Real Estate And Other Office Uses Not Elsewhere
Classified
Depository institutions (banks) 60
Nondepository credit institutions 61
Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchange and services 62
Insurance carriers 63
Insurance agents, brokers, and services 64
Real estate office 65
Holding and other investment offices 67
Professional and semiprofessional office use --
Division I - Services
Hotels, rooming houses, camps, and other lodging places 70
Personal services 72
Business services 73
Automotive repair, services, and parking 75
Miscellaneous repair services 76
Motion pictures 78
Amusement and recreation services 79
Health services 80
Legal services 81
Educational services 82
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 502/687
Social services 83
Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens 84
Membership organizations 86
Engineering, accounting, research, management and related services 87
Services not elsewhere included 89
Division J - Public Administration
Justice, public order and safety 92
Finance, taxation and monetary policy 93
Administration of human resource programs 94
Administration of environmental quality and housing programs 95
Administration of economic programs 96
C.Table 6.1 - Use Matrix:
DIVISION A - AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHING
RC Regional Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District LI Light Industrial District
CMC Community Commercial District VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District GI General Industrial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District WR Warehouse Retail District OF Office District
CVC Convenience Commercial District BP Business Park District PCP Professional Commerce Park District
SC Support Commercial District VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District OS Agricultural/Open Space District
01 Agricultural production - crop production outdoors
011Cash grains P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
013Field crops except cash grains P
P
016Vegetables and melons
017Fruit and tree nuts
019General farms, primary crop production
018Horticulture specialties - other than cultivation of
marijuana
P
P
-Cultivation of marijuana with or without a license as a
medical cannabidiol manufacturer
01 Agricultural production - crop production under
cover
018 Horticultural specialties - other than cultivation of
marijuana
P P P
P
P
-Cultivation of marijuana as part of a licensed medical
cannabidiol manufacturer
Must comply with the State's medical cannabidiol
regulations
Pc
-Cultivation of marijuana without a license as a medical
cannabidiol manufacturer
02Agricultural production - livestock and animal
specialties
0211Beef cattle feedlots
0212Beef cattle, except feedlots P
0213Hogs - hog farms, except feedlots P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 503/687
-Hog feedlots
0214Sheep and goats P
0219General livestock, except dairy and poultry P
024Dairy farms P
025Poultry and eggs P
027Animal specialty P
029General farms primarily livestock and animal
specialties
P
07Agricultural services (except: exotic animal
husbandry)
071Soil preparation services P P
P
P
072Crop services P P
P
P
-Cultivation of marijuana as part of a licensed medical
cannabidiol manufacturer
Must comply with the State's medical cannabidiol
regulations
Pc
-Cultivation of marijuana without a license as a medical
cannabidiol manufacturer
0741Veterinary services for livestock P
P
0742Veterinary services for animal specialties, no outdoor
runs
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
P
P
-Veterinary services for animal specialties, with outside
runs
P
075Animal services, except veterinary
0751Livestock services, except veterinary P
0752Animal specialty services, except veterinary,
grooming and boarding services, kennels
P
-Boarding services with kennels, no outside runs Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
P
-Boarding services - kennels, with outside runs P
-Grooming services P P P P P P P P P
P
P
076Farm labor and management services P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
0781Landscape counseling and planning P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
0782Lawn and garden services P P P
P
P
0783Ornamental shrub and tree services P P P P P
P
08Forestry Pc
085Forestry services P P P P
P
P P P
09Fishing, hunting and trapping Pc
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 2160, 7-25-2016; Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
DIVISION B - MINING
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 504/687
RC Regional Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District LI Light Industrial District
CMC Community Commercial District VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District GI General Industrial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District WR Warehouse Retail District OF Office District
CVC Convenience Commercial District BP Business Park District PCP Professional Commerce Park District
SC Support Commercial District VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District OS Agricultural/Open Space District
10Metal mining
12Coal mining Pc
13Oil and gas extraction Pc
14Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic materials
except fuels
Pc
Pc
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005)
DIVISION C - CONSTRUCTION
RC Regional Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District LI Light Industrial District
CMC Community Commercial District VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District GI General Industrial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District WR Warehouse Retail District OF Office District
CVC Convenience Commercial District BP Business Park District PCP Professional Commerce Park District
SC Support Commercial District VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District OS Agricultural/Open Space District
15, 16, 17Building construction, contractor and
operative builders (offices only, no warehouse
component)
P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
15, 16, 17Building construction, contractor and
operative builders with warehouse building - no
outdoor storage yard allowed
Pc Pc P P P P
P
P
-With warehouse component consisting of building and/or
paved outdoor storage yard
Pc
Pc Pc
P
-With warehouse component consisting of building and/or
gravel outdoor storage yard (*see also subsection 9-10-
4A8 of this title)
P*
(Ord. 1874, 6-28-2010)
DIVISION D - MANUFACTURING
RC Regional Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District LI Light Industrial District
CMC Community Commercial District VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District GI General Industrial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District WR Warehouse Retail District OF Office District
CVC Convenience Commercial District BP Business Park District PCP Professional Commerce Park District
SC Support Commercial District VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District OS Agricultural/Open Space District
20Food and kindred products
201Meat products
202Dairy products P P P
P
203Canned and preserved fruits and vegetables P P P
P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 505/687
20Food and kindred products
204Grain mill products P
205Bakery products P P P
P
206Sugary and confectionery products P P P
P
207Fats and oils P
208Beverages Pc
Pc
P
2082Brewery with no taproom Pc
Pc
P
2082Brewery less than or equal to 5,000 sq. ft. in
conjunction with a taproom
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
2082Brewery greater than 5,000 sq. ft. and less than or
equal to 10,000 sq. ft. in conjunction with a taproom
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
2082Brewery greater than 10,000 sq. ft. in conjunction
with a taproom
Pc
Pc
P
2085Distillery with no tasting room Pc
Pc
P
2085Distillery less than or equal to 5,000 sq. ft. with a
tasting room
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
2085Distillery greater than 5,000 sq. ft. and less than or
equal to 10,000 sq. ft. with a tasting room
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
2085Distillery greater than 10,000 sq. ft. with a tasting
room
Pc
Pc
Pc
209Miscellaneous food and kindred products (e.g.,
roasted coffee and potato chips, etc.) (except: 2091 -
2092)
Pc
Pc Pc
P
2091Canned and cured fish and seafood
2092Fresh or frozen prepared fish
21Tobacco products P
P
22Textile mill products P P
23Apparel and other finished products from fabrics
and similar materials
P P P
P
24Lumber and wood products
241Logging Pc
242Sawmills and planing mills Pc
243Millwork, veneer, plywood and structural members
2431Millwork Pc P P Pc P
P
2434Wood kitchen cabinets Pc P P Pc P
P
2435Hardwood veneer and plywood Pc P
P
2436Softwood veneer and plywood Pc P
P
2439Structural wood members, not elsewhere classified Pc P
P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 506/687
20Food and kindred products
244Wood containers Pc Pc
P
245Wood buildings and mobile homes Pc
P
P
249Miscellaneous wood products (e.g., wood barrels,
wood kegs, etc.) (except: 2491 and 2492)
Pc P
P
2491Wood preserving
2492Reconstituted wood products
25Furniture and fixtures P P P P P P
P
26Paper and allied products (except: 2611, 2621, and
2631)
P
2611Pulp mills
2621Paper mills
2631Paperboard mills
27Printing, publishing and allied industries (except:
275)
P P Pc P
P
275Commercial printing P P P P
P
28Chemicals and allied products, and cosmetic
preparations (except: 283, 2844 and 2892)
Pc
283Drugs P P P P
P
-Processing of marijuana as part of a licensed medical
cannabidiol manufacturer
Must comply with the State's medical cannabidiol
regulations
Pc
-Processing of marijuana without a license as a medical
cannabidiol manufacturer
2844Perfumes, other toiletry preparations (except:
cosmetic preparations)
Pc
Pc
-Cosmetic preparations P P P P
P
2892Explosives
2899Chemicals and chemical preparations, NEC
29Petroleum refining and related industries (except:
2951)
2951Asphalt paving mixtures and blocks Pc
30Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
301Tires and inner tubes Pc
302Rubber and plastic footwear Pc
Pc P
P
305Gaskets, packing and sealing devices and rubber and
plastic hoses and belting
Pc
P
306Fabricated rubber products, not elsewhere classified Pc P
P
308Miscellaneous plastic products (except: 3084 and
3089)
Pc
Pc P
P
3084Plastic pipe Pc
P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 507/687
20Food and kindred products
3089Plastic products, not elsewhere classified Pc
Pc Pc
P
31Leather and leather products (except: 311) P Pc P
P
311Leather tanning and finishing
32Stone, clay and glass products
321Flat glass Pc Pc
Pc
322Glass and glassware, pressed or blown Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
323Products of purchased glass P P P
P
324Cement, hydraulic Pc
Pc
325Structural clay products (e.g., bricks, etc.) Pc
Pc
326Pottery and related products Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
327Concrete, gypsum, and plaster products Pc
Pc
3271Concrete products, not elsewhere classified P
P
3273Ready mixed concrete Pc
Pc
Pc
328Cut stone and stone products Pc
Pc
329Miscellaneous nonmetallic mineral products (except:
3292)
Pc
Pc
3292Asbestos products
33Primary metal industries (e.g., blast furnaces,
foundries, etc.) (except: 3313, 3315, 336, 3398, and
3399)
3313Electrometallurgical products, except steel Pc
3315Steel wire drawing, steel nails and spikes Pc Pc
Pc
336Nonferrous foundries (castings) Pc
3398Metal heat treating Pc
Pc P
P
3399Primary metal products, not elsewhere classified
(except: metal fasteners)
-Metal cans and shipping containers Pc
Pc Pc
P
34Fabricated metal products, except machinery and
transportation equipment
341Metal cans and shipping containers Pc P
P
342Cutlery, hand tools and general hardware (except:
forged and drop forged manufacturing)
P Pc P
P
343Heating equipment except electric and warm air; and
plumbing fixtures (except: 3431)
P P P
P
3431Enameled iron and metal sanitary ware P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 508/687
20Food and kindred products
344Fabricated structural metal products (except: 3442 and
3444)
Pc
P
3442Metal doors, sash, frames, moldings and trim P P P
P
3444Sheet metalwork P P P
P
-Cutlery, hand tools and general hardware using forged
and dropped forged manufacturing
Pc
Pc
3451Screw machine products P P P
P
3452Bolts, nuts, screws, rivets and washers Pc Pc
Pc
346Metal forging and stamping Pc
347Coating, engraving and allied services Pc Pc
P
P
348Ordnance and accessories, and guided missiles
(except: 3484)
3484Small arms P P
P
349Miscellaneous fabricated metal products (e.g., steel
springs, valves and pipes)
Pc
Pc Pc
P
35Industrial and commercial machinery and computer
equipment (no outdoor storage in BP Zones)
351Engines and turbines P Pc P
P
352Farm and garden machinery P Pc P
P
353Construction and related materials P Pc P
P
354Metalwork machinery P Pc P
P
355Special industry machinery P Pc P
P
356General industrial machinery P Pc P
P
357Computer and office equipment P P Pc P
P
358Refrigeration and services machinery P Pc P
P
359Industrial machinery, not elsewhere included P Pc P
P
36Electrical and electronic machinery, and supplies,
except computer equipment (except: 3691 - 3692)
P P P
P
3691Storage batteries Pc
3692Primary batteries Pc
37Transportation equipment
371Motor vehicles and equipment (except: 3714) no
outside storage in LI and BP Zones
P P
P
3714Motor vehicle parts and accessories (no outdoor
storage)
P Pc P
P
372Aircraft and parts (except: 3724) Pc
P Pc P
P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 509/687
20Food and kindred products
3724Aircraft engines and engine parts (no outdoor
storage)
P P Pc P
P
373Ship and boat building and repairing P
374Railroad equipment P
375Motorcycles, bicycles, and parts P Pc P
P
376Guided missiles, space vehicles and parts P P Pc P
P
379Miscellaneous transportation equipment (no outside
storage in BP Zone)
P Pc P
P
38Instruments and related products P P Pc P
P
3843Dental equipment and supplies, not to exceed 5,000
sq. ft. and no outdoor presence of the manufacturing
activity
P
39Miscellaneous manufacturing industries
391Jewelry, silverware, and plated ware (except: 3914) P P P P P P
P
3914Silverware Pc Pc
Pc
393Musical instruments P P P P
P
394Toys and sporting goods P P P P
P
395Pens, pencils, office, and art supplies P P P P
P
396Costume jewelry and notions P P P P P P
P
399Miscellaneous manufactures, not elsewhere classified
(except: 3995 - 3996)
P Pc P
P
3995Burial caskets Pc Pc
P
3996Linoleum asphalted floor coverings, etc. Pc
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 2113, 9-8-2015; Ord. 2225, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2250, 9-18-2017; Ord. 2265, 12-11-2017; Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
DIVISION E - TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
RC Regional Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District LI Light Industrial District
CMC Community Commercial District VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District GI General Industrial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District WR Warehouse Retail District OF Office District
CVC Convenience Commercial District BP Business Park District PCP Professional Commerce Park District
SC Support Commercial District VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District OS Agricultural/Open Space District
40Railroad transportation Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
41Local and suburban transit and interurban highway
passenger transportation (except: bus terminal
operations and ambulance services)
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 510/687
-Bus and terminal operations Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
4119-9902 Ambulance services (road) P Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
42Trucking and warehousing
421Trucking and courier services, except air P Pc
Pc P
P
Pc
-Product transportation services, garbage collection and
transport - not disposal
Pc
Pc
Pc
4221Farm product warehousing and storage Pc
4222Refrigerated warehousing and storage Pc
P Pc P
P
4225General warehousing and storage (except:
miniwarehouse/self-storage; storage of fireworks; and
storage of explosives and explosive materials)
Pc
Pc Pc
P P P P
P
-With no outside storage yard Pc
P Pc P
P
-With paved outside storage yard Pc
P
-With gravel outdoor storage yard (see also subsection 9-
10-4A8 of this title)
P
4225Self-service storage facility
-Exterior unit access with no outside storage yard P Pc P
P
-Exterior unit access with paved outdoor storage yard P P
P
-Exterior unit access with gravel outdoor storage yard
(*see also subsection 9-10-4A8 of this title)
P*
-Interior unit access with no outside storage yard Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc P P P P
P
P P
-Interior unit access with paved outside storage yard P P
P
-Interior unit access with gravel outdoor storage yard (*see
also subsection 9-10-4A8 of this title)
P*
4225General warehousing and storage - fireworks P
4225General warehousing and storage - explosives and
explosive materials
4226Special warehousing
-Liquid storage P
P
-Household goods and furniture storage Pc
P P
P
-Special warehousing and storage P
P
-Document and office records storage P P P P
P
Pc
423Terminal and joint terminal maintenance facilities for
motor freight transportation
Pc
Pc
Pc
43U.S. Postal Service P
44Water transportation (except: 4493)
4493Marinas P
45Transportation by air
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 511/687
4512Air transportation - scheduled Pc
4513Air courier services Pc
4522Air transportation - nonscheduled Pc
-Heliport/helistop Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
4581Airports, flying fields and airport terminal services Pc
46Pipelines Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
47Transportation services
472Passenger transportation arrangement P P P P P P P P
473Freight transportation arrangement P P P P P P P P P
474Rental of railroad cars Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
478Miscellaneous transportation services
4783Packing and crating P P P P Pc P
P
4785Fixed facilities and inspection and weighing services
for motor vehicle transportation
Pc
Pc
Pc
P
4789Transportation services, not elsewhere classified Pc
Pc
-Horsedrawn transportation services Pc P
-Stockyards, not primarily for fattening or selling of
livestock
48Communications
481Telephone communications (except:
transmitting/receiving towers and/or dishes)
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
-Unmanned service buildings P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
482Telegraph and other communications (except:
transmitting and receiving towers and/or dishes)
P P P P P P
483Radio and television broadcasting (except:
transmitting and receiving towers and/or dishes)
P P P P P P
484Cable and other pay TV services (except:
transmitting/receiving towers and/or dishes)
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
-Unmanned service buildings P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
489Communications services, not elsewhere included
(except: transmitting and receiving towers and/or dishes)
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
-Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
-Transmitting/receiving towers Pc
Pc
Pc
49Electric, gas and sanitary services
491Electric services P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
-Small wind energy conversion system (see section 9-14-
13 of this title)
P
P
P P P
-Small solar energy system (see section 9-14-14 of this
title)
P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 512/687
-Large solar energy system (see section 9-14-14 of this
title)
P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
-Electric vehicle charging station P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
-Renewable energy electric vehicle charging station P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
492Gas production and distribution
4922Natural gas transmission (except: natural gas storage
and 4925)
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
-Natural gas storage
4925Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas
production and/or distribution (except: production and
manufacturing)
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
-Production and manufacturing
493Combination utility services P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
494Water supply P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
4952Sanitary services, sewerage systems P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
4953Refuse systems
4959Sanitary services, not elsewhere classified P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P P
496Steam and air conditioning supply
497Irrigation systems
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 1860, 3-22-2010; Ord. 1940, 12-27-2011; Ord. 1958, 8-20-2012; Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016; Ord. 2187, 12-12-2016; Ord.
2225, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018; Ord. 2288, 3-19-2018)
DIVISION F - WHOLESALE TRADE
RC Regional Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District LI Light Industrial District
CMC Community Commercial District VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District GI General Industrial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District WR Warehouse Retail District OF Office District
CVC Convenience Commercial District BP Business Park District PCP Professional Commerce Park District
SC Support Commercial District VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District OS Agricultural/Open Space District
50 Wholesale trade - durable goods (no outside
storage in the BP or VJLI Zone)
501Motor vehicles, parts and supplies Pc
P P
P
502Furniture and home furnishings P P P P
P
503Lumber and construction materials P Pc P
P
504Professional and commercial equipment P P Pc P
P
505Metals and minerals, except petroleum P
506Electrical goods P P P P
P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 513/687
507Hardware, plumbing and heating equipment P P P P
P
508Machinery equipment and supplies P P Pc P
P
509Miscellaneous durable goods (except: 5092-02;
fireworks and 5093; ammunition; and wood and wood
byproducts)
P P P P
P
5092-02 Fireworks P
5093Scrap and waste materials
-Ammunition
-Wood byproducts
51Wholesale trade - nondurable goods
511Paper and paper products P P P P
P
512Drugs, proprietary, and sundries P P P P
P
-Distribution of medical cannabidiol as part of a licensed
medical cannabidiol manufacturer
Must comply with the State's medical cannabidiol
regulations
Pc
-Distribution of medical cannabidiol without a license as a
medical cannabidiol manufacturer
513Apparel, piece goods and notions P P P P
P
514Groceries and related products P P P P
P
515Farm product, raw materials Pc
Pc
5154Livestock
516Chemicals and allied products (except: explosives) P P P
P
-Explosives
517Petroleum and petroleum products Pc
518Beer, wine and distilled beverages P P P P
P
519Miscellaneous nondurable goods (except: paints,
varnish, and supplies; and fertilizers and agricultural
chemicals)
P P Pc P
P
-Paints, varnishes and supplies Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
-Fertilizers and agricultural chemicals Pc
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 2225, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
DIVISION G - RETAIL TRADE
RC Regional Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District LI Light Industrial District
CMC Community Commercial District VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District GI General Industrial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District WR Warehouse Retail District OF Office District
CVC Convenience Commercial District BP Business Park District PCP Professional Commerce Park District
SC Support Commercial District VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District OS Agricultural/Open Space District
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 514/687
52Building materials, hardware, garden supply and
mobile home dealers
521(a)Lumber and other building material dealers (no
outside storage in BP, VJLI, and VJC Zones)
P P P P P
P
521(b)Showrooms/display rooms and associated offices
(sales displays only, no distribution or warehousing of
materials and no outside storage)
P P P P P P
P
523Paint, glass and wallpaper stores P P P P P
5251Hardware stores greater than 15,000 sq. ft. P P P P
P
5251Hardware stores 15,000 sq. ft. or less P P Pc
P P P P
P
526Retail nurseries and garden stores Pc
Pc Pc
Pc P P
P
Pc
527Mobile home dealers
53General merchandise stores
531Department stores P P P
533Variety stores greater than 10,000 sq. ft. P P P P
533Variety stores 10,000 sq. ft. or less P P P P P
539Miscellaneous general merchandise stores (e.g.,
catalog stores, County general stores)
P P P P
54Food stores
541Grocery stores (except: convenience stores) P P P P Pc P
-Convenience stores (with or without fuel pumps) Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
542Meat and fish markets P P Pc
Pc Pc Pc Pc
543Fruit and vegetable markets P P P P P P P P
544Candy, nut and confectionery stores P P P P P P P
545Dairy products stores P P P P P P P
546Retail bakeries P P P P P P P
549Miscellaneous food stores - no drive-through P P P P P
55Automotive dealers and service stations
551New and used car dealers Pc
Pc
552Used car dealers Pc
Pc
5521Use car dealers - indoor showroom only Pc
Pc
Pc
553Auto and home supply stores P P Pc
Pc Pc
P
554Gasoline service stations - without repair Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
- With repair Pc
Pc
Pc
555Boat dealers Pc
Pc
P Pc
556Recreational vehicle dealers - campers and travel
trailers
Pc
Pc
P
557Motorcycle dealers Pc
Pc
Pc
559Automotive dealers, not elsewhere classified (e.g.,
aircraft dealers, snowmobile dealers)
Pc
Pc
Pc
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 515/687
56Apparel and accessory stores P P P P P P
57Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment stores
5712Furniture stores P P P P P
5713Floor covering stores P P P P P
5714Drapery, curtain and upholstery stores P P Pc
P P P
5719Miscellaneous home furnishing stores P P P P P
572Household appliance stores P P P P P
5731Radio, television, consumer electronics stores P P P P P
5734Computer and computer software stores P P P P P P
5735Record and prerecorded tape stores P P P P P
5736Musical instrument services P P P P P
58Eating and drinking places
5812Eating places, sit down eating places P P P Pc P Pc P P Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
-Eating places with takeout only - no drive-throughs P P P Pc P Pc P P Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
-Eating places with drive-throughs P P P Pc P
5813Drinking places Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
-Taproom/beer parlor in conjunction with a brewery of less
than or equal to 5,000 sq. ft.
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
-Taproom/beer parlor in conjunction with a brewery or
distillery greater than 5,000 sq. ft. and less than or equal
to 10,000 sq. ft.
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
-Taproom/beer parlor in conjunction with a brewery or
distillery greater than 10,000 sq. ft.
Pc
Pc
Pc
59Miscellaneous retail
591Drugstores and proprietary stores P P P P P P P P
-Distribution of medical cannabidiol as part of a licensed
medical cannabidiol manufacturer
Must comply with the State's medical cannabidiol
regulations
P P P P P P P P P
-Distribution of medical cannabidiol without a license as a
medical cannabidiol manufacturer
592Liquor stores Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
5932Pawnshops Pc
Pc Pc
5932-01 Home furnishings and
appliances, secondhand
P P P P P
5932-02 Antiques (no outdoor
displays)
P P P P P P
5932-03 Bookstores - secondhand
P P P P P P
5932-04 Clothing and shoes,
secondhand
P P P P P
5932-05 Office furniture and
store fixtures, secondhand
P P P P P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 516/687
5932-99 Used merchandise
stores (except: used
building materials)
P P P P P
5932-99 Used building
materials (no
outside storage)
P P P P P
P
5941Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops P P P P P P P
5942Bookstores P P P P P P P P
5943Stationery stores P P P P P P P P
5944Jewelry stores P P P P P P P
5945Hobby, toy and game shops P P P P P P P
5946Camera and photographic supply stores P P P P P P P P
5947Gift, novelty and souvenir shops P P P P P P P
5948Luggage and leather goods stores P P P P P
5949Sewing, needlework and piece goods stores P P P P P P
5961Catalog and mail order houses P P P P P P
P
5962Automatic merchandise machine operators P P P P
P
-Vending machines (not to include SIC 60 automated teller
machine (ATMs))
- Outdoor
- Indoor (see subsection 9-10-4A of this title) P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
- Unattended fuel pumps (see section 9-14-9 of this title) Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
- Attended fuel pumps (see SIC 541 and SIC 554)
5963Direct selling establishments P P P P P
P
598Fuel dealers Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
5992Florist P P P P P P P P
5993Tobacco stores and stands P P P P P P P P
5994News dealers and newsstands 1 P P P P P P P P P P P
1 Must comply with the City's adult entertainment
ordinance
5995Optical goods stores P P P P P P P P
5999Miscellaneous retail stores, NEC (e.g., no outdoor
sales or storage)
-Adult entertainment establishment (films, books,
magazines, sexually oriented merchandise) 2
Pc
Pc
2 Must comply with the City's adult entertainment
ordinance
-Alarm and safety equipment stores P P P P P P P P
P
-Alcoholic beverage making equipment and supplies P P P P P P
-Art and architectural supply stores P P P P P P P P
-Art, picture frames and decoration stores P P P P P P P
-Auction rooms P P
P
Pc
-Banners, flags, decals and poster stores P P P P P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 517/687
-Batteries, nonautomotive P P P P P P
-Binocular and telescope stores P P P P P
-Canvas products P P
P
-Cleaning equipment and supplies P
P
-Coin and stamp stores P P P P P P P
-Concrete products precast P
-Educational aids and electronic training material stores P P P P P P P P
-Electronic parts and equipment P P P P
P
-Engine and motor equipment and supply stores P P Pc
P
-Event tents P P
P
-Farm equipment and supply stores Pc
Pc
-Fiberglass materials, except insulation Pc
-Fireworks - must obtain State license and City permit:
outdoor sales allowed with proper permit
P
-Foam and foam products P P
P
-Gem and precious stone stores P P P P P P P
-Infant furnishing and equipment stores P P P P
-Insecticide P
-Medical apparatus and supply stores P P P P P P P
-Miscellaneous retail not elsewhere classified P P P P P P
-Monument and tombstone stores P P P
-Packing materials: boxes, padding, etc. P P P
P
-Pet and pet supply shops Pc
Pc Pc Pc
-Sales barn Pc
-Swimming pools, hot tubs and sauna equipment and
supply stores
P P P P P P P
P
-Telephone and communication equipment stores P P P P P P P P
-Toiletries, cosmetics and perfume stores P P P P P P P
-Typewriter and business machine stores P P P P P P P P
-Vaults and safes P P P
P
-Water and air purification equipment for agricultural use P P
P
-Water and air purification equipment for residential use Pc
P P P
P
-Welding supplies P P
P
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 1830, 6-1-2009; Ord. 1883, 11-1-2010; Ord. 1901, 12-27-2010; Ord. 1911, 2-22-2011; Ord. 2080, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2085,
3-9-2015; Ord. 2113, 9-8-2015; Ord. 2177, 10-31-2016; Ord. 2201, 3-6-2017; Ord. 2224, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2225, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2265, 12-11-2017; Ord.
2270, 1-8-2018; Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018; Ord. 2288, 3-19-2018; Ord. 2305, 6-11-2018)
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 518/687
DIVISION H - FINANCE, INSURANCE, REAL ESTATE AND OTHER OFFICE
USES NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
RC Regional Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District LI Light Industrial District
CMC Community Commercial District VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District GI General Industrial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District WR Warehouse Retail District OF Office District
CVC Convenience Commercial District BP Business Park District PCP Professional Commerce Park District
SC Support Commercial District VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District OS Agricultural/Open Space District
60Depository institutions (banks) P P P P P P P P P P P
-Outdoor freestanding ATM Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
609Functions closely related to banking P P P P P P P P P P P
P P
Professional and semiprofessional office uses, not
elsewhere classified, without attendant retail,
manufacturing, assembly or warehousing
P P P P Pc Pc P P P P
61 Nondepository credit institutions P P P P Pc Pc P P P P P
6141Personal credit institutions (including check and cash
agencies and delayed deposit services businesses)
Pc
Pc Pc
62 Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchange
and services
P P P P P Pc Pc P P P P P
63 Insurance carriers P P P P P Pc Pc P P P P P
64 Insurance agents, brokers, and services P P P P P Pc Pc P P P P P
65 Real estate office P P P P P Pc Pc P P P P P
67 Holding and other investments offices P P P P P Pc Pc P P P P P
(Ord. 1678, 3-27-2006; amd. Ord. 1901, 12-27-2010; Ord. 1958, 8-20-2012; Ord. 2201, 3-6-2017)
DIVISION I - SERVICES
RC Regional commercial district VJC Valley Junction commercial district LI Light industrial district
CMC Community commercial district VJHB Valley Junction historic business district GI General industrial district
NC Neighborhood commercial district WR Warehouse retail district OF Office district
CVC Convenience commercial district BP Business park district PCP Professional commerce park district
SC Support commercial district VJLI Valley Junction light industrial district OS Agricultural/open space district
70Hotels, rooming houses, camps, and other lodging
places
701Hotels and motels P P P P P
703Camps and recreational vehicle parks Pc
72Personal services
7211Power laundries, family and commercial P P P Pc P
P
7212Garment pressing and agents for laundries and dry
cleaners in accordance with subsection 9-10-4A14 of this
title
P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
7213Linen supply Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
7215Coin operated laundries and dry cleaning P P Pc
Pc P Pc Pc Pc
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 519/687
7216Dry cleaning plants, except rug cleaning Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
7217Carpet and upholstery cleaning Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
7218Industrial launderers Pc
Pc P
P
7219Laundry and garment service, not elsewhere
classified
Pc
Pc P
P
722Photographic studio, portrait P P P P P P P
723Beauty shops P P P P P P P P
724Barbershops P P P P P P P P
725Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors P P P P P P P P P P
726Funeral service (except: crematories) Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc Pc
-Crematories Pc
Pc
Pc
7291Tax services P P P P P P P P P P
7299Miscellaneous personal services, not elsewhere
classified
- 01Personal appearance services P P P P P P
- 02Massage therapy establishments and steam bath
services
P P P Pc Pc
Pc P Pc
P P
- 03Dating and escort services Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
- 04House and baby sitting services P P P P P P P P
- 06Personal document and information services P P P P P P P P P P
- 07Station operation services Pc
Pc
- 08Stitching services P P P P P P P P P
P
- 09Clothing rental services P P P P P P
- 10Personal financial services P P P P P P P P P
- 11Personal item care and storage services P P P P P
- 12Consumer purchasing services P P P P P P P
73Business services
731Advertising services P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
732Consumer credit reporting and collection agencies,
mercantile reporting agencies
P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
733Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography
and stenographic services
P P P P P P P P
P P
7334Photocopying and duplicating services P P P P P P P P P P P
7342Disinfecting and pest control services P P P
P
7349Building cleaning and maintenance services, not
elsewhere classified
P P P
P
735Miscellaneous equipment rental and leasing services
7352Medical equipment P P P P P P P
P
7353Heavy construction equipment rental and leasing Pc
Pc
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 520/687
7359Equipment rental and leasing, not elsewhere
classified
-Businesses with no outside storage P P P P P
P
-Businesses with outside storage Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
736Personnel supply services P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
737Computer and data processing services P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
738Miscellaneous business services
7381Detectives, guard and armored car services except:
guard dogs and armored car
P P P P P P
P
P P
-Guard and armored car/equipment storage Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
-Guard dogs Pc
Pc
Pc
7382Security systems services Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
P
P
P
7383News syndicates P P P P P P P
7384Photo finish labs P P Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
7389Office related business services, not elsewhere
classified (e.g., arbitration services, interior decorating,
notaries public, etc.)
P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
7389Manufacturing related business services, not
elsewhere classified (e.g., field warehouse, liquidator of
merchandise, swimming pool cleaning, etc.)
Pc P
P
7389-14 Auction, appraisal, and
exchange services (flea
market)
P P P P
75Automotive repair, services, and parking
751Automotive rental and leasing, without drivers Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
752Automotive parking
753Automotive repair shops
7532Top, body, and upholstery repair, paint shops Pc
Pc P
P
7533Automotive exhaust system repair shops Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
7534Tire retreading and repair shops Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
7536Automotive glass replacement shops Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
7537Automotive transmission repair shops Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
7538General automotive repair shops Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
7539 Automotive services, not elsewhere classified
-Automotive services, not elsewhere classified Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
-Frame and front end repair services Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
P
-Power train components repair services Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 521/687
-Electrical services Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
P
-Brake services Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
P
754Automotive services, except repair
7542Car washes Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
7549Automotive services, except repair and car washes
(e.g., diagnostic centers, touring services, etc.)
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
76Miscellaneous repair services
762Electrical repair shops P P P P P P P
P
763Watch, clock, and jewelry repair P P P P P P P P
P
764Reupholstery and furniture repair P P P P P P P P
P
769Miscellaneous repair shops and related services
7692Welding repair Pc
Pc P
P
7694Armature rewinding shops Pc
P P
P
7699Repair shops and related services, not elsewhere
classified
-Professional instrument repair services P P P P P P P P
P
-Tank repair and cleaning services Pc Pc
Pc
-Waste cleaning services Pc
Pc
-Boiler and heating repair services Pc
-Industrial equipment services Pc
Pc Pc
P
-Nautical repair services Pc
Pc
Pc
-Hospital equipment repair services P P P P P P
P
-Scientific equipment repair services P P P P P P
P
-Recreational sporting equipment repair services P P P Pc Pc P P P P
P
-Musical instrument repair services P P P P P P P P
P
-Lock and key services P P P P P P P P
P
-Metal reshaping and replating services Pc
Pc P
P
Pc
-Recreational vehicle repair services Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
-Agricultural equipment repair services Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
P
Pc
-Household appliance repair services P P Pc Pc P P P
P
-Cleaning services P P P
P
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 522/687
-General household repair P Pc P P P
P
-Leather goods and luggage repair services P P P P P
-Customizing services, (except: railroad car customizing) P P P P P P P P
P
-Railroad car customizing P
-Gun services Pc
Pc Pc Pc Pc
-Aircraft and heavy equipment repair services P P
-Tool repair services P P P P P P P P
P
-Miscellaneous automotive repair services Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc P
P
-Miscellaneous building item repair services P P P
P
-Window blind repair services P P P P P P P P
P
-Hobby and collectors services P P P P P P P P
P
-Photographic and optical goods equipment repair
services
P P P P P P P P
P
78Motion pictures
781Motion picture production and allied services P P P P
P
P P
782Motion picture distribution and allied services P P P P P P
P
P P
7832Motion picture theaters, except drive-in P P P
7833Drive-in motion pictures Pc
784Videotape rentals P P P P P P
79Amusement and recreational services
-Event venue 5,000 sq. ft. or less Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
-Event venue greater than 5,000 sq. ft. Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc
791Dance studios, schools and halls P P P P P P P P P
792Theatrical productions, bands, orchestras, and
entertainer (except: motion pictures)
P P P P
793Bowling centers P P P
7941Professional sports clubs and promotions P P Pc
Pc
7948Racing, including track operations Pc
Pc
7991Physical fitness facilities P P Pc
Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
P P
P
P P
7992Public golf courses P P P P P
7993Coin operated amusement devices (video arcades) P P Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
7996Amusement parks Pc
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 523/687
7997Membership sports and recreation clubs Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
7999Amusement and recreation services, NEC (e.g., golf
courses - miniature, driving ranges, circus companies and
fairs, except 7999-100 fireworks display services)
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc P P P P
P
Pc
7999-100 Fireworks display
services: including bulk
storage of fireworks
P
80Health services
801 Offices and clinics of doctors of medicine P P P P P P P P P P
802Offices and clinics of dentists P P P P P P P P P P
803Offices and clinics of doctors of osteopathy P P P P P P P P P P
804Offices and clinics of other health practitioners P P P P P P P P P P
805Nursing and personal care facilities Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
806Hospitals
8062General medical and surgical hospitals P P P P
8063Psychiatric hospitals Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
8069Specialty hospitals
-Substance abuse hospitals Pc
Pc
-Chronic disease hospitals P P P P
-Respiratory hospital P P P P
-Children's hospital, eye, ear, nose and throat hospital,
geriatric hospital, maternity hospital, orthopedic hospital
P P P P
807 Medical and dental laboratories P P P P P P P
P
P P
808Home healthcare service P P P P P P P P
P
P P
809Miscellaneous health and allied services, not
elsewhere classified
P P P P P
81Legal services P P P P P P P P P
82Educational services
821Elementary and secondary schools Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
822Colleges and universities Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
P Pc
823Libraries Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
824Vocational schools P P Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
P Pc
829Schools and educational services, not elsewhere
classified (tutoring)
P P Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
P Pc
83Social services
832 Individual and family social services P P P P P P P P P
833Job training and vocational rehabilitation services P P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
835Child daycare services Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
P
836Residential care (except: juvenile care) Pc Pc
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 524/687
-Juvenile care Pc
Pc
839Social services, not elsewhere classified (e.g.,
advocacy groups, community development groups)
P P P Pc P P P P P
84 Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological
gardens
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
86Membership organizations
861 Business associations P P P P P P P P P
862Professional membership organizations P P P P P P P P P
863Labor unions and similar labor organizations P P P P P P P P P
864Civic, social, and fraternal associations P P P P P P P P P
865Political organizations P P P P P P P P P
866Religious organizations Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
869Membership organizations - not elsewhere classified
(except: organizations with food/drink service and
conference facilities)
P P P P P P P P P
-Organizations with food/drink services and conference
facilities
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
87Engineering, accounting, research, management
and related services (except: 8731, 8734, 8744)
P P P P P P P P P P P
8731Commercial physical and biological research P P P P
P
P P P
8734Testing laboratories (except: auto testing) P P P P
P
P P P
-Auto testing laboratories Pc
Pc
8744Facilities support management services Pc
Pc
89Services, not elsewhere included
8999Artists and artists' studios P P P P P P P P
-Art related services P P P P P P P
-Commercial and literary writings P P P P P P P
-Communication services P P P P P P P
-Earth science services P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
-Lecturing services P P P P P P P
-Personal services P P P P P P P
-Scientific consulting P P P P P P P P P P
P
-Songwriting P P P P P P P
-Weather related services P P P P P P P
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 1707, 9-25-2006; Ord. 1779, 9-10-2007; Ord. 1818, 10-6-2008; Ord. 1830, 6-1-2009; Ord. 1832, 7-27-2009; Ord. 1883,
11-1-2010; Ord. 1931, 9-6-2011; Ord. 1958, 8-20-2012; Ord. 2080, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2081, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2123, 11-2-2015; Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; Ord.
2225, 5-30-2017)
DIVISION J - PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
RC Regional Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District LI Light Industrial District
CMC Community Commercial District VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District GI General Industrial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District WR Warehouse Retail District OF Office District
CVC Convenience Commercial District BP Business Park District PCP Professional Commerce Park District
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 525/687
SC Support Commercial District VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District OS Agricultural/Open Space District
92Justice, public order, and safety
921Courts Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
9221Police protection Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
9222Legal counsel and prosecution P P P P P P P P P
9223Correctional institutions Pc
Pc
9224Fire protection Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc
Pc Pc Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
Pc
Pc
Pc Pc
9229Public order and safety, not elsewhere classified
(e.g., emergency management offices, public safety
bureaus)
P P P P P P P P
P
P P
93Finance, taxation and monetary policy P P P P P P P P P
94Administration of human resource programs P P P P P P P P P P
95Administration of environmental quality housing
programs
P P P P P P P P P P
96Administration of economic programs P P P P P P P P P
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 2288, 3-19-2018)
9-6-7: INDEX:
H 6099 ATM machines (freestanding)
H 96 Administration of economic programs
J 96 Administration of economic programs
J 95 Administration of environmental quality and housing programs
J 94 Administration of human resource programs
G 5999 Adult entertainment establishments (films, books, magazines, sexually oriented merchandise)
I 731 Advertising services
I 7699 Agricultural equipment repair services
A 07 Agricultural services (except: exotic animal husbandry)
E 4513 Air courier services
E 4522 Air transportation, nonscheduled
E 4512 Air transportation, scheduled
I 7699 Aircraft and heavy equipment repair services
D 372 Aircraft and parts (except: aircraft engines and engine parts)
D 3724 Aircraft engines and engine parts
E 4581 Airports, flying fields and airport terminal services
G 5999 Alarm and safety equipment stores
I 7999 Amusement and recreation services, not elsewhere classified (e.g., golf courses - miniature, driving ranges, circus companies,
fairs)
I 7996 Amusement parks
A 075 Animal services, except veterinary
A 027 Animal specialty
SIC CODES RC
CMC
NC
CVC
SC
VJC
VJHB
WR
BP
VJLI
LI
GI
OF
PCP
OS
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 526/687
A 0752 Animal Specialty Services, Except Veterinary (EXCEPT: Grooming and Boarding Services - Kennels)
G 56 Apparel and Accessory Stores
D 23 Apparel and Other Finished Products from Fabrics and Similar Materials
F 513 Apparel, Piece Goods, and Notions, wholesale trade
I 7694 Armature Rewinding Shops
G 5999 Art and Architectural Supply Stores
G 5999 Art, Picture Frames and Decoration Stores
I 8999 Art-Related Services
D 395 Art Supplies, manufacturing of
I 8999 Artists and Artists' Studios
D 3292 Asbestos Products
D 2951 Asphalt Paving Mixtures and Blocks
G 553 Auto and Home Supply Stores
G 5962 Automatic Merchandising Machine Operators
G 559 Automotive Dealers, NEC (e.g., aircraft dealers, snowmobile dealers)
I 7533 Automotive Exhaust System Repair Shops
I 7536 Automotive Glass Replacement Shops
I 752 Automotive Parking
I 751 Automotive Rental and Leasing, Without Drivers
I 7538 Automotive Repair Shops, General
I 7539 Automotive Repair Shops, Not Elsewhere Classified
I 754 Automotive Services, Except Repair
I 7549 Automotive Services, Except Repair and Car Washes (e.g., diagnostic centers, touring service, etc.)
I 7532 Automotive Top, Body, and Upholstery Repair, Paint Shops
I 7537 Automotive Transmission Repair Shops
D 205 Bakery Products
H 609 Banking, Functions Closely Related to
H 60 Banks/Depository Institutions (see also ATM machines)
G 5999 Banners, Flags, Decals and Poster Stores
G 5813 Bar, see drinking places
I 724 Barbershops
D 3692 Batteries, Primary
D 3691 Batteries, Storage
I 723 Beauty Shops
A 0212 Beef Cattle, Except Feedlots
A 0211 Beef Cattle Feedlots
F 518 Beer, Wine and Distilled Beverages, wholesale trade
D 208 Beverages
G 5999 Binocular and Telescope Stores
A 0752 Boarding Services - Kennels, No Outside Runs
A 0752 Boarding Services - Kennels, With Outside Runs
G 555 Boat Dealers
I 7699 Boiler and Heating Repair Services
D 3452 Bolts, Nuts, Screws, Rivets and Washers
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 527/687
G 5942 Bookstores
I 793 Bowling Centers
I 7349 Building Cleaning and Maintenance Services Not Elsewhere Classified
D 3995 Burial Caskets
E 41 Bus Terminal Operations
I 861 Business Associations
I 73 Business Services
E 484 Cable and Other Pay TV Services (EXCEPT: Transmitting/Receiving Towers and/or Dishes)
G 5946 Camera and Photographic Supply Stores
I 703 Camps and Recreational Vehicle Parks
G 544 Candy, Nut, and Confectionery Stores
D 203 Canned and Preserved Fruits and Vegetables
G 551 Car Dealers, New and Used
G 552 Car Dealers, Used
I 7542 Car Washes
I 7217 Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning
G 5961 Catalog and Mail-Order Houses
D 324 Cement, Hydraulic
D 28 Chemicals and Allied Products (EXCEPT: drugs, explosives, perfumes and cosmetics)
F 516 Chemicals and Allied Products (EXCEPT: Explosives), wholesale trade
I 835 Child Daycare Services
I 864 Civic, Social, and Fraternal Associations
I 7699 Cleaning Services
I 7299 Clothing Rental Services
B 12 Coal Mining
D 347 Coating, Engraving and Allied Services
G 5999 Coin and Stamp Stores
I 7215 Coin-Operated Laundries and Dry cleaning
I 822 Colleges and Universities
I 8999 Commercial and Literary Writings
I 8999 Communication Services
E 489 Communications Services, Not Elsewhere Included (EXCEPT: Transmitting/Receiving Towers and/or Dishes)
G 5734 Computer and Computer Software Stores
I 737 Computer and Data Processing Services
D 357 Computer and Office Equipment
D 3271 Concrete Block and Brick
D 327 Concrete, Gypsum, and Plaster Products
D 3272 Concrete Products, Not Elsewhere Classified
C 15,
16, 17
Construction and Contractor's Operations, Storage Yards, and Offices
D 353 Construction and Related Materials
I 732 Consumer Credit Reporting and Collection Agencies, Mercantile Reporting Agencies, etc.
I 7299 Consumer Purchasing Services
G 541 Convenience Stores
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 528/687
J 9223 Correctional Institutions
D 2844 Cosmetic Preparations (see also perfumes, cosmetics and other toilet preparations)
J 921 Courts
I 726 Crematories
A 072 Crop Services
A 01 Crops
I 7699 Customizing Services (EXCEPT: Railroad Car Customizing)
D 328 Cut Stone and Stone Products
D 342 Cutlery, Hand Tools and General Hardware (EXCEPT: Forged and Drop Forged Manufacturing / see Fabricated Structural Metal
Products)
A 024 Dairy Farms
D 202 Dairy Products
G 545 Dairy Products Stores
I 791 Dance, Studios, Schools, and Halls
I 7299 Dating and Escort Services
I 802 Dentists, Offices and Clinics of
G 531 Department Stores
I 7381 Detective and Office
I 7381 Detectives, Guard and Armored Car Services
G 5963 Direct Selling Establishments
I 7342 Disinfecting and Pest Control Services
I 801 Doctors of Medicine, Offices and Clinics of
I 803 Doctors of Osteopathy, Offices and Clinics of
G 5714 Drapery, Curtain and Upholstery Stores
G 5813 Drinking Places
I 7833 Drive-In Motion Pictures
D 283 Drugs
F 512 Drugs, Proprietaries, and Sundries, Wholesale Trade
G 591 Drugstores and Proprietary Stores
I 7216 Dry-Cleaning Plants, Except Rug Cleaning
I 8999 Earth Science Services
G 5812 Eating Places, Sit-Down Eating Places, Eating Places with Take-Out Only
G 5999 Educational Aids and Electronic Training Material Stores
E 491 Electric Services
D 36 Electrical and Electronic Machinery, Equipment, and Supplies, Except Computer Equipment (EXCEPT: batteries)
F 506 Electrical Goods, Wholesale Trade
I 762 Electrical Repair Shops
D 3313 Electrometallurgical Products, Except Steel
I 821 Elementary and Secondary Schools
D 3431 Enameled Iron and Metal Sanitary Ware
G 5999 Engine and Motor Equipment and Supply Stores
I 87 Engineering, Accounting, Research, Management and Related Services
D 351 Engines and Turbines
I 7359 Equipment Rental and Leasing, Not Elsewhere Classified
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 529/687
D 2892 Explosives
F 516 Explosives, Wholesale Trade
D 306 Fabricated Rubber Products, Not Elsewhere Classified
D 344 Fabricated Structural Metal Products - Cutlery, Hand Tools and General Hardware Using Forged and Drop Forged
Manufacturing
I 7299 Facility Rental and Party Planning Services
D 352 Farm and Garden Machinery
G 5999 Farm Equipment and Supply Stores
A 076 Farm Labor and Management Services
F 515 Farm Product Raw Materials, Wholesale Trade
E 4221 Farm Product Warehousing and Storage
D 207 Fats and Oils
J 93 Finance, Taxation and Monetary Policy
J 9224 Fire Protection
D 2091 Fish and Seafood, Canned and Cured
D 2092 Fish, Prepared Fresh or Frozen
A 09 Fishing, Hunting and Trapping
E 4785 Fixed Facilities and Inspection and Weighing Services for Motor Vehicle Transportation
D 321 Flat Glass
G 5713 Floor Covering Stores
G 5992 Florist
D 20 Food and Kindred Products
A 08 Forestry
E 473 Freight Transportation Arrangement
G 543 Fruit and Vegetable Markets
G 598 Fuel Dealers
I 726 Funeral Service (EXCEPT: Crematories)
D 25 Furniture and Fixtures (EXCEPT: Wood Office Furniture, Public Bldg. and Related Furniture, Wood Partitions and Fixtures)
D 25 Furniture and Fixtures, Manufacturing
F 502 Furniture and Home Furnishings, Wholesale Trade
G 57 Furniture, Home Furnishings, and Equipment Stores
G 5712 Furniture Stores
I 7212 Garment Pressing, and Agents for Laundries and Dry Cleaners
E 492 Gas Production and Distribution
D 305 Gaskets, Packing, and Sealing Devises and Rubber and Plastic Hoses and Belting
G 554 Gasoline Service Stations - with repair
G 554 Gasoline Service Stations - without repair
G 5999 Gem and Precious Stone Stores
A 029 General Farms Primarily Livestock and Animal Specialties
I 7699 General Household Repair Services
D 356 General Industrial Machinery
A 0219 General Livestock, Except Dairy and Poultry
E 4225 General Warehousing and Storage (EXCEPT: Miniwarehouse/Self Storage)
G 5947 Gift, Novelty, and Souvenir Shops
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 530/687
D 322 Glass and Glassware, Pressed or Blown
D 204 Grain Mill Products
F 514 Groceries and Related Products, Wholesale Trade
G 541 Grocery Stores (EXCEPT: Convenience Stores)
A 0752 Grooming Services
I 7381 Guard and Armored Car/Equipment Storage
I 7381 Guard Dogs
D 376 Guided Missiles, Space Vehicles and Parts
I 7699 Gun Services
F 507 Hardware, Plumbing and Heating Equipment
G 525 Hardware Stores
D 2435 Hardwood Veneer and Plywood
I 809 Health and Allied Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
I 804 Health Practitioners, Offices and Clinics of Other
I 80 Health Services
D 343 Heating Equipment, Except Electric and Warm Air; and Plumbing Fixtures (EXCEPT: Enameled Iron and Metal Sanitary Ware)
I 7353 Heavy Construction Equipment Rental and Leasing
E 4581 Heliport/Helistop
I 7699 Hobby and Collectors Services
G 5945 Hobby, Toy, and Game Shops
A 0213 Hog Feedlots
A 0213 Hogs - Hog Farms, Except Feedlots
H 67 Holding and Other Investment Offices
I 808 Home Healthcare Services
E 4789 Horse-Drawn Transportation Services
I 7699 Hospital Equipment Repair Services
I 806 Hospitals
I 70 Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps, and Other Lodging Places
I 701 Hotels and Motels
I 7299 House and Babysitting Services
I 7699 Household Appliance Repair Services
G 572 Household Appliance Stores
I 832 Individual and Family Social Services
D 35 Industrial and Commercial Machinery and Computer Equipment
I 7699 Industrial Equipment Services
I 7218 Industrial Launderers
D 359 Industrial Machinery, Not Elsewhere Included
G 5999 Infant Furnishings and Equipment Stores
D 38 Instruments and Related Products
H 64 Insurance Agents, Brokers, and Services
H 63 Insurance Carriers
E 497 Irrigation System
D 391 Jewelry
D 396 Jewelry, Costume; and Notions
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 531/687
G 5944 Jewelry Stores
I 833 Job Training and Vocational Rehabilitation Services
I 863 Labor Unions and Similar Labor Organizations
A 0781 Landscape Counseling and Planning
I 7219 Laundry and Garment Service, Not Elsewhere Classified
A 0782 Lawn and Garden Services
D 31 Leather and Leather Products (EXCEPT: leather tanning and finishing)
I 7699 Leather Goods and Luggage Repair Services
D 311 Leather Tanning and Finishing
I 8999 Lecturing Services
J 9222 Legal Counsel and Prosecution
I 81 Legal Services
I 823 Libraries
I 7213 Linen Supply
D 3996 Linoleum Asphalted Floor Coverings, etc.
E 4925 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Mixed, Manufactured, or Production and/or Distribution (EXCEPT: Production and Manufacturing)
E 4925 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Production and Manufacturing
G 592 Liquor Stores
A 0751 Livestock Services, Except Veterinary
F 5154 Livestock, Wholesale Trade
E 41 Local and Suburban Transit and Inter-Urban Highway Passenger Transportation (EXCEPT: Bus Terminal Operation)
I 7699 Lock and Key Services
D 241 Logging
G 5948 Luggage and Leather Goods Stores
F 503 Lumber and Construction Materials
G 521(a)
Lumber and Other Building Material Dealers (No outside storage in the BP Zone)
D 24 Lumber and Wood Products
F 508 Machinery, Equipment and Supplies
I 733 Mailing, Reproduction, Commercial Art and Photography, and Stenographic Services
I 7389 Manufacturing Related Business Services, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g., Field Warehouse, Liquidators of Merchandise,
Swimming Pool Cleaning, etc.)
E 4493 Marinas
I 7299 Massage Parlor and Steam Bath Services
G 542 Meat and Fish Markets
D 201 Meat Products
I 807 Medical and Dental Laboratories
G 5999 Medical Apparatus and Supply Stores
I 7352 Medical Equipment
I 869 Membership Organizations, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g., farm bureaus, poetry associations)
I 7997 Membership Sports and Recreation Clubs
D 341 Metal Cans and Shipping Containers
D 3399 Metal Fasteners
D 346 Metal Forging and Stamping
D 3398 Metal Heat Treating
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 532/687
B 10 Metal Mining
D 34 Metal Products, Fabricated, Except Machinery and Transportation Equipment
I 7699 Metal Reshaping and Replating Services
F 505 Metals and Minerals, Except Petroleum, Wholesale Trade
D 354 Metalworking Machinery
D 2431 Millwork
D 243 Millwork, Veneer, Plywood and Structural Members
B 14 Mining and Quarrying of Nonmetallic Materials, Except Fuels
E 4225 Miniwarehouses/Self-Storage Including Caretakers Facility
I 7699 Misc. Automotive Repair Services
I 7699 Misc. Building Item Repair Services
I 738 Misc. Business Services
F 509 Misc. Durable Goods (EXCEPT: scrap and waste materials)
D 349 Misc. Fabricated Metal Products (e.g., steel springs, valves and pipes)
D 209 Misc. Food and Kindred Products (e.g., roasted coffee, potato chips, etc. (EXCEPT: fish and seafood, canned and cured; and
fish, prepared fresh or frozen)
G 549 Misc. Food Stores
G 539 Misc. General Merchandise Stores (e.g., catalog stores, county general stores)
G 5719 Misc. Homefurnishing Stores
D 399 Misc. Manufactures, Not Elsewhere Classified (EXCEPT: burial caskets and linoleum asphalted floor coverings)
F 519 Misc. Nondurable Goods, Wholesale Trade
I 7299 Misc. Personal Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
I 769 Misc. Repair Shops and Related Services
G 59 Misc. Retail
G 5999 Misc. Retail Stores, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g., auction rooms, coin shops)
D 379 Misc. Transportation Equipment
D 249 Misc. Wood Products (e.g., Wood Barrels, Wood Kegs, etc.) (EXCEPT: wood preserving and wood products, reconstituted)
G 527 Mobile Home Dealers
G 5999 Monument and Tombstone Stores
I 782 Motion Picture Distribution and Allied Services
I 781 Motion Picture Productions and Allied Services
I 7832 Motion Picture Theaters, Except Drive-In
D 3714 Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories
D 371 Motor Vehicles and Equipment (EXCEPT: Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories)
F 501 Motor Vehicles, Parts, and Supplies
G 557 Motorcycle Dealers
D 375 Motorcycles, Bicycles, and Parts
I 84 Museums, Art Galleries, Botanical and Zoological Gardens
I 7699 Musical Instrument Repair Services
G 5736 Musical Instrument Stores
D 393 Musical Instruments
E 4922 Natural Gas Storage
E 4922 Natural Gas Transmission (EXCEPT: Natural Gas Storage and Mixed, Manufactured, or Liquefied Petroleum Gas Production
and/or Distribution)
I 7699 Nautical Repair Services
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 533/687
G 5994 News Dealers and Newsstands
I 7383 News Syndicates
H 61 Nondepository Credit Institutions
D 336 Nonferrous Foundries (castings)
D 329 Nonmetallic Mineral Products, Misc. (EXCEPT: asbestos products)
I 805 Nursing and Personal Care Facilities
I 7389 Office-Related Business Services, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g., Arbitration Services, Interior Decorating, Notaries Public, etc.)
B 13 Oil and Gas Extraction
G 5995 Optical Goods Stores
D 348 Ordnance and Accessories, Except Vehicles and Guided Missiles (EXCEPT: ammunition)
A 0783 Ornamental Shrub and Tree Services
E 4783 Packing and Crating
G 523 Paint, Glass and Wallpaper Stores
D 26 Paper and Allied Products (EXCEPT: pulp, paper, and paperboard mills)
F 511 Paper and Paper Products, Wholesale Trade
D 2621 Paper Mills
D 2631 Paperboard Mills
E 472 Passenger Transportation Arrangement
D 395 Pens, Pencils, and Office Supplies
D 2844 Perfumes, Cosmetics and Other Toilet Preparations (EXCEPT: Cosmetic Preparations)
I 7299 Personal Appearance Services
I 7299 Personal Document and Information Services
I 7299 Personal Financial Services
I 7299 Personal Item Care and Storage Services
I 8999 Personal Services
I 736 Personnel Supply Services
G 5999 Pet and Pet Supply Shops
F 517 Petroleum and Petroleum Products, Wholesale Trade
D 29 Petroleum Refining and Related Industries (EXCEPT: asphalt paving mixtures and blocks)
I 7384 Photo Finish Labs
I 7699 Photographic and Optical Goods Equipment Repair Services
I 722 Photographic Studio, Portrait
I 7991 Physical Fitness Facilities
E 46 Pipelines
D 3084 Plastic Pipe
D 308 Plastic Products, Miscellaneous (EXCEPT: plastic pipe and plastic products not elsewhere classified)
D 3089 Plastic Products, Not Elsewhere Classified
J 9221 Police Protection
I 865 Political Organizations
E 431 Postal Service, U.S.
D 326 Pottery and Related Products
A 025 Poultry and Eggs
I 7211 Power Laundries, Family and Commercial
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 534/687
D 33 Primary Metal Industries (e.g., Blast Furnaces, Foundries, Etc.) (EXCEPT: Electrometallurgical Products, Steel Wiredrawing and
Steel Nails and Spikes, Rolling, Drawing, and Extruding of Nonferrous Metals, Nonferrous Foundries, Metal Heat Treating, and
Primary Metal Products, Not Elsewhere Classified)
D 3399 Primary Metal Products, Not Elsewhere Classified (EXCEPT: metal fasteners)
D 275 Printing, Commercial
D 27 Printing, Publishing and Allied Industries (EXCEPT: Printing, Commercial)
E 421 Product Transportation Services, Garbage Collection and Transport - Not Disposal
D 323 Products of Purchased Glass
F 504 Professional and Commercial Equipment
H -- Professional and Semiprofessional Office Uses, Not Elsewhere Classified
I 7699 Professional Instrument Repair Services
I 862 Professional Membership Organizations
I 7941 Professional Sports Clubs and Promotions
I 7992 Public Golf Courses
J 9229 Public Order and Safety, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g., emergency management offices, public safety bureaus)
D 2611 Pulp Mills
I 7948 Racing, Including Track Operations
E 483 Radio and Television Broadcasting (EXCEPT: Transmitting/Receiving Towers and/or Dishes)
G 5731 Radio, Television, Consumer Electronics Stores
I 7699 Railroad Car Customizing
E 474 Railroad Cars, Rental of
D 374 Railroad Equipment
E 40 Railroad Transportation
D 3273 Ready-Mixed Concrete
H 65 Real Estate Office
G 5735 Record and Prerecorded Tape Stores
I 7699 Recreational Sporting Equipment Repair Services
G 556 Recreational Vehicle Dealers - campers and travel trailers
I 7699 Recreational Vehicle Repair Services
E 4222 Refrigerated Warehousing
D 358 Refrigeration and Service Machinery
E 4953 Refuse Systems
I 866 Religious Organizations
I 7699 Repair Shops and Related Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
I 836 Residential Care
G 58 Restaurants, see Eating and Drinking Places
G 546 Retail Bakeries
G 526 Retail Nurseries and Garden Stores
I 764 Reupholstery and Furniture Repair
D 335 Rolling, Drawing, and Extruding of Nonferrous Metals
D 30 Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastics Products
D 302 Rubber and Plastic Footwear
E 4959 Sanitary Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
E 4952 Sanitary Services, Sewerage Systems
D 242 Sawmills and Planing Mills
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 535/687
I 829 Schools and Educational Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
I 8999 Scientific Consulting
I 7699 Scientific Equipment Repair Services
F 5093 Scrap and Waste Materials
D 3451 Screw Machine Products
H 62 Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers, Exchange and Services
I 7382 Security Systems Services
G 5949 Sewing, Needlework, and Piece Goods Stores
A 0214 Sheep and Goats
D 373 Ship and Boat Building and Repairing
I 725 Shoe Repair and Shoe Shine Parlors
G 521(b)
Showrooms/Display Rooms and Associated Offices (Sales displays only, no distribution or warehousing of materials, and no
outside storage or display)
D 3914 Silverware
I 83 Social Services
I 839 Social Services, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g., advocacy groups, community development groups)
D 2436 Softwood Veneer and Plywood
A 071 Soil Preparation Services
I 8999 Song Writings
D 355 Special Industry Machinery
D 394 Sporting Goods
G 5941 Sporting Goods Stores and Bicycle Shops
I 7299 Station Operation Services
G 5943 Stationery Stores
E 496 Steam and Air-Conditioning Supply
D 3315 Steel Wiredrawing and Steel Nails and Spikes
I 7299 Stitching Services
E 4789 Stockyards, Not Primarily for Fattening or Selling of Livestock
E 4226 Storage, Document and Office Records
E 4226 Storage, Household Goods and Furniture
E 4226 Storage Special Warehousing and, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g., Fur Storage, Petroleum and Chemical Bulk Stations)
D 325 Structural Clay Products (e.g., Bricks, Etc.)
D 2439 Structural Wood Members, Not Elsewhere Classified
D 206 Sugary and Confectionery Products
G 5999 Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Sauna Equipment and Supply Stores
I 7699 Tank Repair and Cleaning Services
I 7291 Tax Services
E 482 Telegraph and Other Communications (EXCEPT: Transmitting/Receiving Towers and/or Dishes)
G 5999 Telephone and Communication Equipment Stores
E 481 Telephone Communications (EXCEPT: Transmitting/Receiving Towers and/or Dishes)
E 423 Terminal and Joint Terminal Maintenance Facilities for Motor Freight Transportation
D 22 Textile Mill Products
I 792 Theatrical Productions (EXCEPT: Motion Picture), Bands, Orchestras, and Entertainers
I 7534 Tire Retreading and Repair Shops
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 536/687
D 301 Tires and Inner Tubes
D 21 Tobacco Products
G 5993 Tobacco Stores and Stands
G 5999 Toiletries, Cosmetics and Perfume Stores
I 7699 Tool Repair Services
D 394 Toys
E 489 Transmitting/Receiving Towers and/or Dishes
E 478 Transportation Services, Miscellaneous
E 4789 Transportation Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
E 421 Trucking and Courier Services, Except Air
G 5999 Typewriter and Business Machine Stores
E 493 Utility Services, Combination
G 533 Variety Stores
A 0742 Veterinary Services for Animal Specialties, No Outside Runs
A 0742 Veterinary Services for Animal Specialties With Outside Runs
A 0741 Veterinary Services for Livestock
I 7993 Video Arcades, Coin Operated Amusement Devices
I 784 Videotape Rentals
I 824 Vocational Schools
I 7699 Waste Cleaning Services
I 763 Watch, Clock, and Jewelry Repair
E 494 Water Supply
I 8999 Weather Related Services
I 7692 Welding Repair
I 7699 Window Blind Repair Services
D 245 Wood Buildings and Mobile Homes
D 244 Wood Containers
D 2434 Wood Kitchen Cabinets
D 2491 Wood Preserving
D 2492 Wood Products, Reconstituted
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1258, 7-14-1997; Ord. 1303, 5-4-1998; Ord. 1307, 6-1-1998; Ord. 2080, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016)
Chapter 7
SETBACK AND BULK DENSITY REGULATIONS
9-7-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the SETBACK AND BULK DENSITY MATRIX. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-7-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth specific development standards which are applicable to the zoning districts and uses specified. This chapter lists
in matrix form the specific development standards applicable to specific zones. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-7-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
Division
SIC Land Use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 537/687
A. Any cell within the matrix that does not include a specific numerical designation or is labeled not applicable (n/a), indicates that the use is not
considered an allowed use within that zoning district.
B. Where the specific requirements of a proposed land use that is determined to be an acceptable use by the City Council, the Director of Community
Development shall review the proposed use when requested to do so by letter and, based upon the characteristics of the use, determine which of the
specific development regulations listed in this chapter is equivalent to that proposed.
C. Individual manufactured housing units shall be allowed in all single-family detached zones. The unit shall be required to comply with all of the height
and bulk requirements for that zone. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-7-4: SETBACK AND DENSITY REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to development within the City. Building setbacks may need to be larger than indicated depending on applicable
Building and/or Fire Code requirements. (Ord. 2276, 2-5-2018)
TABLE 7.1
Maximum du/acre 0.05 0.91 6.0 5.8 5.8 6.0 12.0 12.0 18
Zone standards
Use OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ VJHB MH RM RH 
Minimum lot area:
Single-family detached 20
acres
40,000 sq.
ft.
5,000 sq.
ft.
7,500 sq.
ft.
7,500 sq.
ft.
6,000 sq.
ft.
5,300 sq.
ft.
n/a n/a
Single-family attached n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2,000 sq.
ft.
2,000 sq.
ft.
Multi-family n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2 acres 2 acres
Nondwellings 20
acres
2.5 acres 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre 18,000 sq.
ft.
6,500 sq.
ft.
2 acres 2 acres
Open space required (minimum
percentage)
75 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25
Notes:
1. Prefabricated housing only; stick-built structures shall comply to the regular setback requirements of the RS Zone, as appropriate, to the
proposed use.
2. Except for condominium ownership.
(Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998; amd. Ord. 1406, 5-1-2000; Ord. 1419, 8-21-2000)
TABLE 7.2
MINIMUM SETBACKS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS
Front yard 50' 50' 30' 2 35' 2 35' 2 35' 2
30'
2 20' 2 20' 2
20'
n/a
n/a
Rear yard 50' 50' 35' 35' 35' 35' 35'
20' 35' 10'
n/a
n/a
Side yard least width on any
1 side 50' 20' 7' 3 8' 3 8' 3 8' 3 7' 3
5' 3 5' 3 5' 3
n/a
n/a
Minimum sum of side yards
100'
40' 15' 20' 20' 20' 15'
10' 10' 10'
n/a
n/a
Minimum lot width4
100'
6
100'
6 50' 5,6 70' 6 80' 6 100' 6
60'
6
50' 40' 50'
n/a
n/a
Minimum street frontage 40' 40' 40' 40' 40' 60' 40'
50' 40' 40'
n/a
n/a
Required Standards OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH 1 RM2 RH2
Required Standards OS RE
RS
R-1
SFCR
SFVJ
MH1
RM
RH
5,000 To
7,999 Sq.
Ft.
8,000 To
9,999 Sq.
Ft.
10,000 To
14,999 Sq.
Ft.
15,000 Sq. Ft. Or
Greater
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 538/687
Notes:
1. Prefabricated housing only; stick built structures shall comply to the regular setback requirements of the RS or RM Zone, as appropriate, to the
proposed use.
2. In any existing platted property where the average front yard setback is greater than that required by code, no front yard depth shall be less than
the smallest front yard depth of any existing dwelling immediately adjacent thereto and within 200 feet fronting on the same side of the street.
3. Measured to foundation; however, no part of any structure, including eaves and overhangs, may be closer than 5 feet to a property line.
4. Measured at building setback line.
5. An additional 10 feet of lot width shall be required for each additional 1,000 square feet above 5,000 square feet.
6. The minimum lot width for corner lots shall be increased by 25 feet.
(Ord. 2306, 6-11-2018)
TABLE 7.3
MINIMUM SETBACKS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED1
(DUPLEXES, TOWNHOMES AND DETACHED TOWNHOMES)
Front yard:
Bi-attached units n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 30' 30'
Detached n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 30' n/a
3 or more units n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 50' 50'
Rear yard:
Detached n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 35' n/a
Minimum side yards:
Attached n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 15' 1 15' 1
Detached n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 7' 1 n/a
Side yards for interior units:
Setbacks between units in the same building n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0' 0'
Minimum lot width of the development parcel:
Bi-attached units n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 100' 100'
Detached n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 50' n/a
3 or more units n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 150' 150'
Minimum street frontage of the development parcel:
Bi-attached units n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 100' 100'
Detached n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 50' n/a
3 or more units n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 150' 150'
Minimum separation between principal structures:
Attached n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 30' 30'
Attached next to detached n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 22' n/a
Detached n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 14' n/a
Minimum separation between principal and accessory structures n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 20' 20'
Notes:
1. No single-family attached units shall be located closer than 35 feet from the perimeter of the development.
2. Prefabricated housing only; stick built structures shall comply to the regular setback requirements of the RS or RM Zone, as appropriate, to the
proposed use.
(Ord. 1677, 2-27-2006)
TABLE 7.4
MINIMUM SETBACKS FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS
(APARTMENTS, STACKED FLATS AND CONDOMINIUMS)
Required Standards OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH2 RM RH
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 539/687
Front yard:
2 story n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 30' 35'
3 story or greater n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 50' 2 60' 2
Rear yard:
2 story n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 35' 35'
3 story or greater n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 50' 2 60' 2
Side yard n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 30' 2 30' 2
Minimum lot width of the minimum development parcel n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 150' 150'
Minimum street frontage of the development parcel n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 150' 150'
Minimum separation between principal structures n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 30' 2 30' 2
Minimum separation between principal and accessory structure n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 20' 20'
Notes:
1. Prefabricated housing only; stick-built structures shall comply to the regular setback requirements of the RS or RM Zone, as appropriate, to the
proposed use.
2. For any building over 3 stories, there needs to be an additional 10 feet of building setback for each story above 3 stories.
TABLE 7.5
MINIMUM SETBACKS FOR DAYCARE,
CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, NONRESIDENTIAL USES
Front yard 100' 100' 50' 50' 20' 20' 35' 50' 50'
Rear yard 100' 100' 50' 50' 20' 20' 35' 50' 50'
Side yard 75' 50' 25' 25' 15' 15' 10' 25' 25'
Minimum lot width 200' 100' 150' 150' 50' 45' 60' 150' 150'
Minimum street frontage 100' 50' 75' 75' 75' 40' 40' 75' 75'
Maximum height:
Principal structure 40' 1 40' 1 40' 1 40' 1 40' 1 40' 1 40' 1 40' 1 40' 1
Accessory structure 20' 1
1 story
20' 1
1 story
20' 1
1 story
20' 1
1 story
20' 1
1 story
20' 1
1 story
20' 1
1 story
20' 1
1 story
20' 1
1 story
Open space (minimum %) 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25%
Note:
1. Additional 12 feet of height allowed for each additional 10 feet of setback.
(Ord. 1419, 8-21-2000)
TABLE 7.6
MINIMUM SETBACKS FOR DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
(GARAGES, SWIMMING POOLS, HOT TUBS, SATELLITE DISHES, ETC.)
Front yard 50' 1 50' 1 30' 1,4 35' 1,4 30' 1,4 30' 1,4 20' 1,4 20' 1 30' 1 35' 1
Rear yard 5' 2 20' 2 5' 2 5' 2 5' 2 5' 2 5' 2 5' 2 10' 2 10' 2
Side yard 5' 2 20' 2 5' 2 5' 2 5' 2 5' 2 5' 2 5' 2 10' 2 10' 2
RReeqquuiirreedd SSttaannddaarrddss OOSS RREE RRSS RR--11 SSFF--CCRR SSFF--VVJJ MMHH11 RRMM RRHH
Required Standards OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Required Standards OS RE
RS
<8,000 8,000> R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 540/687
From alleys where the structure accesses the alley 20' 20' 20' 20' 20' n/a 20' 20' 20' 20'
From main structures 10' 3 10' 3 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 20' 20'
From other accessory structures 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 20' 20'
Notes:
1. Any accessory structure located between the principal building and the public street shall be screened from public view with a combination of
landscaping, berming or fencing in accordance with buffering requirements.
2. Measured to foundation; however, no part of any structure, including eaves and overhangs, may be closer than 5 feet to a property line.
3. Any accessory structure that will house farm animals, animals wild by nature, or a kennel, shall be located no less than 100 feet from an existing
residential dwelling on a lot not under the same ownership.
4. In any existing platted property where the average front yard setback is greater than that required by code, no front yard depth shall be less than
the smallest front yard depth of any dwelling immediately adjacent to and within 200 feet fronting on the same side of the street.
(Ord. 2282, 3-5-2018)
TABLE 7.7
MINIMUM SETBACKS FOR ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES ATTACHED TO THE MAIN STRUCTURE
(SUNROOMS, DECKS, PORCHES, ETC.)
Front yard 50' 50' 30' 35' 30' 20' 20' 20' 30' 35'
Rear yard 35' 35' 20' 20' 20' 20' 20' 10' 20' 20'
Side yard 5' 1 5' 1 5' 1 5' 1 5' 1 5'1 5'1 5' 1 5' 1 5' 1
From other accessory structures 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10' 10'
Note:
1. Measured to foundation; however, no part of any structure may be closer than 5 feet to a property line.
(Ord. 1419, 8-21-2000)
TABLE 7.8
BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL AND
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Minimum lot area1 60,000 sq.
ft.
60,000 sq.
ft.
60,000 sq.
ft.
40,000 sq.
ft.
60,000 sq.
ft.
20,000 sq.
ft.
6,250 sq.
ft.
20,000 sq.
ft.
Minimum setback2:
Front yard 100' 100' 45' 45' 100' 35' 0' 50'
Rear yard 50' 50' 35' 35' 50' 35' 0' 50'
If abuts like zoning district
0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0'
Side yard 50' 50' 35' 50' 50' 35' 0' 50'
If abuts like zoning district
0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0'
Minimum lot width 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' 50' 50'
Maximum height 36' 3 36' 3 30' 30' 36' 3 30' 36' 60'3
Open space (minimum
percentage)
25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 0% 25%
Required Standards OS RE
RS
<8,000 8,000> R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Required Standards OS RE
RS
<8,000 8,000> R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Required Standards RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 541/687
Notes:
1. Except for condominium ownership.
2. Refer to setback definitions in this title.
3. Additional 12 feet of height allowed for each additional 10 feet of setback.
(Ord. 2276, 2-5-2018)
TABLE 7.9
BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES IN INDUSTRIAL, OFFICE AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
Minimum lot area1 20,000 sq.
ft.
7,250 sq. ft. 10,000 sq.
ft.
20,000 sq.
ft.
10,000 sq.
ft.
60,000 sq.
ft.
20 acres
Minimum setback2:
Front yard 50' 15' 30' 40' 30' 50' 50'
Rear yard 50' 10' (from
alleyway)
35' 35' 35' 50' 50'
If abuts like zoning district 15' 15' 25'
Side yard 50' 10' 20' 35' 10' 50' 50'
If abuts like zoning district 0' 0' 0' 0' 25'
If abuts residential zoned or used
property
10'
Minimum lot width 75' 50' 75' 75' 80' 150' 200'
Maximum height 60' 3 15'
30' 4
60' 3 60' 3 36' 3 60' 3 60' 3
Open space required (minimum
percentage)
35% 20% 20% 20% 25% 35% 75%
Notes:
1. Except for condominium ownership.
2. Refer to setback definitions in this title.
3. Additional 12 feet of height allowed for each additional 10 feet of setback.
4. Maximum height of 30 feet allowed with a building side yard setback of 20 feet.
(Ord. 2276, 2-5-2018; amd. Ord. 2297, 4-30-2018)
9-7-5: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS:
A. Setbacks from private streets and drives in condominium, townhome, detached townhome, and apartment complexes: (Ord. 1677, 2-27-2006)
1. Attached Garages: The minimum setback for garages attached to dwelling units shall be twenty five feet (25'), measured perpendicularly from the
garage opening to the closest point of the sidewalk or back of curb of the intersecting private street or drive, whichever is more restrictive.
2. Detached Garages: The setback for garages detached from dwelling units shall be either subsection A2a or A2b of this section:
a. A distance of twenty five feet (25') or greater, measured perpendicularly from the garage opening to the closest point of the sidewalk or back of
curb of the intersecting private street or drive, whichever is more restrictive; or
b. A distance of ten feet (10') or less, measured perpendicularly from the garage opening to the closest point of the back of curb of the intersecting
private street or drive.
Garages set back within a range of distance of ten (10) and twenty five feet (25') from the sidewalk or back of curb shall not be permitted due to
concerns that vehicles parked in front of a garage set back within this range of distance may block or obstruct safe vehicle or pedestrian
movement on the private street/drive or sidewalk.
3. Residential Structures: The minimum setback for a residential structure shall be fifteen feet (15') from the back of curb of an adjacent private street
or drive. This setback shall apply to all structures intended for occupancy, including leasing offices, recreation centers, clubhouses, and laundry
centers. (Ord. 1343, 11-30-1998)
Chapter 8
HOME OCCUPATION
Required Standards BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 542/687
9-8-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the HOME OCCUPATION ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-2: PURPOSE:
In adopting this Chapter, it is recognized that while a home occupation in and of itself is an acceptable use within a residential area, it is when those uses
take on a more commercial character that conflicts arise. This Chapter seeks to ensure that home occupations do not have a negative impact upon the
residential area in which they are located. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, "home occupation" shall mean any occupation or profession conducted solely by the resident occupants in their place of abode,
involving primarily service and limited sale of commodities upon the premises. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-4: APPLICATION AND PERMIT PROCESSING:
A. A home occupation permit shall be required for all home occupation uses under this Chapter.
A home occupation permit must be issued prior to the commencement of any home occupation use. The Director of Community Development may,
from time to time, specify the form of the home occupation permit application. Applications for said home occupation permit shall be secured from the
Director of Community Development in the manner prescribed by this Chapter, who shall cause the application to be directed to all concerned City
departments and divisions. Affected departments or divisions shall comment on the application.
B. Home occupations may be subject to additional permits or inspections as required by any applicable law or regulation.
C. Home occupation permits shall be renewed every two (2) years and are not transferable to another party. The Director of Community Development or
his designee shall be authorized to approve, conditionally approve or deny any request for a home occupation permit or a renewal of a home
occupation permit. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-5: RESTRICTIONS FOR HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A. All home occupations shall comply with all pertinent City codes, ordinances and regulations in addition to the following restrictions:
1. The home occupation shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.
2. To avoid any traffic congestions, all customers, clients, etc., shall be handled by appointment only with a restriction of only two (2) clients allowed per
hour on a daily average basis, unless noted otherwise in this Chapter.
3. Only one nonresident of the dwelling shall be employed on the premises at any one time in the conduct of a home occupation, unless noted
otherwise in this Chapter.
4. No signs relating to the home occupation shall be allowed, other than what is required by State law. Signs shall be limited to one square foot in area,
and nontransferable.
5. Home occupation permits are valid only for the person(s) and use(s) approved and are nontransferable.
6. No dwelling shall be built, altered, furnished or decorated for the purpose of conducting the home occupation in such a manner as to change the
residential character and appearance of the dwelling, or in such a manner as to cause the structure to be recognized as a place where a home
occupation is conducted.
7. A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or a garage, and the activities of such home occupation shall not be visible, or
otherwise noticeable outside the structure, unless noted otherwise in this Chapter. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
8. There shall be no home occupation activities that are objectionable due to glare, dust, fumes, odor, vibration, noise or other nuisances that disturb
the peace.
9. No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible electrical or mechanical interference in any radio or television receiver or
other device outside the dwelling unit structure, or causes fluctuations in the line voltage outside the dwelling unit structure.
10. No more than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area of the building(s) in total may be used in pursuit of the occupation in which the general
public is going to the premises to receive a good or service. In those cases where the general public does not go to the premises to receive a good
or service, up to one-fourth (1/4) of the home or a garage or five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater, may be utilized for the
home occupation.
11. No portion of an accessory structure, carport or similar structure, except a garage, shall be used for home occupation purposes.
12. No storage of mechanical/construction equipment shall be permitted on the premises, other than that normally associated with a residential use.
13. No vehicles or trailers except those normally incidental to a residential use shall be parked so as to be visible from the public right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 543/687
14. The home occupation shall not cause, involve or result in the use of commercial vehicles for deliveries to or from the premises, excluding a vehicle
not to exceed three-fourths (3/4) ton capacity, which shall be registered to the operator of such home occupation.
15. The use of the United States postal service in conjunction with appropriate uses as determined by the director of community development, such as
mail order businesses, shall be done by means of a post office box.
16. No deliveries of goods or merchandise may originate from or be made to the premises except during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday.
17. The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic and/or vehicular parking which degrades or is otherwise detrimental to the residential
nature of the neighborhood and thus becomes objectionable to the neighboring residents.
18. If the home occupation is to be conducted in a rental unit, a written statement from the property owner giving his or her permission shall be
required.
19. The home occupation shall not affect nor reduce the parking spaces required by this code.
20. The home occupation shall not involve the use and/or on site storage of chemicals, flammable materials, or other hazardous materials, except as
may be permitted by the fire code as adopted by the city.
21. Those occupations normally classified as a trade and involving the use of contractors' or mechanics' tools or equipment used by carpenters,
electricians, painters, plumbers, pest control services, etc., shall be limited to office use only.
22. Any citizen who wishes to make other than minor repairs to his own vehicles must abide by the aforementioned conditions. No more than two (2)
vehicles per year, owned by the occupant, shall be rebuilt, repaired, or reconstructed. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1242, 4-21-1997)
23. The operation of an in home childcare business shall require the issuance of a home occupation permit prior to initiation of the activity. In home
childcare businesses shall be limited to childcare homes (5 or fewer children at any 1 time), and child development homes in accordance with Iowa
department of human services registration guidelines including category C with two (2) providers. Any other applicable state or federal regulations
shall apply. In home childcare businesses shall be exempt from subsections A2, A3, A11, and A17 of this section, of the conditions for home
occupations. (Ord. 1949, 5-29-2012)
24. Private swim lessons shall be permitted as a home occupation in a home outdoor pool, provided that there is no more than a maximum of four (4)
students per one hour time period. No more than one instructor shall be giving lessons during any given time, and no more than one employee may
be employed in the home occupation other than the residents of the household where the business is conducted. Hours of operation shall be limited
to between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday through Friday, eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on Saturdays, with a maximum of five (5) total hours per day and only during the months of June, July, August and September. Prior to
issuance of a home occupation permit for this use, the applicant shall be required to submit verification that the pool has been registered with the
state and is in compliance with all state and local regulations for the commercial use of a residential pool. (Ord. 1863, 5-3-2010)
9-8-6: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
A. The director of community development may impose such conditions on a home occupation permit as is necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter
and protect the public health, safety and welfare and adjacent uses. Conditions which may be imposed may include, but are not limited to:
1. Yard setback and open space requirements.
2. Parking.
3. Fences, walls or other screening.
4. Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress.
5. Property maintenance during the course of the activity.
6. Control of illumination, noise, odor, vibration or other nuisances.
7. Hours of operations. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-7: FEES:
Each application request for a home occupation permit, or a renewal, shall be accompanied by the fee specified by city council resolution before it is
accepted for filing and processing. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
Chapter 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
9-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
AREA DEVELOPMENT PLAN (ADP): A plan that identifies infrastructure, planning units, major street patterns, stormwater drainage and detention, public
and private utilities, shared public spaces, vehicular traffic impacts, proposed density, and land use assumptions for geographically designated areas
within the Town Center Overlay District. The ADP establishes development parcels that may be under one or several specific plans. The intent is to
encourage cohesive, unified development and identify the phasing of construction by creating partnerships with the adjacent property owners and
developers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 544/687
MIXED USE: A single building containing two (2) or more types of land use or a single development of more than one building and use where the different
types of land uses are in close proximity, planned as a unified complementary whole, and functionally integrated to the use of shared vehicular and
pedestrian access and parking areas.
OPEN SPACES: Shall include all uncovered areas surrounding buildings except streets, private drives, and parking areas.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: Districts which are placed over base zoning districts to modify the development standards and to achieve a specific purpose for that
area. The regulations of the underlying zoning district and all other regulations remain in effect; however, if any overlay district's regulations conflict with
the underlying zoning regulations the overlay's regulations prevail.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): Any development in which the proposed land uses, transportation elements, building densities, arrangements
and types are set out in a unified plan. A planned unit development may consist of mixed residential, commercial, office, and public land uses or a single
use development.
PLANNING UNITS: Parcels of land uses, such as mixed use or single-family that are determined during the review of the area development plan and
further defined during the review of the specific plan.
SPECIFIC PLAN DEVELOPMENT (SP): An alternate type of planned unit development which applies to development within the Town Center Overlay
District. The SP is an ordinance that is produced through a creative design process which outlines detailed development criteria such as density,
architectural building details, usable open space, traffic and streetscape details for each planning unit as identified in the area development plan.
USABLE OPEN SPACE: Areas which serve the need for leisure, recreation, and pedestrian interaction. Spaces may include, but are not limited to, plaza
areas, open lawn areas, trails, open air recreation facilities, outdoor gardens, pedestrian walkways, and waterways. (Ord. 1524, 4-28-2003)
9-9-2: RESIDENTIAL DENSITY:
Provided that the overall density of the residential development does not exceed the density otherwise permitted by the Comprehensive Plan, the density
of residential land uses shall be as set forth by the planned unit development (PUD) or specific plan development (SP). In determining whether or not to
allow the density of development to be varied from this Code, the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council shall give consideration to the following:
A. The amount, location, and proposed use of common open space;
B. The location and physical characteristics of the site of the proposed development; and
C. The location, design, and type of dwelling units and other land uses. (Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017)
9-9-3: MINIMUM ACREAGE:
No minimum acreage is required to establish a planned unit development district, unless specifically provided in the planned unit development or specific
plan ordinance, for any development. (Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017)
9-9-4: INTENT:
A. Planned unit developments or specific plans shall be used as an alternate development tool for those developments that propose a creative and
innovative development whose layout is not achievable by the standards under which the property is currently zoned. This type of zoning shall be
reserved for only those developments which meet one or more of the following goals:
1. To encourage unique innovations in residential, commercial, and industrial development, and/or urban renewal so that the growing demands of the
population may be met by greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space;
2. To encourage a more efficient use of land and of public/private services, and to reflect changes in the technology of land development that benefit
the future resigned;
3. To conserve the value of the land in order to allow for development that is a creative, unique or efficient use of the land that the typical zoning
standard would prevent;
4. To provide a procedure which can relate the type, design, and layout of development to the particular site, thereby encouraging preservation of the
site's natural characteristics;
5. To provide for infill development that enhances, revitalizes and protects the overall characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood and natural
resources.
B. In addition to meeting one of the above mentioned goals, the applicant shall prepare a statement of intent for the planned unit development or specific
plan. The statement shall give specific direction as to the objective of the development.
C. A reduction or modification of setbacks, bulk regulations, additional signage, or amendment of land uses shall not be the sole justification for a planned
unit development or specific plan. The applicant must demonstrate how the proposed development is a creative, unique or efficient use of the land and
that the typical zoning standard would prevent an innovative positive development that will benefit the community. (Ord. 1524, 4-28-2003; amd. Ord.
2222, 5-30-2017)
9-9-5: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 545/687
A. Application Form, Submittal Requirements And Fee: The applicant shall refer to the application form and checklist for current submittal requirements.
B. Planned Unit Development: The applicant shall prepare an intent statement identifying the objective of development. In addition, the applicant should
prepare a sketch plan for proposed implementation of the site. The applicant shall refer to the PUD checklist for additional sketch plan requirements.
Additional information or detail may be required by the Community Development Director.
C. Specific Plan: For those developments within the Town Center Overlay District, in conjunction with or subsequent to approval of the planning units
identified in the area development plan, a specific plan may be approved by the City Council upon receiving recommendation from the Plan and Zoning
Commission. The applicant shall submit a specific plan map which shows the location of all buildings on site and their use, parking areas, landscaping
concepts, pedestrian pathways, and usable open space. The plan shall also include the proposed roadway system, proposed stormwater detention
plan, location of existing or proposed utilities, existing topography, and illustration of existing drainage considerations as well as proposed private and
public ownership boundaries, including proposed private lots for sale, and common ownership areas. In addition, the applicant shall prepare language
for the standards and criteria of development for each planning unit. The specific plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Standards for principal and accessory uses;
2. Standards for setbacks, density, parking, buffers, and usable outdoor space;
3. Detailed description of features, location and illustration of street furniture, amenities, landscaping and usable outdoor space;
4. Detailed description and illustration of architecture, identifying any dominate themes;
5. Detailed description of site design;
6. Lot sizes and distribution within planning unit;
7. Building and pedestrian layout;
8. Traffic considerations, including access points into the development;
9. Statement of methods for addressing unique features of the site.
Additional information or detail may be required by the Community Development Director.
D. Completion Of Application: No application will be placed on a Plan and Zoning Commission or City Council agenda until the Community Development
Director deems it complete. (Ord. 1524, 4-28-2003; amd. Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017)
9-9-6: REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Preapplication Meeting: Prior to the submittal of a planned unit or specific plan development, the applicant shall present to the Community Development
Department a specific plan or sketch plan proposal. The Community Development Department shall schedule a development review team meeting. At
this meeting, the applicant shall explain all of the elements required on the SP or PUD application checklist. As determined by the Community
Development Director, additional preapplication materials and/or meetings may be required.
B. Submittal Of Application: Following the preapplication meeting, the applicant may submit a formal application with the required material to the
Community Development Department. If the Community Development Director deems the application complete, the project is then placed on a review
schedule. If deemed incomplete, the Community Development Director, or his designee, will notify the applicant in writing within twelve (12) business
days, of receipt of the application and indicate what is necessary to make the submittal complete.
C. Plan And Zoning Commission: The commission shall hold a public hearing and make a recommendation to the City Council on the proposed request.
The commission's recommendations shall include a determination if the proposed PUD or SP is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan. If it is
determined the proposal constitutes a substantial change to the Comprehensive Plan, an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan may be required. If
the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial of a request for a PUD or SP development as proposed, and the applicant desires to revise
or resubmit the PUD or SP, the applicant shall be subject to an additional processing fee. If the applicant proceeds to Council with the commission's
recommendation for denial, a super majority of the Council members must vote in the affirmative for the ordinance to pass.
D. City Council: Within a period of sixty (60) days after the City Council is in receipt of the report from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed PUD.
E. Amendments To A Planned Unit Development/Specific Plan: Amendments to a PUD or specific plan shall be granted if approved by the City Council
after a recommendation by the Plan and Zoning Commission. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove that the amendment meets the
established intent of the existing PUD/SP. (Ord. 1524, 4-28-2003; amd. Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017)
Chapter 10
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
9-10-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the ZONING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 546/687
9-10-2: PURPOSE:
The regulations set forth in this chapter identify specific performance standards that all uses within the specified zoning district shall comply with. These
standards have been established for the following purposes:
A. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City.
B. To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger.
C. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the City and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the
community through appropriate growth management techniques by assuring proper urban form and open space separation of urban areas, and
protecting environmentally critical areas from premature urban development.
D. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts
among the uses of land and buildings.
E. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for development and redevelopment in order to further the orderly layout and use of land.
F. To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the
wise use and management of natural resources throughout the City in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the
value of the land.
G. To prevent the problems associated with inappropriately developed land, including excess development and low grade development. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-
1996)
9-10-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
Where a question arises about the applicable standards to be applied for a proposed use as outlined in this chapter, the Director of Community
Development shall review the proposed use when requested to do so by letter and, based upon the characteristics of the use, determine which of the
performance standards listed in this chapter are appropriate to that proposed use. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2344 - GARAGE REQUIREMENT FOR MULTI-FAMILY CONDOMINIUM. Go to new
ordinance.
9-10-4: SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS:
The following performance standards shall be applied to the specific uses listed below in any district or in the specific district where that use is allowed. In
the event that any of the standards below conflict with other standards, regulations of requirements of Federal, State, County laws or regulations, or as
outlined elsewhere within this Code, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
A. The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Zoning Districts Unless Noted Otherwise In This Title:
1. Fuel Supply Systems: All fuel supply systems shall be constructed and installed in accordance with all applicable requirements of this title, the
Building Code as adopted and amended by the City, the Fire Code as adopted and amended by the City, and any other applicable, local, County,
State, or Federal regulations or requirements.
2. Screening Of Mechanical Units: The following standards apply to the location and screening of mechanical equipment: (Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
a. Screening Of Ground Mounted Mechanical Units: For all uses, except for single-family detached and bi-attached residential uses, all ground
mounted mechanical units, including, but not limited to: air conditioning condensers, heat pumps, ventilation units, computer cooling equipment,
etc., and any related utility structures and equipment, that are visible from any adjacent public thoroughfare shall be visibly screened from public
view by the use of a screening wall built out of materials compatible and consistent with the architecture and materials of the principal building,
landscape plantings of predominately evergreen materials to provide year round screening, or a combination of the above. The type of screening
to be used shall be identified as part of the site plan submittal. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
b. Screening Of Roof Mounted Mechanical Units: All roof mounted mechanical units shall be screened from adjacent public thoroughfares by the use
of an opaque screening material compatible with the architecture of the building or architecturally designed screening, such as a parapet wall. The
screening of the roof mounted units shall be designed to blend with the building and roof materials. Additional screening may be required due to
topographic differences in the adjoining properties.
c. Location Of Meters In Single-Family And Bi-Attached Developments: Single-family and bi-attached residential developments shall be prohibited
from locating the mechanical units and meters in the front yard of the property unless adequate screening is provided to visibly screen these
elements from the public view.
3. Screening Of Solar Energy Systems:
a. Ground mounted solar energy systems should be sited to visually mitigate undesirable features that are visible at grade from surrounding
properties and public thoroughfares. The City is aware of the operating needs of these types of structures and acknowledges that it may be
impossible to orient a system to hide its undesirable features such as the structural elements, rear face of the collector panels, mechanical
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 547/687
equipment and accessories. Should any of these features be visible, the following options are acceptable methods of screening the view of these
undesirable features:
(1) An enclosure or a freestanding screen wall or fence of an opaque design built out of materials consistent with the architecture and materials of
the principal building. Landscape plantings may be implemented in combination with the screen enclosure, fence or wall to soften the
appearance of the installation.
(2) Landscape plantings that are composed of evergreen materials to provide year round screening may be implemented in lieu of screen
enclosure, fence or wall. Plant material shall be of sufficient height and size at the time of installation to fully screen the undesirable features of
the system.
b. Building mounted systems do not require screening if they comply with the requirements as noted in section 9-14-14, "Solar Energy Systems", of
this title. However the structural elements, equipment and accessories related to a system mounted on a flat roof that are visible from any adjacent
public thoroughfare or adjacent property shall be selected to be a similar color to the roof surface or adjacent building materials to mitigate the
visual impact of the system. Wall or ground mounted mechanical equipment related to any solar energy system as noted in subsection A2a of this
section, will require screening. (Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
4. Screening Of Trash Receptacles: For any development or properties where three (3) or more residential dwelling units are using a common trash
receptacle and all nonresidential uses; trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be opaquely screened on all sides by the use of a permanent
enclosure, with gates for disposal truck access. The enclosure shall be constructed of materials and colors compatible with the dominant
architectural materials of buildings on site and shall be integral to a building on site whenever possible. The enclosure shall be constructed to visibly
screen the receptacle from public view and views from the adjoining properties. The design of the pedestrian access to the receptacle should be
designed to minimize the views into the enclosure. The enclosure should be landscaped to mitigate the visual impact of the enclosure on surrounding
properties and public thoroughfares. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
5. Satellite Dishes And Communication Antennas: The following standards shall apply to satellite dishes and communication antennas:
a. Interference With Emergency Frequencies: All satellite dishes and communication antennas shall be subject to any State and Federal regulations
and shall not interfere with emergency frequencies within the City.
b. Advertising Prohibited: No satellite dish or communication antenna shall be permitted to display advertising or identification of any kind that is
visible from the ground, on elevated structures, or readily discernible to the general public.
c. Building Permit Required: Satellite dishes and communication antennas are considered accessory structures, which require a building permit and
are subject to all applicable requirements for accessory structures identified elsewhere within this title.
d. Freestanding Dishes And Antennas: The City is aware of the operating needs of these types of structures and acknowledges that it may be
impossible to totally screen a satellite dish or communication antenna, however, every effort should be made by the dish owner to minimize the
visual impact of the dish on the general public, the surrounding properties and the principal outdoor use areas of the adjoining properties.
(1) Satellite dishes and antennas shall be prohibited in the front and side yard of residential property and shall comply with the applicable setback
requirements for accessory structures. If the applicant can show that a usable signal cannot be obtained from the rear yard area, the satellite
dish or antenna may be located on an interior (nonstreet side) side yard with the approval of the Director of Community Development, and,
provided, that in all cases a building permit is obtained prior to installation. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
(2) Satellite dishes and antennas in nonresidential areas shall be sited to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and public
thoroughfares. Location of satellite dishes and communication antennas in the front yard (to include all of the area between the principal
structure and the public street) shall be discouraged and shall only be allowed if approved through the appropriate site plan process. (Ord. 2274,
2-5-2018)
e. Roof Mounted Satellite Dishes And Antennas: Roof mounted satellite dishes and antennas shall be located in such a manner as to be screened
from surrounding properties and public thoroughfares by the use of a parapet wall or blended into the design and color of the building such that it is
not readily apparent. Roof mounted dishes and antennas shall be limited to a maximum height of ten feet (10') above the structure.
f. Wall Mounted Satellite Dishes And Antennas: Wall mounted satellite dishes and communication antennas on existing structures may be permitted
by the City Council if the petitioner can demonstrate that the combination of the dish/antennas design and position on the structure is established
as an architectural feature or element to the existing structure. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
g. Accessory Equipment Associated With Satellite Dishes And Antennas: Accessory equipment associated with satellite dishes and communication
antennas shall either be located within the building, on the roof in a screened enclosure constructed of materials compatible with the building or
other roof structures, or on the ground within a structure designed and landscaped to be compatible with the principal structure. The location of the
equipment and enclosure shall meet setback standards for the principal structure and shall be subject to site plan review as required elsewhere in
this title. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
6. Transmitting/Receiving Towers: In the applicable zoning districts, the installation of transmitting/receiving towers may be permitted by the City
Council following their review and approval through the permitted conditional use process, if the petitioner meets the following requirements:
a. Interference With Emergency Frequencies: All transmitting/receiving towers shall be subject to any State and Federal regulations and shall not
interfere with emergency frequencies within the City.
b. Advertising Prohibited: No tower or associated structures shall be permitted to display advertising or identification of any kind that is visible from
the ground, on elevated structures, or readily discernible to the general public.
c. Building Permit Required: A building permit shall be required prior to installation of the tower and associated structures.
d. Setback Standards: All towers and associated structures shall meet setback standards for a principal structure in the applicable zoning district
described elsewhere in this title.
e. Architecture Of The Associated Structures: The architecture of any structures associated with a transmitting/receiving tower shall be reviewed
during the development permit application process for compatibility with the predominate architectural character of the surrounding area.
7. Exterior Lighting: The following standards shall apply to all exterior lighting.
a. The use of "wall pack" lights shall be prohibited in the following districts and situations:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 548/687
(1) Neighborhood Commercial District.
(2) Convenience Commercial District.
(3) All residential districts.
(4) For any nonresidential use which abuts a residential district where the building or structure that the "wall pack" is to be located, is within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of a residentially zoned property or a residential use.
b. All light fixtures shall be of a cutoff type to eliminate glare and spillover lighting beyond the property line. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 2143,
5-2-2016)
8. Outdoor Storage Yards: Outdoor storage yards associated with service oriented businesses such as, but not limited to, construction contractors,
plumbing companies, wholesale material suppliers, etc., and self-storage facilities shall only be allowed in rear and side yard areas within the
Warehouse Retail (WR), Valley Junction Light Industrial (VJLI), Light Industrial (LI) and General Industrial (GI) Zoning Districts unless noted
otherwise elsewhere within this title. Areas of outside storage shall not occupy any portion of required yard areas, open space, required off street
parking areas, etc., and shall be screened from views from the public streets, adjoining properties, especially those of a different zoning classification
and any residential property through the use of opaque screening reviewed as part of the site plan submittal. The need for limited visibility for security
reasons should be considered when determining appropriate screening levels. With the exception of business associated vehicles, equipment and
trailers and recreational vehicles, no material being stored shall exceed the height of the screening structure. Appropriate security lighting shall be so
arranged as to divert the light away from adjoining traveled roadway of public streets and adjoining properties. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
That portion of a site indicated and identified as an outdoor storage yard on a City approved site plan associated with a business and self-storage
facilities shall be exempt from off street parking regulations stated in chapter 15 of this title for striping, dimensions, surfacing and curbing. Gravel
shall be a prohibited surfacing material for storage yards unless all of the following conditions are met:
a. The property is located within a General Industrial (GI) zoned district; and
b. The parcel upon which the storage yard is located does not share a common property line with any residentially used or zoned property; and
c. The storage yard is located within the rear yard of the parcel; and
d. A defined permanent edge or curbing is installed to confine the granular material; and
e. Appropriate dust mitigation measures are implemented to control dust.
9. Outside Display Areas: Outside display areas shall not occupy any portion of required yard areas, open space, required off street parking areas, etc.,
unless approved as part of a site plan, conditional use permit or temporary use permit. Bulk storage of merchandise (such as that typical of garden
centers associated with home improvement stores), shall be appropriately screened from views from public thoroughfares and adjacent properties.
No merchandise being stored shall exceed the height of the screening structure. All display and storage shall occur on asphaltic or portland cement
concrete pavement consistent with the surfacing and curbing requirements of off street parking areas. (Ord. 1860, 3-22-2010; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-2-
2016)
10. Overtax Public Utilities And Facilities: No use shall be permitted that involves any activity that substantially increases the burden on any existing or
proposed public utilities or facilities, unless provisions are made for any necessary adjustments.
11. Utilities: All developments must be designed to interface with existing utility systems and provide for any extension of the utilities as necessary for
the proposed use. All utilities and easements must be accommodated in the site design. No overhead wiring shall be permitted where utilities can
reasonably be accommodated underground.
12. Permitted Noise Levels: In any zoning district, noise levels shall not be permitted in excess of sixty five (65) dBA on the community noise equivalent
level (CNEL) as measured at the property line.
13. Extraction Of Earth Products: In those districts where mining is allowed, the following standards shall apply:
a. As part of the application submittal, a map, to a scale of no greater than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), of the proposed area of
extraction shall be submitted that shows the existing topography in two foot (2') intervals, the location of existing watercourses and drainageways,
and the outline of the area to be excavated. A second map, drawn to the same scale, shall be required that shows a general plan for proposed
operation and rehabilitation of the site that includes:
(1) The locations of proposed watercourses and drainage systems, including lakes, ponds, and retention basins.
(2) The sequence of operations and the schedule of rehabilitation measures.
(3) The proposed locations of sorting, grading, crushing, stockpiling of topsoil, and similar equipment necessary for the operation and the initial
distribution of the excavated products.
(4) The proposed locations of any buildings, scale house, equipment storage areas, and equipment repair sheds or areas.
(5) Temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation controls.
(6) Proposed ground cover and landscaping to be installed following the completion of the operation or the expiration of the use permit.
b. All mines and quarries shall be located adjacent to, or have direct access over a private haul road to, an arterial street which is designed for heavy
truck traffic.
c. All aboveground operations shall be located no less than seven hundred fifty feet (750') from residentially zoned property or one thousand feet
(1,000') from an existing residence.
d. All belowground operations shall be located no less than two hundred feet (200') from the nearest property line, measured laterally.
e. After completion of the operation, and in accordance with the approved rehabilitation plan, the premises shall be cleared of debris, and a layer of
soil capable of supporting vegetation shall be spread over the premises to a depth of at least three inches (3") (except for area underwater) and
shall be seeded with grass or other ground cover to prevent erosion.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 549/687
f. All lakes, ponds, and retention areas to remain and as shown on the rehabilitation plan shall be graded so that the slope of the underwater grades
within the first fifty feet (50') of the permanent water elevation, does not exceed one foot (1') of drop per ten feet (10') of run.
g. All mines and quarries shall follow state and federal guidelines and requirements for blasting and vibrations. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord.
1860, 3-22-2010; Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
14. Dry Cleaners: In those districts in which SIC 7212 is allowed, when said operation includes dry cleaning equipment the following standards shall
apply:
a. Maximum of one solvent based cleaning machine shall be located on the premises;
b. Class I and II solvents shall be allowed. No class III solvents for the cleaning operation shall be allowed;
c. The maximum amount of solvent present on site at a given time shall not exceed one drum (maximum 55 gallons);
d. Establishment and operation shall comply with all city of West Des Moines adopted fire and building code regulations, including addendums;
e. A minimum one hour firewall shall exist between tenant spaces, including ceiling and floors;
f. A Fire Marshal approved solvent containment basin and accompanying storage container shall be utilized;
g. Fire Marshal must approve of solvent transfer operations, including fill location;
Upon approval of the initial operation, any changes to equipment, type of solvent used, or solvent transfer or fill operations will require the review
and approval of the Building Division and Fire Marshal. At the discretion of the Chief Building Official and/or Fire Marshal, additional measures to
ensure safety and eliminate potential impacts on adjacent tenants/businesses/properties may be required and shall be adhered to. (Ord. 2081, 2-
9-2015; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
15. Taprooms Or Beer Parlors: In those districts where a taproom/beer parlor is allowed, the taproom/beer parlor shall only be allowed by approval of a
permitted conditional use permit to operate in conjunction with a brewery. The brewery must have a native beer brewery (NAB or NAAB) permit
issued through the State of Iowa and a Class B beer license approved by the City. The Class B beer license shall be restricted to serving only those
beers brewed on site, plus a maximum of five (5) additional microbrewery or craft beers that are brewed off site.
No Class LC liquor permit will be allowed in conjunction with the taproom; having such license will classify the establishment as a drinking place/bar
for the purposes of this subsection and regulation.
For taprooms/beer parlors exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the gross square footage of the brewery, or serving more than five (5) varieties of
microbrewery or craft beers, those uses will be considered a drinking place/bar for purposes of this subsection and regulation.
Parking space requirements for a brewery with taproom/beer parlor will be calculated at the parking rate for 5813 drinking establishments for that
portion of the brewery identified as the taproom/beer parlor. This parking calculation shall be in addition to the parking requirement for SIC 20 food
and kindred products for that portion of the brewery identified for production purposes. (Ord. 2113, 9-8-2015; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
16. Self-Service Storage Facilities: The intent of these performance standards is to allow two (2) distinct building forms while maintaining building form
compatibility with the zoning district in general and the site specific surrounding development.
a. Exterior Unit Access (Miniwarehouse Storage): This building type is intended to allow for single-story, long row, connected units with exterior
access doors in the warehouse retail and industrial districts. The following development standards shall apply, in addition to development
standards cited elsewhere in this title, including, but not limited to, landscaping, open space, buffers, screening, parking, setbacks, trash
enclosures, etc.
(1) Views of individual unit exterior access doors shall be screened from the public street or from adjacent nonindustrial or nonwarehouse retail
zoned or developed property.
(2) The building(s) shall be surfaced with materials compatible with adjacent industrial or warehouse retail development. Facades visible from the
public street shall be enhanced to add visual character and distinction from the interior of the development. Facades facing adjacent residential
property shall be screened with a fence or evergreen landscaping and otherwise enhanced by incorporating front facade materials or enhanced
materials used elsewhere in the development. Three hundred sixty degree (360°) architecture is not intended for ministorage, but those
buildings visible from the street or adjacent residential developed or zoned property shall be expected to reflect material enhancements that may
not be commonly considered in warehouse retail and industrial developments.
(3) Outdoor storage areas, as allowed in this title, should be consolidated into a single area and screened as required elsewhere in this title.
(4) Fences and walls used to provide screening shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe, and structurally sound condition. RVs, boats, and
recreational trailers may exceed the height of the fence or wall; all other materials shall not exceed the height of the wall or fence. Fences shall
be placed no closer to the front lot line than the front yard established by the building or building setback line, whichever is greater.
(5) Wall signage for the development shall be calculated according to the Sign Code calculations located elsewhere in this title for the building
facade in which the business office is located. No signage or advertising is allowed on screen walls or fencing.
(6) Vehicle circulation shall allow for two-way drive aisles and circulation with no dead ends. (Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016)
b. Interior Unit Access: This building type is intended to allow for facilities where units are accessed by interior hallways. These structures shall
emulate the exterior architecture and characteristics of buildings in the specific district in which the facility is located. The following development
standards shall apply, in addition to development standards cited elsewhere in this title, including, but not limited to, landscaping, open space,
buffers, screening, parking, setbacks, etc.:
(1) Office And Professional Commerce Park Districts: Interior unit access self-storage in the Office and Professional Commerce Park Districts is
intended to be designed to be compatible with expected four-sided office design already exhibited in the City in these districts. The following
performance standards also apply to the design of interior self-storage units:
(A) All storage units shall gain access from the interior of the building, no individual unit doors may face the street or be visible from off the
property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 550/687
(B) One (1) entrance and one (1) exit overhead door shall be allowed. If the facility abuts residentially zoned property, the facility loading bays,
docks, or doors shall not be visible from the residential property. Whenever possible, these features shall be located on facades which face nonresidentially
zoned or developed property. These features shall not be located on the facade facing the public street.
(C) Ground floor and upper floor facades shall be designed to be compatible with expected four-sided office design in the City's office districts.
Examples of such architectural and design features include varied massing, proportion, facade modulation, exterior building materials and
detailing, varied roof line, pedestrian scale, windows, repetition, etc. Views of storage units through windows shall be mitigated. The building
shall look like an office building.
(D) The building shall be surfaced with high-quality, durable materials consistent with the surrounding office uses. Un-faced concrete block,
painted masonry, tilt-up and pre-cast concrete panels and non-architectural metal siding are prohibited in the office districts. Prefabricated
buildings are not allowed in the office districts.
(E) There shall be a pedestrian entrance facing the street. This entrance shall be considered the main or principal entrance, even if the tenants
enter through loading docks, bays, doors or other side or rear entrances. This entrance shall present as a prominent feature that emulates an
office lobby. This entrance shall not be used for the transfer of goods to the storage unit.
(F) To accommodate future potential redevelopment of the building, parking for re-use of the building for other permitted or permitted conditional
uses in the applicable zoning district shall be demonstrated at the applicable ratio; however, only the parking required for the indoor self-storage
shall be required to be constructed.
(G) Indoor self-storage facilities shall abide by all City codes and regulations such as, but not limited to, Building Code and Fire Code provisions.
(H) Tenant access shall be restricted to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
(2) Commercial Districts: Interior unit access self-storage in the commercial districts, to include the Valley Junction Historic Business District, is
intended to be designed to be compatible with expected four-sided commercial design already exhibited in the City in these districts. Retail
tenant spaces shall be included in the first floor design, which may include a retail space for the self-storage office. Tenant spaces shall extend
the length of the facade which faces a main parking field and the public street where parking is available between the building and the public
street. The intent is to emulate tenant and multitenant retail store fronts commonly associated with the commercial districts, to provide the retail
activity for the districts, and to provide services to the community such is commonly available in these districts. In these instances, the selfstorage
use will be of secondary consideration to the retail atmosphere. The following performance standards also apply to the design of interior
self-storage units:
(A) All storage units shall gain access from the interior of the building, no individual unit doors may face the street or be visible from off the
property.
(B) One (1) entrance and one (1) exit overhead door shall be allowed. If the facility abuts residentially zoned property, the facility loading bays,
docks, or doors shall not be visible from the residential property. Whenever possible, these features shall be located on facades which face nonresidentially
zoned or developed property or the public street. In no case will these features appear on the front facade or public facade where
other commercial business takes place.
(C) Ground floor and upper floor facades shall be designed to be compatible with expected four-sided commercial design in the City's
commercial districts. Examples of such architectural and design features include varied massing, proportion, facade modulation, exterior building
materials and detailing, varied roof line, pedestrian scale, windows, repetition, etc. Views of storage units through windows shall be mitigated.
The building shall look like a retail or multitenant commercial space.
(D) The building shall be surfaced with high-quality, durable materials consistent with the surrounding office uses. Un-faced concrete block,
painted masonry, tilt-up and pre-cast concrete panels, non-architectural metal siding, and prefabricated buildings are prohibited in the
commercial districts.
(E) To accommodate future potential redevelopment of the building, parking for re-use of the building for other permitted or permitted conditional
uses in the applicable zoning district shall be demonstrated at the applicable ratio; however, only the parking required for the indoor self-storage
shall be required to be constructed.
(F) Indoor self-storage facilities shall abide by all City codes and regulations such as, but not limited to, Building Code and Fire Code provisions.
(G) Self-storage access shall be restricted to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 2187, 12-12-2016)
c. Prohibited Uses: The only activity permitted in individual storage units shall be the storage of goods and property. Storage units shall not be used
for:
(1) Residences, offices, workshops, studios, hobbies, events, or rehearsal areas;
(2) Manufacturing, fabrication, or processing of goods, services, or repair of vehicles, engines, appliances, or other electrical equipment or any
other industrial activity;
(3) Retail sales of any kind including, but not limited to, garage sales, estate sales, auctions or to conduct any other commercial activity, except in
the business office as permitted in the zone in which the facility is located; excludes auctions of units conducted by the property owner or
manager due to nonpayment, default, or other storage business operation.
(4) The storage of flammable, perishable, or hazardous materials.
(5) The keeping of animals.
(6) Accessory uses such as the rental of trucks, trailers, moving equipment, or the installation of trailer hitches are prohibited unless otherwise
permitted in the zone in which the facility is located. (Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016)
17. Event Venues: The following standards shall apply to all event venues:
a. General Requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 551/687
(1) All event venues must comply with all Building and Fire Code regulations related to assembly uses.
(2) All event venues must comply with parking requirements as follows and as outlined in chapter 15, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title.
(A) Parking will be calculated at one (1) parking space required per fifty (50) square feet of assembly or event venue space.
(B) If the event venue is not the principal use of the building or tenant space, the business of the principal use of the building or tenant space
may not be conducted during the event except with event attendees, unless the parking required for the principal use is provided in addition to
parking required for the event venue.
(C) In cases where the parking available is not equal to or greater than that needed for the proposed event venue, the event venue space
square footage and maximum occupancy load as determined by the Fire Code and Building Code will be limited in size and occupancy load to
match the available parking.
(D) If the event venue is part of a commercial center with shared parking, parking will be calculated at the commercial center rate, plus one (1)
space per fifty (50) square feet of event venue area to avoid an under parked situation for other tenants.
(E) No outside activity is allowed if located within three hundred feet (300') of property zoned for residential development or used for residential.
This includes, but is not limited to, patios, decks, amplified sound, roll-up windows, or garage type doors. (Ord. 2123, 11-2-2015; amd. Ord.
2143, 5-2-2016; Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016)
18. Roll-Up And Sliding Doors And Windows Relating To Eating And Drinking Places (SIC 58): The use of roll-up and sliding doors or windows,
including garage type doors, for SIC 58 eating and drinking places is prohibited when the nearest point on the tenant space in a multi-tenant building
or stand alone structure housing the eating or drinking place is within three hundred feet (300') of nearest point on a residential structure when
measured in a straight line, regardless of intervening structures.
Roll-up and sliding doors and windows function such that the door or window rolls up or slides open for purposes including, but not limited to,
allowing outside air into the space, offering bar or food services, displaying TV or video, providing for music out of doors or allowing other business to
be conducted through the opening. For the purposes of this regulation, roll-up or sliding door and window does not mean vehicular access, drive-in
bays, or windows for drive-through service. (Ord. 2124, 11-2-2015; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016; Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016)
19. Beekeeping: In those districts in which SIC 0279-9901 is allowed, the following regulations shall apply to beekeeping operations:
a. Beekeeping shall only be allowed on property owned by the beekeeper or on property owned by a third party for which the beekeeper has written
authorization from the property owner allowing for the keeping of bees.
b. Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames, with said hives kept in sound and usable condition.
c. A maximum of two (2) hives shall be permitted on a property one (1) acre or smaller in size, while a maximum of ten (10) hives shall be permitted
on a property larger than one (1) acre in size.
d. Hives shall not be located in the front or side yard.
e. A source of water shall be readily available to the bees within the property that the beehives are located at all times during the time of year in
which the bees are active.
f. When a hive is situated within twenty five feet (25') of a property line, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the
beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier parallel to the property line(s) which is a minimum of six feet (6') in height consisting of a
solid wall of a building, fence, dense vegetation or combination thereof. Said flyway barrier shall extend a minimum of twelve feet (12') beyond the
hive in all directions so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet (6') above ground level over the property line(s) in vicinity of
the apiary. Dense vegetation used as a flyway barrier may exceed a height of six feet (6'); however, said vegetation shall be a minimum of six feet
(6') in height at the time that beehives are located on the property. A building permit shall be obtained prior to construction of any building or fence.
g. As recommended by the Iowa State Apiarist, the beekeeper shall incorporate best management practices in the beekeeping operation at all times,
including practicing proper management and manipulation of colonies to remedy swarming and/or aggressive colonies.
h. In the event that a beekeeping operation is determined to be in violation of this Code with regard to the above regulations, the beekeeper and/or
property owner shall be given written notice of the violation and be allowed fourteen (14) days from the date of the notice to correct the violation. If
the property is not brought into compliance within fourteen (14) days, the hives shall be immediately removed from the property. (Ord. 2141, 4-4-
2016; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016; Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016)
20. Veterinary And Animal Services: The following regulations shall apply in multi-tenant buildings within all zoning districts in which the use is allowed
and in all situations in which noise or odors of veterinary and animal services are potentially noticeable to an adjacent or nearby business regardless
if located within the same building:
a. All veterinary and animal service uses:
(1) All walls, ceiling or floor assemblies surrounding any area for animal holding, exam, or treatment areas shall be constructed to meet or exceed
a sound transmission class rating (STC) of 55 and the walls shall extend all the way from the floor to the roof, sealed with a continuous bead of
caulk along the top, bottom and side wall intersections of the wall and around any penetrations. Doors or windows within exterior walls for these
wall assemblies must be constructed to meet or exceed a sound transmission class rating (STC) of 40. Doors or windows within these wall
assemblies serving as an interior wall of the tenant space (not a tenant separation wall) must be constructed to meet or exceed a sound
transmission class rating (STC) of 30.
(2) The ceiling over any animal holding, exam, or treatment areas shall meet or exceed a noise reduction coefficient (NRC) of 0.70.
(3) The HVAC system of the tenant space shall be designed to ensure adequate ventilation for odor elimination.
(4) Identify the outdoor open space that will be used for animal waste elimination and provide a proposed maintenance schedule for the cleaning
and removal of animal waste.
b. Veterinary and animal service uses in multi-tenant buildings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 552/687
(1) The wall, ceiling or floor assemblies between the entire tenant space conducting the activity and adjacent tenants shall be constructed to meet
or exceed a sound transmission class rating (STC) of 50 and the walls shall extend all the way from the floor to the roof, sealed with a
continuous bead of caulk along the top, bottom and side wall intersections of the wall and around any penetrations.
(2) The HVAC system for the tenant space shall be completely independent of any other tenant space to eliminate the transmission of sound or
odors. (Ord. 2160, 7-25-2016)
21. Scoreboards: Scoreboards are accessory to the primary use of a stadium or recreational facility. The current technology available for scoreboards
with video display capabilities creates concern for public safety due to the potential distraction to the motoring public viewing the scoreboard from
adjacent roadways and the potential intrusion of light and sound into adjacent properties. Every effort should be made in the design and placement of
the scoreboard to limit and screen the view of any video display component of the scoreboard from the general public. If the scoreboard cannot be
screened to adequately limit its view to patrons of the stadium or recreational facility, presumed to be screening which does not prevent a
continuously unobstructed view to the general public of more than five (5) seconds, the following performance standards shall apply:
a. Full use of all capabilities of the scoreboard shall be allowed only when an event is in progress within the stadium or recreational facility.
b. Full use of all capabilities of the scoreboard during the day of an event shall be limited to pregame warm ups, game duration and postgame
postings.
c. Use of the scoreboard during athletic practices and activities with limited spectator involvement shall be limited to score and timing functions and
shall not utilize any video display that may be a part of the scoreboard's capabilities. (Ord. 2162, 8-8-2016)
22. Snow Maintenance Facilities: The intent of this subsection is to allow for the removal of snow and conducting of winter maintenance activities on
nonsingle-family developed property on a seasonal basis and according to the following performance standards:
a. Maximum Duration: The snow maintenance facility may not be located on a site prior to October 1 and must be removed from the site no later than
May 31 unless specific permission is granted by the City.
b. Location Within The Site: To the greatest extent practicable, the snow maintenance facility shall be located in an unobtrusive location and
minimally visible from any public thoroughfares. Consideration should be given to the placement of the facility within the site to minimize impact to
adjacent residential properties.
c. Maximum Area Dedicated To The Facility: The maximum number of permanent parking spaces allowed to be used for a snow maintenance facility
including material stockpiles, snow removal equipment, storage containers, temporary sheds, etc., shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the
parking on site or twenty percent (20%) of the site area, whichever is more restrictive.
d. Location On Paved Surfaces: All elements of the snow maintenance facility shall be located on paved surface areas. No material, structures or
equipment shall be placed within any perimeter parking lot setback.
e. Temporary Storage: Temporary structures, semivan trailers, shipping containers and portable on demand storage containers shall be allowed for
the storage of material and equipment during the period of time allowed under this subsection A22.
f. Advertising Signage: No signage advertising for any business, other than typical company signage on vehicles, shall be allowed to be displayed.
g. Removal: On or before May 31, unless an extension is specifically granted by the City, all structures, equipment, unused materials, bulk material
piles, etc., associated with the snow maintenance facility shall be removed from the site. All sites shall be completely cleaned of debris and
maintenance elements. Site elements shall be properly restored to their prestorage facility condition.
h. Other Applicable Laws, Rules And Regulations: Any maintenance operation and the use and/or storage of fuel for equipment and/or chemicals
and materials to aid in the removal of snow and ice shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable City, County, State and Federal laws, rules
and regulations (i.e., air quality, chemical or material runoff, erosion prevention, Fire Code, etc.).
i. Vehicle Maintenance And Repair: Other than immediate repair in the event of a vehicle or equipment breakdown, maintenance or repair of vehicles
and equipment within the property is prohibited. (Ord. 2176, 10-31-2016)
23. Vending Machines: Vending machines are evolving to become more than a mechanized device that dispenses small items such as snack foods
and beverages. With improvements in vending hardware, software and theft resistant technology, the operational and locational limitations these
machines once had, have been removed. The intent of this subsection A23 is to establish performance standards to accommodate the new ways
vending machines are being used while being consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, the stated purpose of each zoning
district, to minimize visual clutter, and to maintain the aesthetic and architectural continuity of the community. Vending machines shall be in
accordance with the following performance standards:
a. All vending machines except outdoor freestanding ATMs, fuel pumps, fuel canister dispensing units, and tire air pumps, vehicle vacuums or other
similar devices ancillary to the function or service provided by the primary establishment shall be located within the principal building or vestibule
attached to the principal building.
b. Any addition to an existing building shall be constructed from similar material and shall have an appearance complementary to the main building.
c. No more than fifty percent (50%) of each facade adjacent to the machines can be transparent.
d. The vending area shall not block any interior or exterior walkways.
e. Signage or advertising is allowed as regulated elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2201, 3-6-2017)
24. Public Utility Structures: Shall be located in a private or public utility easement or street right-of-way unless they exceed one of the following criteria:
a. Exceeds sixty four (64) square feet; or
b. Exceeds a height of six feet (6') above grade.
Those structures exceeding the criteria noted above may be located outside of private or public utility easements or street rights-of-way and must
be set back a minimum of thirty five feet (35') from the front yard and a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the side and rear yard. The structure
shall be located to comply with the vision clearance requirements of chapter 14 of this title. Utility structures can exist on a lot without an
associated principal building. A lot containing only a utility structure does not need to meet the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 553/687
district.
Public utility structures exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet need to meet the principal structure setbacks for the specific zoning district
where they are located. (Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
25. Tasting Rooms In Conjunction With A Distillery: In those districts where a tasting room is allowed, the tasting room shall only be allowed by
approval of a permitted conditional use permit to operate in conjunction with a distillery. The distillery must have a native distilled spirits liquor control
license issued through the State of Iowa and a Class LC liquor license issued by the City. For tasting rooms exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the
gross square footage of the distillery, or serving cocktails, spirits or liquor produced elsewhere, those uses will be considered a drinking place/bar for
purposes of this subsection A25 and regulation.
Parking space requirements for a distillery with a tasting room will be calculated at the parking rate for SIC 5813, drinking places for that portion of
the distillery identified as the liquor consumption area. This parking calculation shall be in addition to the parking requirement for SIC 2085, distillery
for that portion of the distillery identified for production purposes. (Ord. 2265, 12-11-2017)
26. Factory Built Structures: All factory built structures not designated as a manufactured or mobile home or a trailer for temporary business or storage
use must meet all bulk regulations and design standards of their respective zoning district. (Ord. 2269, 1-8-2018)
B. The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Residential Districts:
1. For the purpose of this subsection an "enclosed parking space" or reference to a "garage" shall mean a covered space fully surrounded by walls,
including windows, doors and similar openings or architectural features.
2. For any detached single-family residential dwelling, a minimum of one enclosed garage parking space shall be required for the use. This garage may
be attached or detached but shall be of a minimum twenty foot by fourteen foot (20' x 14') size to accommodate one vehicle and additional storage.
3. For any single-family attached dwelling intended as owner occupied, a minimum of one enclosed parking space shall be required for each unit. This
parking space shall be a minimum of nineteen feet by nine feet (19' x 9') and may be designed as a freestanding garage, attached garage or multiple
garage spaces within an enclosure.
4. Any existing detached single-family residence and any single-family attached dwelling intended as owner occupied shall be required to comply with
the enclosed garage space if the residence is proposed to be remodeled, enlarged, expanded or modified and the cumulative value of the alterations
of the structure since the adoption date hereof exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current valuation of the structure.
For the purpose of determining the valuation of the building, the current assessor's tax roll shall be used. The valuation shall be measured on a
cumulative basis for all alterations made since the adoption date hereof rather than evaluating each alteration independently against the current
valuation.
5. Any existing detached single-family residence and any single-family attached dwelling intended as owner occupied which is damaged or destroyed
by catastrophe or act of God to the extent equaling fifty percent (50%) or more of its total assessed value, shall be exempt from the provisions of this
Code regarding the garage requirement as a part of the reconstruction of the damage to the residential structure due to the catastrophe or act of
God.
6. Any existing single-family attached dwelling which has not previously been operated as owner occupied and intends to convert to an owner occupied
program shall be required to comply with the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 1715, 11-20-2006)
7. For single family zoning districts in or adjacent to developed areas, buildings should be designed to be consistent with its surrounding architectural
context or historic character of the area with comparable architectural design, materials and details, including building mass and roof slope. (Ord.
2258, 10-30-2017)
C. The Following Standards Shall Apply To Uses Within The Agricultural/Open Space District:
1. Separation From Residential Structures: Any accessory structure that will house farm animals, animals wild by nature or a kennel shall be located no
closer than one hundred feet (100') from an existing residential dwelling on a lot not under the same ownership.
2. Disposal Of Offal And Manure: There shall be no disposal of offal or manure, other than the regular removal thereof, within five hundred feet (500') of
any adjacent residentially zoned property.
3. Storage And Disposal Of Chemicals And Hazardous Waste: All chemicals and hazardous waste shall be stored and disposed of as shown on the
product label or regulated by the applicable County, State and Federal regulations.
D. The Following Standards Shall Apply To Uses Within The Low Density Residential District:
1. Keeping Of Horses: The keeping of horses shall be allowed, provided the use shall comply with the following:
a. Minimum of two (2) acres per horse shall be required.
b. Any accessory structure that will house farm animals, animals wild by nature or a kennel shall be located no less than one hundred feet (100')
from an existing residential dwelling on a lot not under the same ownership.
2. Separation From Residential Structures: Any accessory structure that will house farm animals, animals wild by nature or a kennel, as permitted in
this district, shall not be located closer than one hundred feet (100') from an existing residential dwelling on a lot not under the same ownership.
3. Disposal Of Offal And Manure: There shall be no disposal of offal or manure, other than the regular removal thereof, within seven hundred fifty feet
(750') of any adjacent residentially zoned property.
4. Storage And Disposal Of Chemicals And Hazardous Waste: All chemicals and hazardous waste shall be stored and disposed of as shown on the
product label or regulated by the applicable County, State and Federal regulations.
5. Keeping Of Domestic Animals: The keeping of domestic animals and birds normally raised as a hobby and maintained in outdoor enclosures, such
as pigeons, rabbits, etc., shall be permitted provided that the enclosure is located no less than fifty feet (50') from the property line and shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 554/687
screened from the view from the public right-of-way and the surrounding properties.
E. The Following Standards Shall Apply To Uses In The Medium Density Residential District:
1. Access: The design and orientation of these uses should be to provide principal access to arterial and collector streets.
2. Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks, walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for circulation
within the project to and from the dwelling units to anticipated destinations (i.e., management office, recreation facilities, playground, etc.) and to the
public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project. All sidewalks, walkways and paths, shall be located and designed to provide adequate
physical separation from vehicles along all public and private streets and drives within any parking area.
F. The Following Standards Shall Apply To Uses Within The High Density Residential District:
1. Access: These uses should be designed and oriented to provide principal access to arterial and collector streets and should not be designed to
direct traffic through single-family residential districts to access the arterial or collector street.
2. Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior
details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large residential buildings. The use of brick or stone shall be incorporated into the building's
architecture on all sides of the structure, and thereof design of any and all buildings within the High-Density Residential District shall be pitched or
gabled and reflect a residential appearance in nature, unless the City Council, after review by the Plan and Zoning Commission shall determine that
the use of alternate building materials and style, enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential
uses in the neighborhood.
3. Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks, walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for circulation
within the project to and from the dwelling units to anticipated destinations, such as the management office, recreation facilities, playground, etc., the
public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project, and public transportation stops and transfer centers. All sidewalks, walkways and paths, shall
be located and designed to provide adequate physical separation from vehicles along all public and private streets and drives within any parking
area. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1697, 6-5-2006)
G. The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Commercial Districts Unless Noted Otherwise In This Title:
1. Outside Storage And Displays: No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside a building except as allowed by the approval of the City Council
as part of a site plan permit, or as permitted by a temporary use permit issued by the Development Services Department. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
2. Architecture: In all commercial zoning districts, all sides of commercial buildings shall be architecturally treated to produce an aesthetically pleasing
facade which is of a design compatible with surrounding buildings and the character of the community and shall be reviewed through the applicable
development permit process.
3. Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks, walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for safe,
convenient, and attractive on site pedestrian circulation access linkage to and from surrounding residential and employment areas to anticipated
destinations, such as the public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project and public transportation stops and transfer centers. All sidewalks,
walkways and paths, shall be located and designed to provide adequate physical separation from vehicles along all public and private streets and
drives within any parking area.
4. Community Commercial District:
a. Individual commercial uses within a Community Commercial District should be tied together by prominent common features such as architectural
theme, roofing material and style, and landscape materials.
b. Primary access into a Community Commercial District use shall not be taken off local residential streets. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1697,
6-5-2006)
5. Neighborhood Commercial Districts:
a. Buildings in the Neighborhood Commercial District shall be limited to a height of one story and shall have a residential style roof design (e.g.,
mansard, pitched, gabled, etc.), unless otherwise approved by City Council.
b. All uses within a Neighborhood Commercial District shall be specifically designed and operated to be compatible with the adjacent residential
uses. Specifically, limitations on design and operation of uses shall include architectural and building mass, hours of operation, delivery hours,
noise and lighting controls, signage and traffic considerations and shall be reviewed during the site plan or permitted conditional use permit (Pc)
review process.
c. Unless otherwise authorized by the City, outdoor display of merchandise may occupy an area equal to or less than an amount of square feet that
is twenty percent (20%) of the gross square feet of the tenant space in the principal building. This display area may occupy an area located
adjacent to the tenant space, without encroaching into any sidewalk (a 4 foot wide sidewalk must be maintained) or parking area.
d. Unless otherwise authorized by the City, outdoor storage of larger or bulk merchandise may occupy an area equal to no more than ten percent
(10%) of the gross square foot of the tenant space in the principal building. All outdoor storage is expected to be surrounded with an opaque
enclosure up to eight feet (8') tall; no material can exceed the height of the enclosure. This area shall not be located within required front yard,
parking areas or required open space. (Ord. 2224, 5-30-2017)
6. Architecture Requirements In The Valley Junction Commercial District And The Valley Junction Historic Business District: All uses within the Valley
Junction Commercial District and the Valley Junction Historic Business District should be designed with the historical character of the area in mind
and encourage the preservation of significant historical, natural, cultural sites and other unique landmarks. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
7. Pawnshops And Check Cashing, Payday Loan, Personal Credit Institutions, And Delayed Deposit Services Businesses: The following shall apply to
pawnshops and check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institutions, and delayed deposit services businesses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 555/687
a. No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any pawnshops or check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institutions, and delayed
deposit services businesses within one-half (1/2) mile from any other such business.
b. No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any pawnshops or check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institutions, and delayed
deposit services businesses within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any existing residential property or residentially zoned property or a portion of a
PUD district restricted to residential use.
c. For the purposes of this section, measurement of separation distances shall be taken on a direct line from the property line of such pawnshop or
check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institution, and delayed deposit services business to the point on the property line of such other
business, residential property or residentially zoned property, or portion of a PUD district restricted to residential use which is closest to the
property line of such pawnshop or check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institution, and delayed deposit services business.
d. The establishment of a pawnshop or check cashing, payday loan, pawnshops and check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institution, and
delayed deposit services business shall include the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business or the
conversion of an existing business location to a pawnshop or check cashing, payday loan, pawnshops and check cashing, payday loan, personal
credit institutions, and delayed deposit services business. (Ord. 1901, 12-27-2010; amd. Ord. 2160, 7-25-2016)
H. The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Uses Within The Office District:
1. Permitted Uses With Drive-Up Facilities: Any use that is allowed in this district that includes a drive-up or drive-through window or facility shall screen
the drive-through from the public thoroughfare through the use of berming and landscaping, fencing and landscaping, or architectural screening. The
proposed screening shall be identified on the plan submitted for a development permit for review.
2. Permitted Uses With Garage Doors: Any use that is allowed in this district that includes a drive-in bay within the building that is accessed through a
garage door, said garage door shall be screened from view from the public street through the use of berming and landscaping, fencing and
landscaping, or architectural screening. The proposed screening shall be identified on the plan submitted for a development permit for review.
3. Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks, walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for safe,
convenient, and attractive on site pedestrian circulation access linkage to and from surrounding residential and commercial areas to anticipated
destinations, such as the public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project and public transportation stops and transfer centers. All sidewalks,
walkways and paths, shall be located and designed to provide adequate physical separation from vehicles along all public and private streets and
drives within any parking area.
4. Site Furnishings: The provision of site furnishings and pedestrian plazas should be encouraged in outdoor open spaces. Such amenities as seating
areas, fountains, pools, information/exhibit kiosks and works of art are desirable. Site furnishing components should enhance and respect the scale
of the urban spaces in which they are placed. Adjacent sites are encouraged to work together to develop an overall site furnishings scheme.
I. The Following Standards Shall Apply To Uses Within The Professional Commerce Park District:
1. Intent Of The District: The principle of spacious separation and adaptation of the manmade elements to be harmonious with the natural environment
shall dominate the central design theme of the site and structural planning in this district. To accomplish this objective, the standards listed below
shall be considered as minimum acceptable standards. While this district is predominately occupied by spacious office uses, certain uses not
considered professional-commerce and certain inherent physical characteristics shall be considered compatible or incompatible with the intent of this
district as follows:
a. Retail commercial uses not specifically permitted in this district, with independent access to the building and/or signage that is visible from the
exterior of the building, shall be prohibited. Any enterprise or service which is specifically intended to augment, facilitate, be subsidiary and be
accessory to the planned principal uses shall be permitted, providing such use shall be physically accomplished in an aesthetically compatible
manner wholly within the confines of the building and shall comply with all restrictions or performance standards applicable to the principal uses.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1697, 6-5-2006)
b. Any enterprise which cannot wholly enclose its functions within the principal structures or otherwise effectively conceal its functions from public
observation, shall be prohibited. Drive-through windows and drive-up facilities shall be prohibited in this district except as otherwise identified in
this title. Any drive-through facility shall be screened from the public thoroughfare through the use of: 1) berming and landscaping, or 2) fencing
and landscaping, or 3) architectural screening.
(1) Berming: Designed by a registered landscape architect, architect or engineer; with earth berming and landscape plantings, the plantings shall
be predominately of evergreen type trees and shrubs as to assure year round effectiveness. The earth berming shall be a minimum height of
three feet (3') above the top of curb of the adjoining parking lot, if applicable, or public thoroughfare, whichever is higher, and shall be designed
to not negatively affect the drainage of the surrounding area and to be aesthetically pleasing to the general public. Berms may be required to be
higher if the minimum height is identified during the development review process as being inadequate to provide effective screening and
buffering.
(2) Landscape Plantings: The equivalent of one overstory tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of the area adjacent to the public
thoroughfare. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper, evergreen trees shall be a minimum six feet
(6') in height and will be equal to one overstory tree. Shrubs shall be a minimum size of eighteen inches (18") to twenty four inches (24").
Whenever practical, existing trees and shrubs should be preserved and incorporated into the overall design and can be included to meet the
total number of required trees and shrubs, if it is determined during the development review process that the existing trees will provide the
necessary screening and buffering.
Substitution of plant materials will be allowed at the following rate:
Two (2) ornamental trees or five (5) shrubs may be substituted for one overstory tree.
In no case shall the substitution of overstory trees be in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the required number, except in extenuating
circumstances, such as under overhead power lines.
In any case, the design shall simulate natural tree stands with groupings and masses rather than linear or symmetric lines, unless the overall
landscape design is of a more formal nature and deemed appropriate by staff during the development review process.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 556/687
(3) Fencing And Architectural Screening: Architectural design and use of materials for the construction within the property shall be accomplished in
a manner compatible with PCP professional commerce park zone district building standards. The architectural design of the fencing and
screening shall be acceptable to the city, by being reviewed by city staff, recommendation made by the planning and zoning commission and
approved by the city council. The design and style of such an element shall be in context with the surrounding environment and shall be
constructed such that the drive-through is visually screened from the public view and adjoining properties. Drive-throughs located away from the
public view (rear yard or side yard) are preferred. (Ord. 1251, 6-16-1997; amd. Ord. 1697, 6-5-2006)
J. The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Uses Within The Business Park District Unless Noted Otherwise In This Title:
1. Outside Storage: Any enterprise which cannot wholly enclose its functions within the principal structures shall be prohibited.
2. Architecture: While it is not the purpose of this chapter to dictate or specify building materials and structural standards, the importance of material
strength and permanency and their relationship to the central aesthetic character of the district shall be recognized. The use of high quality, durable
materials will result in appreciation of improvements over time.
a. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the city, and all buildings within a property shall have all sides of any building built
on the property consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material, unless
the city council, after having received a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, shall determine said material, when used as a
primary element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the property together into one
project concept.
b. Preferred building materials include, but are not limited to, brick, stone veneers, granite, architectural metals, cast in place concrete panels,
decorative concrete block and tinted glass. This principle shall not be construed to prevent the use of material innovation nor progressive structural
design; however, it shall recognize the strength of stone as compared to the frailty of paper mache, the permanency of brick as compared to
constant maintenance of wood veneer, the strength of concrete and steel as compared to the frailty of light sheet metal, etc.
3. Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks, walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for safe,
convenient, and attractive on site pedestrian circulation access linkage to and from surrounding residential and employment areas to anticipated
destinations, such as the public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project and public transportation stops and transfer centers. All sidewalks,
walkways and paths shall be located and designed to provide adequate physical separation from vehicles along all public and private streets and
drives within any parking area.
4. Site Furnishings: The provision of site furnishings and pedestrian plazas should be encouraged in outdoor open spaces. Such amenities as seating
areas, fountains, pools, information/exhibit kiosks and works of art are desirable. Site furnishing components should enhance and respect the scale
of the urban spaces in which they are placed. Adjacent sites are encouraged to work together to develop an overall site furnishings scheme.
5. Multiple Buildings On One Site: Multiple use of the site by more than one building shall be permitted, provided that a master plan, and any other
covenants that are established as deemed necessary by the City Council, to ensure the use of multiple buildings on a site will be consistent in
architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and
maintain a unified master plan concept.
6. Abatement Or Elimination Of Offensive Activities And Characteristics: Complete abatement or elimination of all generally offensive or obnoxious
characteristics, such as odors, gases, noise, vibration, pollution of air or water or soil, excessive and unnatural lighting intensity, unusual human
activity, hazardous activity, etc., which may be detrimental to the general welfare of this community, shall be accomplished.
7. Traffic Impact: No use shall involve any activity substantially increasing the movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are instituted to
limit traffic hazards and congestion. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1697, 6-5-2006)
K. The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Industrial Districts Unless Noted Otherwise Within This Title:
1. Industrial District Standards: All uses allowed in the industrial districts shall conform to the performance standards to permit potential industrial
nuisances to be measured, factually and objectively; to ensure that all industries will provide methods to protect the community from hazards and
nuisances which can be prevented by processes of control and nuisance elimination; and to protect industries from arbitrary exclusion or persecution
based solely on the nuisance production by any particular type of industry in the past.
2. Glare And Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be conducted within an enclosed building or with other effective screening in
such a manner as to make such glare or heat completely imperceptible from any point along the property line.
3. Vibration: No operation shall cause inherent and recurring generated vibration perceptible without instruments at any point along the property line.
Transportation facilities or temporary construction are excluded from this restriction.
4. Light: Exterior lighting, except for overhead street lighting and warning, emergency, or traffic signals, shall be installed in such a manner that the light
source will be sufficiently obscured to prevent glare on public streets and walkways or into any residential area. The installation or erection of any
lighting which may be confused with warning signals, emergency signals, or traffic signals shall be unlawful.
5. Smoke Emissions: No person, firm or entity shall emit or cause to be emitted into the atmosphere from any air contamination source of emission
whatsoever any air contaminant which is in violation of the provisions of the Polk County Board of Health rules and regulations for air pollution or any
other local, County, State or Federal regulations.
6. Odor Emissions: No person, wherever located, shall cause or allow the emission of odorous air contaminants from any single source such as to
result in detectable odors which are measured in excess of the following limits:
a. For areas used predominantly for residential or commercial purposes, it is a violation if odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted
with seven (7) or more volumes of odor free air.
b. In all other land use areas, it is a violation if odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted with fifteen (15) or more volumes of odor
free air.
c. When the source is a manufacturing process or agricultural operation, no violation of subsections K6a and K6b of this section shall be cited by the
City, provided that the best practical treatment, maintenance, and control currently available shall be utilized in order to maintain the lowest
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 557/687
possible emission of odorous gases, and, where applicable, in determining the best practical control methods, the City shall not require any
method which would result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or in the practical closing of any lawful business or activity if such
would be without corresponding public benefit.
d. For all areas, it is a violation when odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted with one hundred twenty seven (127) or more
volumes of odor free air, in which case the provisions of subsection K6c of this section shall not be applicable.
7. Hazardous Materials: If the proposed uses or tenants of the project are known to use and/or store hazardous materials (including hazardous wastes)
on site, the project shall be designed to comply with all Fire and Building Codes for the hazardous materials use, and adequate precautions shall be
taken to protect against negative off site impacts of a hazardous materials release, using best available technology.
8. Industrial Effluent: All uses shall comply with the provisions of the industrial pretreatment ordinance and any other applicable local, County, State or
Federal regulations. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1697, 6-5-2006)
9. Membrane Structures: Membrane structures are allowed only in General Industrial and Light Industrial Zoning Districts for the storage of bulk
materials and limited equipment necessary to load, unload, or move said materials. Structures must have foundations and/or sidewalls constructed
with durable materials to the anticipated material height at the exterior walls and be designed to withstand the loads and impacts related to the
storage, loading, and unloading of bulk materials. Membrane cladding and the related support structure can only be utilized for the portion of the
structure not subject to bulk material loads or impacts, and must have a minimum of a ten (10) year useful life. In the event that the membrane
structure becomes torn or falls into disrepair, it shall be removed or replaced. Failure to do so will be considered a public nuisance and the structure
will be abated in accordance with title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this Code. Structures must meet all adopted Building and Fire Codes and comply
with applicable setback and bulk regulations for the specific zoning district where they are located. In addition to the size of each structure(s) and
materials being stored, structures located within twenty feet (20') of another shall be treated as one for the purposes of determining fire suppression
requirements. (Ord. 2292, 4-16-2018)
L. The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Uses Within The Warehouse Retail District:
1. Outdoor Storage And Displays: Outdoor storage is allowed in the Warehouse Retail District in rear and side yards away from the public right-of-way
provided that: a) the location of such storage has been approved in conjunction with a site plan; and b) the entire area to be used for outdoor storage
is opaquely screened by a fence, screen wall, or a very dense stand of evergreen trees. The height of the fence, wall, or stand of trees shall be at
least as high as the object(s) being screened. In this district, fences of twelve feet (12') high will be allowed. Outdoor display areas, such as car sales
uses, may be allowed provided that they are approved as part of a site plan and do not detract from the general aesthetics of the surrounding area.
(Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
2. Architecture: All buildings shall be aesthetically pleasing and of a design compatible with surrounding buildings and the character of the community.
Attention to architectural details such as the treatment of doors, windows, and the definition and treatment of the base, middle, and top of a building
shall be paid to the public entrances of the building and those sides of the building within public view. Emphasis shall be placed on breaking up the
mass of long blank walls. Accepted materials include brick, stone, wood, and limited usage of EIFS and metal, unless the City Council or Board of
Adjustment shall determine that the use of alternate building materials is acceptable.
3. Multiple Buildings On One Site: Multiple use of the site by more than one building shall be permitted, provided that a master plan, and any other
covenants or documents that are deemed necessary by the City Council or Board of Adjustment, are provided and approved. Such master plan and
supporting documents can be used to establish a common plan to meet the City's open space, stormwater, landscaping, lighting, and parking
requirements. The architectural style and building materials used on multiple buildings on one site should be compatible. (Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005;
amd. Ord. 1697, 6-5-2006)
M. Regulation Of Specific Activities, Jordan Creek Town Center Overlay District:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection M is to provide for the reasonable regulation of specific activities within the Jordan Creek Town Center
Overlay District to ensure that such activities are harmonious with the pedestrian oriented village atmosphere of the district and that the operation of
such activities is compatible with the surrounding land uses.
2. Findings: The City Council makes the following findings:
a. The Town Center Overlay District is an overlay zoning district that seeks to incorporate residential, retail, office and recreational activities in a
specific area of the City. The overall objective of the district is to create a village atmosphere that provides a safe, convenient, energetic and
attractive area in which to live, work, shop and play.
b. The Town Center Overlay District seeks to achieve a pedestrian friendly environment while offering a varied choice of residential, retail, office and
recreational opportunities.
c. The Town Center Overlay District seeks to balance the presence of office and retail establishments with the goal of creating a traditional residential
community. Attaining a balance between the integration of office and retail establishments with a residential community to achieve a traditional
work, live and play environment requires reducing the dependence upon and dominance of the automobile and recognizing the appropriate
relationship between each permitted land use.
d. Certain permitted uses within the Town Center Overlay District provide the appropriate balance and serve to complement other permitted uses
within the district. However, the secondary effects of such uses may be detrimental to the surrounding area.
e. Commercial and retail establishments in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet generate significantly more traffic, noise and light
than other uses permitted within the district.
f. Larger retail establishments tend to attract a concentration of customers and traffic patterns that are not compatible with the sleep and domestic
patterns of traditional neighborhoods; smaller retail establishments do not attract similar concentrations of customers or such concentrations of
traffic patterns.
g. Large retail establishments, while appropriate at certain hours, are inappropriate at other hours due to the generation of traffic, noise and light
which detrimentally affect both the residential uses of the district and the surrounding residential areas.
h. Additionally, automotive repair facilities, while appropriate in a mixed use environment at certain hours, also generate excessive noise due to the
nature of the facility, and their operation is therefore inappropriate in a mixed use environment after certain hours.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 558/687
i. Commercial, retail and office uses also require the delivery of merchandise and supplies by commercial motor vehicle which are necessary for the
operation of the commercial, retail or office use. Such deliveries often generate noise that may cause undue disruption to the surrounding area.
j. Residential uses are more sensitive to the noise and disruption caused by the delivery of the merchandise and supplies, making it necessary to
balance the needs of the commercial, retail and office uses with the needs of the surrounding residential uses.
k. In seeking to provide the desired traditional relationship between all permitted uses within the district while addressing the detrimental effects large
commercial and/or retail establishments may have on existing land uses both within and surrounding the district, the imposition of reasonable
conditions is necessary.
Therefore, based upon the findings set forth above, it is the determination of the City Council of the City of West Des Moines that the following
conditions are the most appropriate and least restrictive and are reasonable and necessary to address the detrimental effects resulting from
certain uses within the Town Center Overlay District.
3. Definitions:
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR FACILITY: Any and all facilities as established and defined by standard industrial classification group 75, excluding car wash
facilities.
COMMERCIAL OR RETAIL USE: A development or improvement used for the barter, exchange, sale, service, or trade of goods and/or materials for
financial, material or monetary gain.
DELIVERY: The act of conveying or transferring property through the use of a truck, carrier or other commercial vehicle designed primarily for
carrying livestock, merchandise or freight of any kind.
RESIDENTIAL: Any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, piece of land or building used or intended to be used for family dwelling purposes, including
concomitant uses specified herein.
4. Conditions On Specific Activities Within The Town Center Overlay District:
a. Conditions:
(1) Hours Of Delivery: No delivery shall be made within the Town Center Overlay District between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and no stationary refrigerated cargo container or delivery vehicle shall be allowed to operate the compressor unit of the
refrigerated container between these hours.
(2) Hours Of Operation: No commercial or retail use permitted within the Town Center Overlay District having an area in excess of one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet shall be open to the public between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.,
except as otherwise authorized.
No automotive repair facility shall be open to the public between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
(3) Maximum Light Illumination: No use permitted in the Town Center Overlay shall be allowed to display an exterior light that exceeds one footcandle
as measured at the user's property line.
No lighting fixture in the Town Center Overlay District shall exceed twenty five feet (25') in height as measured from the grade to the top of the
fixture.
All lighting fixtures in the Town Center Overlay District shall be cutoff fixtures and no wall pack or floodlighting shall be allowed. Canopy lighting
used for drive-ups or gas pumps shall be limited to the use of a recessed or flush lighting fixture, and no part of the fixture shall be visible from
the street.
b. Exceptions: Upon application, the Director of Community Development or the Director's designee shall allow the applicant to accept deliveries at
times outside the hours of operation set forth in subsection M4a(1) of this section, if such deliveries, as determined by the Director of Community
Development or the Director's designee, are essential to the operation of the establishment and cannot be made during the normal hours of
delivery.
Upon application, the Director of Community Development or the Director's designee may allow the applicant to be open to the public beyond the
hours designated in subsection M4a(2) of this section as it is recognized that there are special circumstances that justify such operation on a
limited basis. Extended hours may be granted one time each calendar year for a period not to exceed four (4) consecutive calendar days.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the limitation on hours of operation designated in subsection M4a(2) of this section shall
not apply to the period beginning seven (7) calendar days before each Thanksgiving and continuing through and including January 7 of the
following calendar year. (Ord. 1638, 6-20-2005; amd. Ord. 1697, 6-5-2006)
Chapter 11
PCP PROFESSIONAL COMMERCE PARK DISTRICT
9-11-1: REGULATIONS:
The regulations set forth in this chapter, and elsewhere in this title which are applicable, shall apply in the PCP Professional Commerce Park District.
For the purpose of this section, the "PCP District" is defined as an area for accommodating the management, research, design, marketing and production
needs of those professional-commerce enterprises which comply with the performance standards of this chapter for the abatement of all obnoxious,
detrimental or other generally unacceptable characteristics including ugliness of physical and natural properties; and for the encouraged use of those
contemporary, modern and futuristic design techniques which yield compatibility of one area to another as well as special beauty. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-11-2: USE REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 559/687
For the purpose of this section, it shall be recognized that the name of a use is not so important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. Further,
in the interest of general community welfare, it is recognized that the community should be beautiful as well as financially prosperous, spacious as well as
efficient; physically balanced as well as regulated. Therefore, it is considered impractical, if not impossible, to accurately enumerate those uses which
would be beneficial or detrimental to the community; and that it is intended only that this district shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use which
might violate the general welfare of the community; but that it shall be restricted and confined to only those integrated professional-commerce uses which
produce net gain to the community in both aesthetic and material quality.
Certain uses not considered professional-commerce and certain inherent physical characteristics are considered compatible or incompatible with the intent
of this district as follows:
A. Any enterprise or service which is specifically intended to augment, facilitate, be subsidiary and be accessory to the planned principal uses shall be
permitted, providing such use shall be physically accomplished in an aesthetically compatible manner and shall comply with all restrictions or
performance standards applicable to the principal uses.
B. Any residential use shall be prohibited, except for caretakers' quarters incidental to the principal permitted use. Accessory apartment or transient
quarters planned as an integral subsidiary element of the principal use may be authorized by special permit.
C. Any retail commercial use shall be prohibited, except as provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
D. Any enterprise, regardless of professional-commerce category, which cannot wholly enclose its functions within the principal structures or otherwise
effectively conceal its functions from public observation, shall be prohibited except as otherwise identified in this title. (Ord. 1251, 6-16-1997)
9-11-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses to be permitted within the PCP District shall comply in total with the following performance standards:
A. The general manner in which any use is accomplished shall demonstrate good faith in the doctrines endorsing responsible recognition of neighbors'
rights, coordination of neighborhood efforts and compatibility of neighborhood elements.
B. The principal of spacious separation and adaptation of the manmade elements to be harmonious with the natural environment shall dominate the
central design theme of the site and structural planning. To accomplish this objective, the following standards shall be considered as minimum
acceptable standards:
1. The total ground area devoted to open space for natural landscape and landscape beautification shall be not less than thirty five percent (35%) of
the total land area within the immediate site under ownership and consideration. Such open space shall be free of all drives, parking areas,
structures, buildings, etc., except for those walkways, monuments, ornamental structures, etc., considered to be necessary but essential to the
central landscape theme.
C. Parking areas, loading ramps, utility areas, etc., shall be effectively screened from observation and visibility by normal traffic using all public
thoroughfares within one thousand feet (1,000') of such area's immediate perimeter or boundary. Screening shall be accomplished through the design
incorporation of landscaping such as planting screens using substantially mature trees and shrubs which have year-round effectiveness; topography
such as the natural or manmade grade differences with sight restrictions similar to a hillside; structural additions such as permanent walls or other
equally permanent and effective screening innovations. Any one or combination of screening methods may be used providing, however, the net result
shall be complementary to the central theme of the overall aesthetic character as well as effectively accomplish the concealment of the area in
question.
D. While it is not the purpose of this chapter to dictate or specify building materials and structural standards, the importance of material strength and
permanency in their proportional relationship to the central aesthetic character shall be recognized and the principle of structural strength and
permanency shall dominate the structural materials and components. This principle shall not be construed to prevent the use of material innovation nor
progressive structural design; however, it shall recognize the strength of stone as compared to the frailty of paper mache, the permanency of brick as
compared to constant maintenance of wood veneer, the strength of concrete and steel as compared to the frailty of light sheet metal, etc.
E. Complete abatement or elimination of all generally offensive or obnoxious characteristics such as odors, gases, noise, vibration, pollution of air or water
or soil, excessive and unnatural lighting intensity, unusual human activity, hazardous activity, etc., which may be detrimental to the general welfare of
this community, shall be accomplished. The standard for compliance with this paragraph shall be as follows:
1. Fire Hazard: The use shall not include any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive material unless protected by adequate
firefighting and fire suppression equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material.
2. Noise: At the lot or property line, the maximum sound pressure level radiated in each standard octave band by any use or facility (other than
transportation facilities or temporary construction work) shall not exceed the values for octave bands lying within the several frequency limits given in
table I of this section, after applying the correction shown in table II of this section. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level
meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. (American Standard Sound
Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, and American
Standard Specifications for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.10-1953, American Standards Association,
Inc., New York, NY, shall be used.)
TABLE I
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 560/687
Frequency Range
Containing Octave Bands
In Cycles Per Second
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level In Decibels
re .0002 dynes/cm2
20 - 300 60
300 - 2400 40
Above 2400 30
If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., one or more of
the corrections in table II of this section shall be applied to the octave band levels given in table I of this section.
TABLE II
Type Of Location Of Operation
Or Character Of Noise
Correction
In Decibels
a. Daytime operation only Plus 5
b. Noise source operated less than:
20% of any 1-hour period
5% of any 1-hour period
(apply 1 of these corrections only)
Plus 5
Plus 10
c. Noise of impulsive character, such as hammering Minus 5
d. Noise of periodic character, such as humming or screeching Minus 5
3. Smoke: No emission shall be permitted at any point from any chimney or otherwise of visible grey smoke of a shade equal to or darker than no. 2 on
the Power's Micro-Ringelmann Chart published by the McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Inc., and copyright 1954 (being a direct facsimile reduction
or a standard Ringelmann Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of Mines) except that visible grey smoke of a shade equal to no. 3 on said
chart may be emitted to four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minute period of time.
4. Odors: No emission shall be permitted or odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable when diluted in the
ratio of one volume of odorous air to four (4) volumes of clean air, at the lot line. There is hereby established as a guide in determining such
quantities of offensive odors, table III, "Odor Thresholds" in chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement Manual", copyright 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists'
Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
5. Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases And Other Forms Of Air Pollution: No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health,
animals, vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling at any point at or beyond the property line. No emission
shall be permitted in excess of the standards specified in table I, chapter 5, "Industrial Hygiene Standards, Maximum Allowable Concentrations", of
the "Air Pollution Abatement Manual", copyright 1951 by the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C. In no event shall any
emission, from any chimney or otherwise, or any solid or liquid particles in concentrations, exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the conveying gas at
any point. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to a stack
temperature of five hundred degrees Fahrenheit (500°F) and fifty percent (50%) excess air.
6. Vibration: The use shall not include vibration which is discernible without instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
7. Glare: The use shall not involve any direct or reflected glare which is visible from any adjoining lot or property.
8. Traffic Hazard: The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are
instituted to limit traffic hazards and congestion.
9. Overtax Public Utilities And Facilities: The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the burden on any public utilities or facilities,
unless provision is made for any necessary adjustments.
10. Character Of Neighborhood: The use shall not involve any activity not in character with the majority of the uses in the neighborhood unless by
design, setback, nature of operation, and other devices the character of the neighborhood will be maintained.
11. General Welfare Of The Community: The use shall not involve any activity which adversely affects the general welfare of the community.
F. The need for private enterprise to visually pronounce their presence through the use of nameplates, placards, monuments or signs is herein
acknowledged. However, such signing shall be in good taste and in good keeping with the central aesthetic theme; sign materials shall be permanent
or long lasting in quality with the use of two-dimensional wall painted signs prohibited; lighting of signs shall be nonobtrusive with backlighting or other
methods of indirect lighting encouraged; and profusion of conflicting or contrasting signs shall be prohibited1.
The number of individual signs shall not exceed one sign per property entrance-exit point and one sign per principal building entrance-exit point. Such
signs shall be limited to the immediate vicinity of the entrance-exit point and shall not be cumulative in number for locations other than the individual
entrance-exit points.
The size and shape of signs shall not prevent the use of registered trademarks. However, in no instance shall a sign of such size, shape or design be
permitted which overwhelms the central scene. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-11-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height regulations in the PCP District shall be as designated in chapter 7, "Setback And Bulk Density Regulations", of this title. In addition, no building
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 561/687
or structure shall be constructed to a height which may create an air traffic hazard to the approach or departure of an existing airport within a fifteen (15)
mile radius of the building or structure. (Ord. 1708, 9-25-2006)
9-11-5: OFF-STREET PARKING:
See chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969; amd. Ord. 2297, 4-30-2018)
9-11-6: COMMISSION REVIEW AND COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
Site plans for all uses in this chapter, shall require review by the commission and approval by the Council for compliance with the provisions of this chapter
prior to the issuance of a building permit. Such plan shall comply with section 9-11-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969; amd. Ord. 2297, 4-30-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 12
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
A. Authority: The legislature of the state of Iowa has in chapter 414, code of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations
to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
B. Findings Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of the city of West Des Moines are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment
of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
2. These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by: a) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flooding and b) the cumulative
effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
3. This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the department
of natural resources.
C. Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the city of West Des Moines and its
residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood
losses described in subsection B1 of this section with provisions designed to:
1. Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities.
3. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
4. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
5. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the national flood insurance program.
(Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Land Applicable: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city of West Des Moines shown on the official
floodplain zoning map as being within the boundaries of the floodway, floodway fringe, general floodplain and shallow flooding (overlay) districts, as
established in section 9-12-3 of this chapter.
B. Establishment Of Official Floodplain Zoning Map: The flood insurance rate map(s) prepared as part of the flood insurance study for the city of West Des
Moines, dated February 16, 2006, is (are) hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the official floodplain zoning map. The flood profiles and all
explanatory material contained with the flood insurance study are also declared to be a part of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 562/687
C. Rules For Interpretation Of District Boundaries: The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the official
floodplain zoning map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the community development director shall make the
necessary interpretation. The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision,
or determination made by the community development director in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
D. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
E. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
F. Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
G. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside the designated floodplain (overlay) district areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the city of West Des Moines or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
H. Severability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS:
The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into the following districts:
Floodway district (FW)
Floodway fringe district (FF)
General floodplain district (FP)
Shallow flooding district (SF)
The boundaries shall be as shown on the official floodplain zoning map. Within these districts, all uses not allowed as permitted uses or permissible as
conditional uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the board of adjustment. (Ord. 1673, 1-
17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-4: FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FW:
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted within the floodway district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of material
or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse:
Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and
wild crop harvesting.
Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting
and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
Such other open space uses similar in nature to the above uses.
B. Conditional Uses: The following uses which involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration
of a watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the board of adjustment as provided for in subsection 9-12-8C of
this chapter. Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the floodway district performance standards.
Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises.
Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and billboards.
Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials.
Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 563/687
Uses or structures accessory to open space uses.
Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.
Other uses similar in nature to uses described in subsection A of this section or this subsection B which are consistent with the provisions of subsection
C of this section and the general spirit and purpose of this chapter.
C. Performance Standards: All floodway district uses allowed as a permitted or conditional use shall meet the following standards:
1. No use shall be permitted in the floodway district that would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level. Consideration of the effects of any
development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
2. All uses within the floodway district shall:
a. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
b. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
3. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage
facility or system.
4. Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the floodway fringe district and
shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
5. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not be for human habitation.
6. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other
material may be allowed if readily removable from the floodway district within the time available after flood warning.
7. Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the department of natural resources.
8. Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
9. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows. (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-5: FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FF:
A. Permitted Uses: All uses within the floodway fringe district shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the floodway fringe district.
B. Performance Standards: All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance standards:
1. All Structures: All structures shall:
a. Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
b. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
2. Residential Buildings: All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of
one foot (1') above the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than 1.0 foot above the
100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least eighteen feet (18') beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of
elevating (such as piers) may be allowed subject to favorable consideration by the board of adjustment, where existing topography, street grades, or
other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various
forces and hazards associated with flooding.
All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.
3. Nonresidential Buildings: All new or substantially improved nonresidential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a
minimum of one foot (1') above the 100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the state of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate
to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the
structure, below the 100-year flood level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification
indicating the specific elevation (in relation to national geodetic vertical datum) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the
administrator.
4. Improved Structures: All new and substantially improved structures:
a. Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 564/687
(1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage.
b. New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
c. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
5. Factory Built Homes:
a. All factory built homes, including those placed in existing factory built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot (1') above the 100-year flood level.
b. All factory built homes, including those placed in existing factory built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors.
6. Utility And Sanitary Systems:
a. On site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.
b. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood
protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the 100-year flood elevation.
c. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on site systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the 100-year
flood elevation.
d. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
7. Storage Of Materials And Equipment: Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the 100-year flood level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated
or: a) not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to floodwaters or b) be readily removable from the area
within the time available after flood warning.
8. Structural Flood Control Works: Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc., shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-
year flood with a minimum of three feet (3') of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, the department of
natural resources shall approve structural flood control works.
9. Watercourse: Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion.
In addition, the department of natural resources must approve such alterations or relocations.
10. Subdivisions: Subdivisions (including factory built home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the
installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall
provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than
five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for those areas located within the floodplain (overlay)
district.
11. Accessory Structures:
a. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements where
the following criteria are satisfied.
(1) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot (1') above the
100-year flood level.
b. Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage
of the structure and its contents.
12. Recreational Vehicles:
a. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection B5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory built homes
when the following criteria are satisfied:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 565/687
(1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
b. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of subsection B5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory built homes.
13. Pipelines: Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due
to channel degradation and meandering. (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-6: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FP:
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted within the general floodplain district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance
(or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory built homes, fill or other obstructions, the storage of
materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse:
Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and
wild crop harvesting.
Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting
and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
B. Conditional Uses: Any uses which involve placement of structures, factory built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the board of adjustment as provided for in
subsection 9-12-8C of this chapter. All such uses shall be reviewed by the department of natural resources to determine: 1) whether the land involved
is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and 2) the 100-year flood level. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the
department of natural resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination.
C. Performance Standards:
1. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as determined by the department of natural resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the floodway (overlay) district (section 9-12-4 of this chapter).
2. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway fringe as determined by the department of natural resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the floodway fringe (overlay) district (section 9-12-5 of this chapter). (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-7: SHALLOW FLOODING (OVERLAY) DISTRICT SF:
A. Permitted Uses: All uses within the shallow flooding district shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance standards of the shallow flooding district.
B. Performance Standards: The performance standards for the shallow flooding district shall be the same as the performance standards for the floodway
fringe district with the following exceptions:
1. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO zone on the flood insurance rate map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation shall be
equal to the number of feet as specified on the FIRM (or a minimum of 2.0 feet if no number is specified) above the highest natural grade adjacent to
the structure.
2. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH zone on the flood insurance rate map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation shall
be equal to the elevation as specified on the FIRM. (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-8: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Appointment, Duties And Responsibilities Of Zoning Administrator:
1. The building official is hereby appointed to implement and administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the administrator.
2. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 566/687
a. Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
b. Review floodplain development applications to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and local governmental
agencies including approval when required from the department of natural resources for floodplain construction.
c. Record and maintain a record of: 1) the elevation (in relation to national geodetic vertical datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures or 2) the elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
d. Notify adjacent communities/counties and the department of natural resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notifications to the federal emergency management agency.
e. Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
f. Submit to the federal insurance administrator an annual report concerning the community's participation, utilizing the annual report form supplied
by the federal insurance administrator.
g. Notify the federal insurance administration of any annexations or modifications to the community's boundaries.
h. Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the city council of potential
conflict.
B. Floodplain Development Permit:
1. Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations), including the placement of factory built homes.
2. Application For Permit: Application shall be made on forms furnished by the administrator and shall include the following:
a. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made.
b. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will readily
identify and locate the work to be done.
c. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
d. Elevation of the 100-year flood.
e. Elevation (in relation to national geodetic vertical datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a building is to
be floodproofed.
f. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
g. Such other information as the administrator deems reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
3. Action On Permit Application: The administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be
informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the city board of
adjustment.
4. Construction And Use To Be As Provided In The Application And Plans: Floodplain development permits based on approved plans and applications
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction without authorization shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be required
to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the state of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor
elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or
occupancy of any structure.
C. Conditional Uses, Appeals And Variances:
1. Duties Of The Board Of Adjustment: The board of adjustment shall hear and decide: a) applications for conditional uses upon which the board is
authorized to pass under this chapter, b) appeals, and c) requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter, and shall take any other action
which is required of the board.
2. Conditional Uses: Requests for conditional uses shall be submitted to the administrator, who shall forward such to the board of adjustment for
consideration. Such requests shall include information ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary
to the board of adjustment.
3. Appeals: Where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the board of adjustment and with
the official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall
transmit to the board of adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
4. Variance: The board of adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards:
a. Variances shall only be granted upon: 1) a showing of good and sufficient cause, 2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 3) a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local
codes or ordinances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 567/687
b. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result. Consideration
of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for
similarly situated lands.
c. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant
shall be notified in writing over the signature of the administrator that: 1) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and 2) such construction
increases risks to life and property.
e. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the department of natural resources.
5. Hearings And Decisions Of The Board Of Adjustment:
a. Hearings: Upon the filing with the board of adjustment of an appeal, an application for a conditional use or a request for a variance, the board shall
hold a public hearing. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in
interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The board may require the
appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or evaluation
of a professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the department of natural resources.
b. Decisions: The board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal, conditional use or variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the
board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for
its decision. In granting a conditional use or variance, the board shall consider such factors as contained in this section and all other relevant
sections of this chapter and may prescribe such conditions as contained in subsection C5b(2) of this section.
(1) Factors Upon Which The Decision Of The Board Of Adjustment Shall Be Based: In passing upon applications for variances, the board shall
consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(A) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
(B) The danger that materials may be swept onto other land or downstream to the injury of others.
(C) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.
(D) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(E) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the city.
(F) The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
(G) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
(H) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(I) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.
(J) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(K) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwater expected at the site.
(L) The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
(M) Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
(2) Conditions Attached To Variances: Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited
to:
(A) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(B) Limitation of periods of use and operation.
(C) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(D) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
department of natural resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
(E) Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The board of adjustment shall require that
the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
6. Appeals To The Court: Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall
be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 568/687
9-12-9: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
1. If such use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
2. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
3. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, any use which has been permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a
conforming use. (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-10: PENALTIES:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of conditional uses or variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of West Des Moines from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy a violation. (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-11: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment,
supplement, change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the department of natural resources. (Ord. 1673, 1-17-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2340 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT . Go to new ordinance.
9-12-12: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See definition of 100-Year Flood.)
BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see definition of Lowest
Floor.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, building or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the community's flood insurance
rate map. May also be referred to as "existing structure".
EXISTING FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date hereof.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY BUILT HOME: Any structure, designed for residential use, which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building site. For the purpose of this chapter factory built homes include mobile
homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes "recreational vehicles" which are placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more factory built home lots for sale or lease.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood
elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates
both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 569/687
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood by more than one foot (1').
FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, maintained by the department of interior, or preliminarily determined by the secretary of
the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of
the interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either: 1) an
approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or 2) directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection
9-12-5B4(a) of this chapter, and
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage, and
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot (1')
above the 100-year flood level, and
D. The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria in subsections A, B, C, and D of this definition, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest
enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
NEW CONSTRUCTION (New Buildings, Factory Built Home Parks): Those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of the flood insurance rate map.
NEW FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the factory built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date hereof.
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the
average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land within a community subject to the "100-year flood". This land is identified as zone A on the community's flood
insurance rate map.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of
pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory built home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory built homes, storage tanks, and other similar uses.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 570/687
equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure which satisfies either of the following criteria:
A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
either: 1) before the "start of construction" of the improvement, or 2) if the structure has been "substantially damaged" and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any
alteration of a "historic structure", provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's designation as a "historic structure".
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by twenty five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after February 16,
2006, shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five percent
(25%).
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulations.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 1673, 1-
17-2006)
Chapter 13
AIRPORT HAZARD AND HEIGHT (OVERLAY) ZONES
9-13-1: PURPOSE:
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority conferred on the City Council by section 329.3 Code of Iowa and pursuant to section 414.1 Code
of Iowa. The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport, mitigation or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes and it
is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and general welfare that creation of airport hazards be prevented. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-2: AIRPORT HAZARD AND HEIGHT (OVERLAY) ZONES AND THEIR AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
In order to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which are depicted on the Airport Hazard and
Height (Overlay) Zoning Map. A structure located in more than one zone of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
A. "HZ" - Horizontal Zone (Overlay): Within the Horizontal Zone no structure shall exceed the elevation of an imaginary "horizontal surface" one hundred
fifty feet (150') above the established airport elevation of nine hundred fifty eight feet (958') MSL. The boundaries of the Horizontal Zone of the Des
Moines Municipal Airport which affects West Des Moines is constructed by swinging an arc of ten thousand feet (10,000') radii from the center of the
primary surface of Runway 12L, 30R. (See Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance 652 and by reference made a part of this Chapter.)
B. "CZ" - Conical Zone (Overlay): Within the Conical Zone no structure shall exceed the elevation of an imaginary "conical surface" which extends outward
and upward at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) from the periphery of the horizontal surface. The Conical Zone extends outward laterally from the
Horizontal Zone for a distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
C. "AZ" - Approach Zone (Overlay): Within the Approach Zone no structure shall exceed the elevation of an imaginary "approach surface" longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface of runways 12L, 30R. The inner
edge of this approach surface is one thousand feet (1,000') wide and the outer edge of the approach surface extends for a horizontal distance of ten
thousand feet (10,000') at a slope of fifty to one (50:1) and then twelve thousand feet (12,000') at a slope of forty to one (40:1), and then restricted to
five hundred feet (500') above the airport elevation for twenty eight thousand feet (28,000'). (See Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance 652 and by
reference made a part of this Chapter.)
D. "TZ" - Transitional Zone (Overlay): Within the Transitional Zone no structure shall exceed the elevation of an imaginary "transitional surface" which
extends outward and upward at a slope of seven to one (7:1) from the sides of the approach surface for those portions of the approach surface which
project outward through and beyond the limits of the conical surface. The Transitional Zone under these transitional surfaces extend a distance of five
thousand feet (5,000') horizontally outward from the approach zone and at right angles to the runway center line. (See Exhibit "A" attached to
Ordinance 652 and by reference made a part of this Chapter.) (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
No use may be made of land or water within West Des Moines in such a manner as to interfere with the operation of any airborne aircraft. The following
special requirements shall apply to each permitted use:
A. All lights or illumination used in conjunction with street, parking, signs or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in such a manner
that is not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from the Des Moines Municipal Airport or in the vicinity thereof.
B. No operations from any use shall produce smoke, glare or other visual hazards which are sufficient to endanger aircraft operating from the airport or in
the vicinity thereof. When the Aviation Director believes such a hazard may exist, a determination shall be obtained from the FAA as to the existence of
such a hazard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 571/687
C. No operations from any use in West Des Moines shall produce electronic interference with navigation signals or radio communication between the
airport and aircraft. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-4: LIGHTING:
A. The owner of any structure over two hundred feet (200') above ground level must install on the structure lighting in accordance with FAA Advisory
Circular 70-7460-1D and amendments. Additionally, any structure, constructed after the effective date hereof and exceeding nine hundred forty nine
feet (949') above ground level, must install on that structure high intensity white obstruction lights in accordance with chapter 6 of FAA Advisory
Circular 7460-1D and amendments.
B. Any variance granted as related to subsection A above may be so conditioned as to require the grantee/owner of the structures or growth in question at
their expense to install, operate and maintain such markers or lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard. (Ord.
652, 4-14-80)
9-13-5:VARIANCES:
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or to permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his property in violation of any
sections of this Chapter, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from such regulations. No application for a variance to the requirements of
this Chapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been submitted to the Des Moines Municipal Airport
Aviation Director for his opinion as to the aeronautical effects of such a variance. If the Aviation Director responds to the Board of Adjustment in favor of
the variance, or if he does not respond within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the copy of the application, then the Board shall make its decision to grant or
deny the variance based upon a preponderance of the evidence. If the Aviation Director responds in opposition to the variance within fifteen (15) days from
receipt of the application, then the Board shall grant the variance only if clear and convincing evidence outweighs the opinion of the Aviation Director. (Ord.
652, 4-14-80)
9-13-6: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Building Inspector shall have the duty to administer the regulations prescribed in this Chapter. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-7: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this Chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to height of structures, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall
govern and prevail. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
Chapter 14
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
9-14-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the WEST DES MOINES ACCESSORY STRUCTURES ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-
1999)
9-14-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the placement and construction of accessory structures for the conservation and protection of
property; the assurance of safety, security, and privacy; and the improvement of the visual environment, including the provision of an orderly appearance in
keeping with neighborhood character. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-14-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
Where any accessory structure is not specifically identified in this chapter, the Director of Community Development shall review the accessory structure
when requested to do so, and based on the characteristics of the proposed accessory structure, determine the appropriate standards to regulate said
accessory structure.
Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the Director, a written request on forms prescribed by the Director of Community
Development for said appeal, along with the appropriate fee, shall be received and stamped filed by the Department of Community Development within a
period of ten (10) business days following the Director's decision. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a request, the Director shall schedule a public
hearing of the Planning and Zoning Commission to review and render a decision on said appeal. The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission is
appealable to the City Council.
Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission on an appeal, a written request on forms
prescribed by the Director of Community Development for said appeal, along with the appropriate fee, shall be received and stamped filed by the
Department of Community Development within a period of ten (10) business days following the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision.
Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a request, the Director shall schedule a public hearing of the City Council to review and render a decision on said
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 572/687
appeal.
Only such items considered under appeal by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be considered by the City Council during its review of the appeal
of the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-14-4: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area,
the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-14-5: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following provisions shall apply to all accessory structures located in any zoning district. Specific requirements related to a particular use may be
outlined elsewhere in this title. See chapters 5 and 6 of this title for allowed uses related to accessory structures and buildings.
A. Permits: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or relocate any accessory structure within the City without first obtaining the appropriate
permits as required by this Code, and making payment of all required permit fees.
B. Types: Accessory structure and building types include, but are not limited to the structures as outlined in table 14.1 of this subsection. This table applies
only when the use supported by the structure, equipment or building is considered accessory to the primary use permitted on the property.
TABLE 14.1
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE TYPES
Agricultural or animal keeping:
Greenhouse, hoop house (temporary) See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Structures or buildings for animal keeping See section 9-10-4 of this title for specific use regulations related to structures
housing animals
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Communication equipment and structures:
All elements associated with communication towers are considered principal structures. See section 9-10-4 of this title for specific use and
screening regulations related to communication towers. See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for principal structures
Display:
Flag poles See section 9-14-15 of this chapter
Scoreboards See section 9-10-4 of this title for specific use regulations related to scoreboards
Energy generating systems:
Small wind energy conversion systems See section 9-14-13 of this chapter
Solar energy systems - ground and building mounted See section 9-14-14 of this chapter
See section 9-10-4 of this title for specific use regulations related to screening of
ground mounted solar energy systems
See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures related to ground mounted solar energy systems
Fences and walls:
Fences or walls See section 9-14-11 of this chapter for fence and wall standards
See chapter 19 of this title for fence and wall provisions related to landscaping and
screening
Retaining walls See section 9-14-12 of this chapter for retaining wall standards
All retaining walls must meet the standards as outlined in the Building Code for
structural design and fall protection
Operation and maintenance:
Electrical or mechanical equipment and related
enclosure or shed - does not include equipment related
to communication towers or public utilities
See section 9-10-4 of this title for specific use regulations
See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 573/687
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Laundry (for resident use only as part of a multi-family
use)
See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Maintenance shed or garage See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Screen fence or wall See subsection 9-14-11C7 of this chapter for provisions related to screening
mechanical equipment
See chapter 19 of this title for fence and wall provisions related to landscaping and
screening
Trash enclosures See section 9-10-4 of this title for specific use regulations related to screening of
trash receptacles
Outdoor use areas:
Arbor, trellis, pergola or canopy See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Decks See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
Porches See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
Screen rooms, screen porches See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Shelters (bus stop, picnic) See section 9-14-7 of this chapter for bus stop shelter requirements
See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for all other shelters
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Sunrooms See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building requirements
Parking structures:
Parking structures, parking ramps and building integrated parking may be considered accessory to the primary use, however due to the large
building mass of these structures they must meet the principal structure setbacks designated for the property. See chapter 7 of this title for
setback and bulk density regulations for principal structures
Recreation:
Clubhouse or recreation building (for resident use only
as part of a multi-family use)
Clubhouse or recreation buildings may be considered accessory to the primary use,
however due to the large building mass of these structures they must meet the
principal building setbacks designated for the property
See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for principal
buildings
Pool house See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Recreation courts with fence enclosures See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
See section 9-14-11 of this chapter for fence standards
Swimming pool, spa See section 9-14-10 of this chapter for swimming pool regulations
Storage structures:
Hoop houses Not allowed for storage purposes
Motor vehicle storage (garages and carports) See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
structures
See section 9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations and specific
requirements for carports
Storage buildings and sheds See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density regulations for accessory
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 574/687
structures
See section 9-14- 6 of this chapter for accessory building regulations
Transactional:
ATMs and related canopy See section 9-14-8 of this chapter for ATM requirements
Fuel canister dispensing unit See section 9-10-4 of this title for specific use regulations for fuel supply systems
Fuel pump, vehicle charging station and related canopy See section 9-14-9 of this chapter for fuel pump canopy requirements
See section 9-10-4 of this title for specific use regulations for fuel supply systems
(Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
C. Vision Clearance: With regard to visibility, the following restrictions shall apply:
1. Intersections: No accessory structure shall be located which may obstruct vision between a height of thirty inches (30") and ten feet (10') on any
corner lot within a vision triangle of twenty five feet (25') formed by intersecting street right-of-way lines. (See figure #1 of this section.)
2. Driveways: No accessory structure shall be located which may obstruct vision between a height of thirty inches (30") and ten feet (10') on any corner
lot within a vision triangle of fifteen feet (15') formed by an intersecting driveway edge (including driveways on adjacent properties) and street rightof-
way line. (See figure #2 of this section.)
3. Undeveloped Property: No accessory structure shall be located which may obstruct vision between a height of thirty inches (30") and ten feet (10')
on any corner lot within a vision triangle of fifteen feet (15') formed by a street right-of-way line and property line adjoining an undeveloped property.
(See figure #3 of this section.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 575/687
At such time that the adjoining undeveloped property is developed, modifications which are in compliance with the above provisions may be allowed,
subject to approval by the building official.
D. Buffer Parks And Buffer Park Easements: No accessory structure may be allowed to be constructed, built or located within a buffer park or buffer park
easement, unless otherwise noted in this title.
E. Unsafe And Unlawful Accessory Structures:
1. Unsafe Accessory Structures: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9-14-11A3 of this chapter, if the Director of Community Development
finds that any accessory structure regulated herein is unsafe, unsecured, or a hazard to the public, the Director of Community Development shall
promptly give written notice by mail or personal service to the permittee thereof or to the owner of the premises on which the accessory structure is
located. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within seventy two (72)
hours after receipt of such notice, such accessory structure may be removed or altered by the Director of Community Development at the expense of
the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located.
2. Unlawful Accessory Structures: If the Director of Community Development finds that any accessory structure regulated herein has been constructed
in violation of the provisions of this chapter, they shall promptly give written notice to the owner of the premises on which the accessory structure is
located. If the owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within seventy two (72) hours after
receipt of such notice by mail or personal service to the permittee thereof or to the owner of premises on which the accessory structure is located,
such accessory structure may be removed or altered to comply by the Director of Community Development at the expense of the owner of the
property upon which it is located. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
9-14-6: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. Accessory buildings shall be allowed only in conjunction with the principal structure, and primary use to which it relates under the same terms and
conditions as the principal structure, and primary use in any zoning district unless otherwise noted in this chapter.
B. Setbacks for accessory buildings, in all zoning districts, which are not specifically spelled out below, shall meet the requirements set elsewhere in this
title under setback and bulk density regulations.
1. On corner lots unless noted otherwise, detached accessory buildings shall meet the front yard setback along each street frontage, as required for the
principal structure.
2. On detached accessory buildings, when the exterior wall parallel to the property line exceeds eight and one-half feet (81/2') in height, including the
foundation or retaining wall, or exceeds twenty four feet (24') in length, that wall shall be set back from the property line a distance equal to the total
exterior wall height. This setback minimum shall not preclude other yard setback or easement requirements.
3. When the vehicle entrance for a garage faces a street or alley, the setback from the alley shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20').
C. Accessory buildings, constructed as part of the principal building, or connected to the principal building by a breezeway or similar structure, or
constructed within ten feet (10') or less of the principal structure, shall be considered an attached accessory building. Attached accessory buildings that
include a roof (such as a covered porch, screen room, sunroom, garage and carport) will be considered part of the primary building and unless noted
otherwise, must meet the primary building setbacks.
D. Accessory buildings in residential zoning districts may occupy up to ten percent (10%) of the total lot area in which it is located. Except, in RS, R-1, SFVJ,
and SF-CR Zoning Districts, the square footage for an accessory building, or the combined square footage of all detached accessory buildings on
the property, shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 576/687
E. In RS, R-1, SF-VJ, and SF-CR Zoning Districts, the maximum roof peak height of detached accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty feet (20'). The
height of retaining walls or the foundation shall be included in the height measurement.
F. In RS, R-1, SF-VJ, and SF-CR Zoning Districts, exterior walls of detached accessory buildings shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height. The wall
height shall be measured from existing grade, and the height of retaining walls or the foundation shall be included in the height measurement.
G. Existing detached garages with a side or rear yard setback of at least three feet (3'), which meet all of the other provisions of this section, may be
repaired or reconstructed with the same setback requirements. However any additions must meet the current setback requirements.
H. The design of accessory buildings shall be in keeping with the character of the zoning district they are located in, with comparable architectural design,
materials and details to the principal structure, including roof slope, overhangs, etc. Any metal cladding shall be prefinished and have the appearance
of the materials used on the primary building. Galvanized metal is prohibited as the exterior finish material in residential zoning districts.
I. A carport cannot exceed one story in height and must be entirely open on two (2) or more sides except for structural supports. There can be no enclosed
use above a carport. No other items other than a motor vehicle may be kept in the carport unless those items are kept in an enclosed section of the
carport and are not visible. A carport is considered an accessory building and shall meet the requirements for accessory structures set elsewhere in
this title. Carports are not considered enclosed garage space for residential uses. The design of a carport shall be in keeping with the character of the
zoning district they are located in, with comparable architectural design, materials and details to the principal structure, including roof slope, overhangs,
etc. Exposed metal structure is prohibited. Any metal cladding shall be prefinished and have the appearance of the materials used on the primary
building. Galvanized metal is prohibited as the exterior finish material in residential zoning districts.
J. All light fixtures mounted on, or in proximity to, accessory buildings shall be downcast or shielded and located to eliminate glare and spillover lighting
beyond the property line.
K. Driveway and parking areas that lead to accessory buildings, which are utilized by motorized vehicles licensed for use on public roadways, shall be
concrete, asphalt, or a similar paved surface. New gravel driveways and parking areas are prohibited.
L. Dog runs, dog pens and housing, play sheds, play structures, swing sets, and similar, shall abide by the setback and height provisions for accessory
buildings. (Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
9-14-7: BUS STOP SHELTERS:
Bus stop shelters may be allowed in all districts subject to receiving approval of a permitted conditional use permit, as defined elsewhere in this title, and
the following:
A. One sign on each side of the bus shelter indicating that the shelter is a bus stop and including the logo of the bus company is allowed up to ten inches
by twenty four inches (10" x 24") each in size.
B. One (1) 2-sided display ad may be placed on the bus shelter, limited in size to no larger than two feet by three feet (2' x 3').
C. All bus stop shelters shall be located on private property and shall not be located within any vision triangles or otherwise unnecessarily or unsafely
obstruct the flow of traffic, as determined by the City. Bus stop shelters shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from side and rear property lines,
and shall have no minimum setback from the ultimate right-of-way.
D. All shelter walls shall be predominantly translucent.
E. Sidewalks shall be installed to connect the bus stop shelter to the street and adjacent pedestrian walkways.
F. Vandalism, decay, deterioration, or other damage to, unto, on, or around the bus stop shelter shall be cleaned and/or repaired by the shelter owner
within forty eight (48) hours of notification by the City.
G. A building permit is required for construction of any bus stop shelters.
H. All power lines connected to a bus shelter must be buried underground. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-14-8: DRIVE-UP AND FREESTANDING AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINES (ATM):
A. Setbacks: Drive-up and freestanding automated teller machines (ATM) shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the ultimate right-ofway,
except in PCP zoned areas, which shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from the ultimate right-of-way.
B. Signage: Any signage displayed on a drive-up or freestanding automated teller machine (ATM) and the housing structure is subject to the requirements
of the West Des Moines sign ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 577/687
C. Construction: Drive-up and freestanding automated teller machines (ATM) are subject to all other requirements related to the construction and operation
of automatic teller machines (ATM) elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-14-9: FUEL PUMP ISLANDS AND ISLAND CANOPIES:
In the applicable zoning districts, the installation of fuel pump islands and fuel pump island canopies may be allowed by the City Council following their
review and approval through the appropriate development review process as noted in the commercial use matrix1 of this title, if the petitioner meets the
following requirements: (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
A. Fuel Pumps And Canopies Related To Ultimate Right-Of-Way Setbacks: All fuel pump island canopies shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50')
from the ultimate right(s)-of-way line as measured to the extreme edge of the canopy. Canopies need to meet the normal side yard and rear yard
setbacks for its respective zoning district as set elsewhere in this title under setback and bulk density regulations2. Fuel pump canopies in existence
prior to the ordinance codified herein will not be made nonconforming by this section.
B. Height: No fuel pump island canopies shall exceed a maximum height of twenty feet (20'), however, all fuel pump island canopies must provide a
minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14') to accommodate the overhead clearance required for emergency vehicles.
C. Signage: Any signage displayed on a fuel pump island or fuel pump island canopy is subject to the requirements of the West Des Moines sign
ordinance.
D. Lighting: All light fixtures attached to a fuel pump island canopy must be recessed into the canopy with flush mounted lenses and designed to illuminate
downward to eliminate glare and spillover lighting beyond the property line. (Ord. 2112, 9-8-2015)
E. Fuel Pumps: The following table shows the maximum number of fuel pumps allowed per site by zoning district.
RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB
Maximum number of fuel pumps allowed per site 12 8 6 6 12 4 4
Note: A "fuel pump" can supply fuel to not more than 2 vehicles at the same time.
RC Regional Commercial District CMC Community Commercial District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District CVC Convenience Commercial District
SC Support Commercial District VJC Valley Junction Commercial District
VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District
(Ord. 2112, 9-8-2015; amd. Ord. 2307, 6-11-2018)
F. Design Standards For Fuel Pump Island Canopies: The intent of the following design standards is to promote an appealing structure that is
architecturally consistent with the principal structure, provides visual interest, and balances the mass of the canopy between the elements of the
structure such as the canopy and the support structure. For all fuel pump canopies the following design elements must be present:
1. All canopy supports shall be designed to be in proportion with the canopy size and height, and that dimension shall extend the full height of the
support. Supports shall be clad with materials consistent with the materials used for the primary structure and be a hard surface material such as
brick or stone that can provide durability against impacts typical of being in close proximity to vehicles. Less durable hard surface materials such as
EIFS and composite materials if consistent with the primary building, may be utilized for the cladding on the upper portion of the column, above the
height of the tallest fuel pump.
2. Pump island canopies one hundred (100) linear feet long or greater shall be designed to provide visual interest and break the straight line
appearance of the length of the canopy by utilizing changes in massing and materials.
3. The color of the canopy shall be consistent with the color of the materials used to construct the primary structure. The color shall not be consistent
with the signage colors unless considered part of the signage allowance for the primary structure as noted elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2182, 11-14-
2016)
9-14-10: SWIMMING POOLS:
A. Setbacks: All swimming pools or spas shall maintain a minimum five foot (5') setback from the side or rear property line and meet the front yard setback
as required for the specific zoning district. Setback and separation distances are measured from the pool deck edge, or if there is no pool deck, from
the pool edge.
B. Area Occupied: For purposes of calculating the total property or lot area occupied by accessory buildings, the total water surface area of a swimming
pool shall not be included in the calculation. (Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 578/687
C. Exceptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
1. Any pond, lake, creek, or other natural occurring bodies of water.
2. Any constructed body of water, similar in nature to a pond, lake, or creek, created for stormwater detention, or other comparable uses, provided it is
approved as part of a development permit.
3. Any body of water, not in an artificial container, including decorative landscape pools not used for swimming, wading or similar recreational uses.
(Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
9-14-11: FENCES AND WALLS:
The following standards shall apply to all fences, walls built for landscaping or screening purposes, and other similar structures, except for retaining walls,
in any zoning district:
A. Materials And Maintenance:
1. Allowed Materials:
a. Fences are to be constructed of customarily used materials such as chainlink, welded wire mesh, wrought iron, aluminum, wood, polyvinyl chloride
(PVC), ornamental woven wire and other similar materials, unless specified otherwise herein. Any fence considered by the Development Planning
and Inspection Manager, or his/her designee, to not be a standard or customarily styled or constructed fence is prohibited.
The use of materials such as sheet metal, chicken wire, temporary construction fencing, snow fencing, woven wire commonly used for the penning
of livestock or other animals or similar materials shall not be permitted for permanent fencing. A fence shall not be constructed or covered with:
paper sheets or strips; cloth or fabric tarps, sheets, or strips; plastic or vinyl tarps, sheets, mesh, or strips; bamboo; reed; or plywood sheeting.
Chainlink or woven wire type fences shall not include plastic or wood slats or strips, bamboo, or reed. Wood fences shall be constructed of treated
lumber, cedar, redwood, or similar types of wood that are resistant to decay. All fences must be of an earth tone, neutral, or natural color such as
white, black, gray (silver), tan, brown, green. Bright or fluorescent colors are not permitted. Pictures, images, lettering, logos, graphics, or artwork
are not permitted on fences.
An exception may be approved by the Development Planning and Inspection Manager, or his/her designee, for sun and/or wind screen material
applied to fences directly associated with a sports or recreation facility such as tennis court fences, baseball field fences, or basketball courts,
subject to the provisions of subsection E3 of this section. An exception also may be approved by the Development Planning and Inspection
Manager, or his/her designee, for mesh screen material associated with a commercial or industrial site.
b. Walls are to be constructed of brick, stone, textured concrete, precast concrete, tile block, etc. Walls constructed of weather resistant wood or
manufactured substitutes may be used if brick or stone columns are incorporated and spaced no more than twenty feet (20') on center.
2. Prohibited Materials: A fence or wall may not be designed to cause pain or injury to humans or animals. Therefore, the use of spikes, broken glass,
barbed wire, razor wire, nails, electrical charge or other similar materials shall be prohibited, unless specified otherwise herein.
3. Construction And Maintenance: All fences shall be constructed in a sound and sturdy manner and shall be maintained in a good state of repair,
including the replacement of defective parts, painting, and other acts required for maintenance. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9-14-5E
of this chapter, the Director of Development Services, after ten (10) days' notice to the owner of the fence, may order the removal of any fence that is
not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the cost assessed against the property where said fence is located. An extension
of time may be granted, upon filing a verified statement that the delay is not a result of any act of the owner.
4. Appeal: Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the Development Planning and Inspection Manager related to the
enforcement of the provisions of this section, specifically this subsection A, a written request on forms prescribed by the Manager for said appeal,
along with the appropriate fee, shall be received and stamped filed by the Department of Development Services within a period of ten (10) business
days following the Manager's decision. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a request, the Manager shall schedule a public hearing of the
Planning and Zoning Commission to review and render a decision on said appeal. The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission is
appealable to the City Council.
Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission on an appeal, a written request on forms
prescribed by the Manager for said appeal, along with the appropriate fee, shall be received and stamped filed by the Department of Development
Services within a period of ten (10) business days following the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such
a request, the Manager shall schedule a public hearing of the City Council to review and render a decision on said appeal. Only such items
considered under appeal by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be considered by the City Council during its review of the appeal of the
Planning and Zoning Commission's decision. (Ord. 1934, 10-3-2011)
B. Measuring Fence Or Wall Height:
1. The height of a fence shall be determined by a measurement from the ground beneath the fence as follows:
a. In a yard abutting a street, the total effective fence height above the finished grade shall be measured on the side nearest the street.
Notwithstanding, if a property or premises is lower than an adjacent street, then the height of the fence shall be determined by a measurement
from the street grade at a ninety degree (90°) angle from the fence; provided the total vertical measurement from the ground beneath the fence to
the top of the fence shall not exceed eight feet (8'). (See figure #4 of this section.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 579/687
b. In any other required yard the total effective fence height above the finished grade shall be measured on the side nearest the adjacent property.
c. On a property line, the fence height shall be measured from the finished grade of the side of the adjacent property. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
d. No single wall face shall be greater than six feet (6') in height without terraces to break up the wall expanse. A minimum one foot (1') of terrace
shall be used for each two feet (2') of wall height. Each terrace shall contain vegetation. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
2. Swales and other earth depressions up to six feet (6') wide shall not be used when measuring the fence's height.
3. Manmade earth berms, terraces, and retaining walls that elevate the fence shall be considered a part of the fence.
4. For purposes of calculating the total property or lot area occupied by accessory structures, the total area occupied by a fence shall not be included in
the calculation. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
C. Fence Regulations:
1. Residential Estate And Agriculture/Open Space Districts: Unless otherwise specified herein, eight foot (8') fences shall be allowed within Residential
Estate (RE) and Open Space Districts (OS). All eight foot (8') fences shall be constructed of decorative metal and maintain a consistency of fifty
percent (50%) open space for the full length of said fence, and the use of any chainlink fence, of any type, shall be prohibited. This calculation shall
be provided at the time of a building permit application. (Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
2. Industrial Districts: Unless otherwise specified herein, fences and walls not exceeding eight feet (8') in height are allowed within the limits of side and
rear yards. Fences may be allowed within the limits of the front yard if approved by the City Council through the site plan process. The use of barbed
wire may be allowed, provided the barbed wire is not less than six feet (6') above the ground.
3. Warehouse Retail District: Fences and screen walls not exceeding twelve feet (12') in height are allowed within the limits of the side and rear yards.
Fences may be allowed within the limits of the front yard if approved by the City Council through the site plan process. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
4. All Other Districts: Unless otherwise specified herein, fences and walls not exceeding six feet (6') in height are allowed within the limits of side and
rear yards. A fence or wall, not exceeding four feet (4') in height is allowed up to the property line provided the visual clearance is maintained.
5. Decorative Features: In all districts, decorative features such as individual posts, trellises, brick or stone columns, and similar features constructed
as part of a fence or wall shall be allowed to exceed the maximum fence height by no more than twelve inches (12"). Decorative features shall not be
counted toward the open space percentage of the fence. Pedestrian entry features which only include arbors, arched entries, arcades or finials may
exceed the maximum allowable fence height in any yard subject to design review and approval of the Director of Community Development.
6. Single Faced Fences: Single faced fences shall have their unfinished side (side with exposed posts) facing toward the property on which the fence is
erected. Provisions for landscaping to soften the visual appearance of the fence or wall and provide additional buffering may be required and will be
reviewed on a case by case basis. In addition, the following shall apply:
a. Safety rails or fencing may be required to satisfy Building Code requirements.
7. Screening Of Mechanical Units: Unless otherwise specified herein, fences or walls installed as a method of screening mechanical equipment may
exceed height limitations of the specific zoning districts in order to effectively screen the mechanical equipment if they are located in direct proximity
to the equipment. All screen fences or walls shall be opaque in design and be built out of materials consistent with the architecture and materials of
the principal building. Any open area required for ventilation of the equipment shall be designed to prevent full view of the equipment. The design of
the screen fence or wall and the height required for full screening shall be provided at the time of a building permit or site plan application. (Ord.
2143, 5-2-2016)
D. Corner Lots And Double Frontage Lots: On corner lots and double frontage lots, fences not more than six feet (6') in height may be placed in a required
front yard abutting a street where all the following are met:
1. The required front yard abutting the street is used as a side yard and not as a front yard.
2. The fence maintains a minimum setback from the ultimate right-of-way of fifteen feet (15').
3. The vision clearance area is maintained.
4. All other requirements of this title are met.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 580/687
E. Exceptions To Fence Requirements:
1. Agricultural Purposes: In Agriculture/Open Space Districts (OS), barbed wire and woven wire fencing may be allowed, subject to a minimum setback
of ten feet (10'), provided it is used to contain livestock or to protect crops and plantings.
In Agriculture/Open Space Districts (OS), an electrified fence may be allowed, subject to a minimum setback of ten feet (10'), provided it is used as
an internal fence, not on the periphery of the property, to contain livestock.
2. Industrial Districts: In industrial districts, fences topped with barbed wire may be allowed, provided the barbed wire is not less than six feet (6') above
the ground.
3. Recreational Purposes: Fences associated with the uses of a sports or recreational facility or other similar area, shall not be subject to the height
restrictions specified elsewhere in this section, provided that such fence is constructed to maintain a consistency of at least seventy five percent
(75%) open space for the full length of the fence and does not impede the required vision clearance. Any such fence is subject to design review and
approval of the Director of Community Development.
4. Swimming Pool Enclosures: Barriers constructed for the purpose of enclosing swimming pools are subject to the requirements of section 9-14-10 of
this chapter.
5. Temporary Fences: Temporary construction fences, barricades, railings, or other similar fences installed to provide temporary site security and/or
safety in conjunction with construction work may be allowed in any district during periods of construction. Any such temporary fences shall be
removed upon completion of the construction work.
F. Overland Flowage Easements:
1. Fences may encroach into an overland flowage easement providing measures are taken to make certain that the fence does not restrict the water
flow, cause siltation buildup, etc.
2. Permitted fence material includes chainlink, wrought iron fencing, picket style fencing that is at least thirty percent (30%) open, or other fencing
styles that are at least thirty percent (30%) open.
3. Solid fencing shall be elevated a minimum of six inches (6") through the swale part of the easement to allow water flowage. (See figure #5 of this
section.)
(Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-14-12: RETAINING WALLS:
A. Retaining walls shall be set back from the property line one foot (1') for every one foot (1') of height, unless a mutual written agreement on the height
and location of the retaining wall has been made with the adjoining property owner.
B. Retaining walls which are more than four feet (4') in height shall be structurally engineered. The design specifications, elevations and site plan showing
the exact location of the wall shall be provided along with the required building permit application to the Building Inspections Division. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-
1999)
9-14-13: SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS:
A. Intent: The intent of this section is to balance the need for clean, renewable energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community. The City finds these regulations are necessary to ensure that small wind energy conversion systems are appropriately
designed, sited and installed. (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
B. Definitions:
HEIGHT, TOTAL SYSTEM: The height above grade of the system, including the generating unit and the highest vertical extension of any blades or
rotors.
HEIGHT, TOWER: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the generation unit and attached blades or rotors.
OFF GRID: An electrical system that is not connected to a utility distribution grid.
SHADOW FLICKER: Changing light intensity caused by sunlight through the moving blades of a wind energy conversion system.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (SWECS): A wind energy conversion system which has a nameplate rated capacity of up to fifteen
kilowatts (15 kW) for residential, office, industrial and open space uses and districts and which is incidental and subordinate to a principal use on the
same parcel. A system is considered an SWECS only if it supplies electrical power solely for use by the owner on the site, except that when a parcel on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 581/687
which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed
by the owner for on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code, as
amended from time to time.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, BUILDING MOUNTED: An SWECS which is securely fastened to any portion of a principal building
in order to achieve desired elevation, whether attached directly to the principal building or attached to a tower structure which is in turn fastened to the
principal building.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, FREESTANDING: An SWECS which is elevated by means of a monopole tower only and is not
located on another supporting structure except that the tower shall have an appropriately constructed concrete base. Guyed, lattice, or other
nonmonopole style towers shall not meet this definition.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, HORIZONTAL AXIS: A small wind energy conversion system that has blades which rotate through
a horizontal plane.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, VERTICAL AXIS: A small wind energy conversion system that has blades which rotate through a
vertical plane.
TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): An aggregation of parts including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guywires and
accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into
mechanical or electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine.
WIND TURBINE GENERATOR: The component of a wind energy conversion system that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical
energy. (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010; amd. Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018)
C. General Regulations:
1. Conditional Use: A small wind energy conversion system (SWECS) shall be allowed only as a conditional accessory use to a permitted principal use
or approved permitted conditional principal use.
2. Permit Required:
a. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter or locate any SWECS within the City of West Des Moines, unless a permitted conditional use
permit has been obtained from the Board of Adjustment. The permitted conditional use permit may be revoked by resolution of the Board of
Adjustment any time the approved system does not comply with the rules set forth in this chapter and the conditions imposed by the Board of
Adjustment. The owner/operator of the SWECS must also obtain any other permits required by other Federal, State and local
agencies/departments prior to erecting the system.
3. Tower: Only monopole towers shall be permitted for freestanding SWECS. Lattice, guyed or towers of any other type shall not be considered to be in
compliance with this section.
4. Installation: Installation must be done according to manufacturer's recommendations. All wiring and electrical work must be completed according to
the applicable Building and Electric Codes. All electrical components must meet code recognized test standards.
5. Number Of Systems Per Zoning Lot: No more than one SWECS may be placed on any residential estate or single-family residential zoned lot.
Building mounted SWECS shall be prohibited on any parcel or lot containing a one- or two-family use.
6. Engineer Certification: Applications for any SWECS shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower,
base, and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the applicable regulations and certified by an Iowa licensed
professional engineer shall also be submitted.
7. Location:
a. No part of an SWECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other established easements, or on or over property lines.
b. An SWECS shall be located entirely in the rear yard.
c. An SWECS shall not be located in any required setback.
d. An SWECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations as amended from
time to time.
e. No SWECS shall be constructed within twenty feet (20') laterally of an overhead electrical power line (excluding secondary electrical service lines
or service drops). The setback from underground electric distribution lines shall be at least five feet (5').
f. No part of an SWECS, including guywires, may be located closer than ten feet (10') to any property line.
8. Color: The SWECS shall be a neutral color such as white or light gray. Other colors may be allowed at the discretion of the Board of Adjustment. The
surface shall be nonreflective.
9. Shadow Flicker: No SWECS shall be installed and operated so to cause a shadow flicker to fall on or in any existing residential structure.
10. Lighting: No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to meet FAA regulations.
11. Signage: No signage or advertising of any kind shall be permitted on the tower or any associated structures.
12. Climbing Apparatus: All climbing apparatus shall be located at least ten feet (10') above the ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent
climbing within the first ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
13. Maintenance: Facilities shall be well maintained in an operational condition that poses no potential safety hazard. Should the SES fall into disrepair
and be in such dilapidated condition that it poses a safety hazard or would be considered generally offensive to the senses of the general public, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 582/687
SES may be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this Code. (Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018)
14. Displacement Of Parking Prohibited: The location of the SWECS shall not result in the net loss of required parking as specified in chapter 15 of this
title.
15. Utility Notification: No SWECS shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent
to install an interconnected customer owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
16. Interconnection: The SWECS, if interconnected to a utility system, shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the
utility and the Iowa Utilities Board.
17. Restriction On Use Of Electricity Generated: An SWECS shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power for on site consumption, except that
excess electrical power generated by the SWECS and not presently needed for on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with
section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code.
18. Noise: Except during short term events including utility outages and severe wind events, an SWECS shall be designed, installed and operated so
that the noise generated does not exceed the maximum noise levels established in title 4, chapter 7 of this Code.
19. Safety Controls: Each SWECS shall be equipped with both an automatic and manual braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent
uncontrolled rotation, over speeding, and excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades, or turbine components. Said automatic braking
system shall also be capable of stopping turbine rotation in the event of a power outage so as to prevent back feeding of the grid.
20. Shutoff: A clearly marked and easily accessible shutoff for the wind turbine will be required as determined by the Fire Marshal.
21. Electromagnetic Interference: All SWECS shall be designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference. If it is determined
that the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the operator shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference
including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of the appropriate City authority. A permit granting an SWECS may be revoked
if electromagnetic interference from the SWECS becomes evident.
22. Wind Access Easements: The enactment of this section does not constitute the granting of an easement by the City. The owner/operator shall
acquire covenants, easements, or similar documentation to assure sufficient wind to operate the SWECS unless adequate accessibility to the wind is
provided by the site. (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
23. Insurance: (Rep. by Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018)
24. Compliance With National Electric Code: Applications for SWECS shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient
detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code. (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
25. Removal: If the SWECS remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned.
The owner/operator shall remove the abandoned system at their expense. Removal of the system includes the entire structure, transmission
equipment and fencing from the property excluding foundations. Should the owner/operator fail to remove the system, the SWECS will be considered
a public nuisance and will be abated in accordance with title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this Code.
D. Bulk Regulations:
1. Setbacks: The minimum distance between any SWECS and any property line for residential uses, residential and open space zoned districts, or
office and industrial zoned districts adjacent to dissimilar land uses shall be a distance that is equivalent to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
total system height.
The minimum distance between any SWECS and any property line within office and industrial zoned districts adjacent to a like zoning district shall be
a distance that is equivalent to one hundred percent (100%) of the total system height.
The setback shall be measured from the property line to the point of the SWECS closest to the property line. (Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018)
2. Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for an SWECS shall be one acre.
3. Maximum Height: Height shall be measured from the ground to the top of the tower, including the wind turbine generator and blades. Manmade earth
berms, terraces, and retaining walls that elevate the wind turbine shall be considered a part of the turbine.
a. For lots of more than one and fewer than three (3) acres, the maximum height shall be sixty five feet (65').
b. For lots of three (3) acres to seven (7) acres, the maximum height shall be eighty feet (80').
c. For lots of more than seven (7) acres the maximum height shall be one hundred feet (100').
4. Maximum Blade Diameter: The maximum diameter of the blades for an SWECS shall be twenty feet (20').
5. Clearance Of Blade: No portion of a horizontal axis SWECS blade shall extend within thirty feet (30') of the ground. No portion of a vertical axis
SWECS shall extend within ten feet (10') of the ground. No blades may extend over parking areas, driveways or sidewalks. No blade may extend
within twenty feet (20') of the nearest tree, structure or aboveground utility facilities.
E. Application Required:
1. Application for SWECS shall be made on forms provided by the city of West Des Moines. No action may be taken regarding requests for SWECS
until completed applications have been filed and fees paid. (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
9-14-14: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
A. Intent: The intent of this section is to balance the need for clean, renewable energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community. The city finds these regulations are necessary to ensure that solar energy systems are appropriately designed, sited and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 583/687
installed.
B. Definitions:
COLLECTOR PANEL: An equipment assembly used for gathering, concentrating or absorbing solar energy as useful thermal energy or to generate
electric energy.
HEIGHT, TOTAL BUILDING MOUNTED SYSTEM: The height above the roof surface measured perpendicular to the roof specific to the installation on
a sloped roof or the height above the roof surface specific to the installation on a flat roof.
HEIGHT, TOTAL GROUND MOUNT SYSTEM: The height above grade of the system from the highest point, including the supporting structure, related
equipment and the collector panels. Adjustable angle systems will be measured from the highest point when the system is at its maximum vertical
extension.
LARGE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (LSES): A solar energy system which has a nameplate rated capacity of over fifteen (15) kilowatts in electrical
energy or fifty (50) KBTU of thermal energy for nonsingle-family residential uses and districts and which is incidental and subordinate to a principal use
on the same parcel. A system is considered an LSES only if it supplies electrical power or thermal energy solely for use by the owner on the site,
except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power
generated and not presently needed by the owner for on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5)
of the Iowa administrative code, as amended from time to time.
OFF GRID: An electrical system that is not connected to a utility distribution grid.
SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SSES): A solar energy system which has a nameplate rated capacity of up to fifteen (15) kilowatts in electrical
energy or fifty (50) KBTU of thermal energy for residential uses and districts and which is incidental and subordinate to a principal use on the same
parcel. A system is considered an SSES only if it supplies electrical power or thermal energy solely for use by the owner on the site, except that when a
parcel on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not
presently needed by the owner for on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa
administrative code, as amended from time to time.
SOLAR ACCESS: A property owner's right to have sunlight shine on his land.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun at wavelengths suitable for heat transfer, photosynthetic use or photovoltaic use.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING INTEGRATED: A solar photovoltaic system that is constructed as an integral part of a principal or accessory
building and where the collector component maintains a uniform profile or surface with the building's vertical walls, window openings, and roofing. Such
a system is used in lieu of an architectural or structural component of the building. A building integrated system may occur within vertical facades,
replacing glazing or other facade material; into semitransparent skylight systems; into roofing systems, replacing traditional roofing materials; or other
building or structure envelope systems. To be considered a building integrated solar energy system, the appearance of the collector components must
be consistent with the surrounding materials.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING MOUNTED: An SES which is securely fastened to any portion of a building roof, whether attached directly to
the principal or accessory building.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND MOUNTED: An SES which is not located on a building and is ground mounted.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES): An aggregation of parts including the base, supporting structure, photovoltaic or solar thermal panels, inverters and
accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in such configuration as necessary to convert radiant energy from the sun into
mechanical or electrical energy.
UTILITY SCALE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system which supplies electrical power or thermal energy solely for use by off site
consumers.
C. General Regulations:
1. Allowances: Allowances for solar energy systems (SES) shall be as follows:
a. A building integrated system.
b. A building mounted system attached to the roof of an accessory or primary structure.
c. A ground mounted system as a detached accessory structure to a primary structure.
d. Large solar energy systems (LSES) are not allowed in open space zoning district and single-family residential used or zoned property.
e. Utility scale solar energy systems are not allowed.
2. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter or locate any solar energy system (SES) within the city of West Des Moines,
unless approved with:
a. Building permit in the following zoning districts: open space and single-family residential zoned property.
b. Site plan, major or minor modification to a site plan permit for all other zoning districts.
c. The owner/operator of the SES must also obtain any other permits required by other federal, state and local agencies/departments prior to
erecting the system.
3. Installation: Installation must be done according to manufacturer's recommendations. All work must be completed according to the applicable
building, fire and electric codes. All electrical components must meet code recognized test standards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 584/687
4. Number Of Systems Per Zoning Lot: No more than one SES may be placed on any zoned lot unless otherwise specifically approved by the city
council.
5. Engineer Certification: Applications for any SES shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the receiving structure if newly constructed, including
the supporting frame and footings. For systems to be mounted on existing buildings, an engineering analysis showing sufficient structural capacity of
the receiving structure to support the SES per the applicable code regulations, certified by an Iowa licensed professional engineer shall be submitted.
6. Color: The SES shall be a neutral color. All surfaces shall be nonreflective to minimize glare that could affect adjacent or nearby properties.
Measures to minimize nuisance glare may be required including modifying the surface material, placement or orientation of the system, and if
necessary, adding screening to block glare.
7. Lighting: No lighting other than required safety lights or indicators shall be installed on the SES.
8. Signage: No advertising or signage other than required safety signage and equipment labels shall be permitted on the SES.
9. Maintenance: Facilities shall be well maintained in an operational condition that poses no potential safety hazard. Should the SES fall into disrepair
and be in such dilapidated condition that it poses a safety hazard or would be considered generally offensive to the senses of the general public, the
SES may be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this code.
10. Displacement Of Parking Prohibited: The location of the SES shall not result in the net loss of required parking as specified in chapter 15 of this
title.
11. Utility Notification: No SES that generates electricity shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of
and is in agreement with the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
12. Interconnection: The SES, if interconnected to a utility system, shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the
utility and the Iowa utilities board.
13. Restriction On Use Of Energy Generated: An SES shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power or thermal energy for on site consumption,
except that excess electrical power generated by the SES and not presently needed for on site use may be used by the utility company in
accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa administrative code.
14. Shutoff: A clearly marked and easily accessible shutoff for any SES that generates electricity will be required as determined by the fire marshal.
15. Electromagnetic Interference: All SESs shall be designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference. If it is determined
that the SES is causing electromagnetic interference, the operator shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference including
relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of the appropriate city authority. A permit granting an SES may be revoked if
electromagnetic interference from the SES becomes evident.
16. Solar Access Easements: The enactment of this section does not constitute the granting of an easement by the city. The owner/operator may need
to acquire covenants, easements, or similar documentation to assure sufficient solar exposure to operate the SES unless adequate accessibility to
the sun is provided by the site. Such covenants, easements, or similar documentation is the sole responsibility of the owner/operator. Should the
owner/operator pursue a solar access easement, the extent of the solar access should be defined and the easement document executed in
compliance with the regulations contained in chapter 564A (access to solar energy) of the Iowa Code.
17. Compliance With National Electric Code: Applications for SESs shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient
detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the national electrical code.
18. Removal: If the SES remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned. The
owner/operator shall remove the abandoned system at their expense. Removal of the system includes the entire structure, collector panels and
related equipment from the property excluding foundations. Should the owner/operator fail to remove the system, the SES will be considered a public
nuisance and will be abated in accordance with title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this code.
19. Screening: SESs that are visible from the public thoroughfare or adjacent properties will require screening in accordance to regulations for
screening of mechanical units noted in section 9-10-4, "Specific Use Regulations", and in chapter 10, "Performance Standards", of this title. The
need for and type of screening to be used shall be identified as part of the building permit, major or minor modification to a site plan or site plan
permit submittal.
20. Nonconforming Systems: An SES that has been installed on or before the effective date of this section and is in active use and does not comply
with any or all of the provisions of this section shall be considered a legal nonconforming structure and will be regulated by the provisions noted in
section 9-3-4, "Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, Uses, Uses Of Land, Or Uses Of Buildings Or Structures", of this title.
21. Unsafe Condition: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any SES or associated
building or structure, or part thereof declared to be unsafe by the appropriate authority.
D. Bulk Regulations:
1. Location:
a. Ground mounted SES:
(1) No part of an SES shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other established easements, or on or over property lines.
(2) The SES shall be located in accordance to the regulations for detached accessory structures in this chapter or not less than one foot (1') from
the property line for every one foot (1') of the system height measured at its maximum height, whichever is most restrictive.
(3) An SSES cannot be located in front of the rear wall of the primary structure, even if it meets the front yard setback requirements. An LSES
cannot be located in the front yard setback.
(4) An SES shall not be located in any required buffer.
(5) The setback from underground electric distribution lines shall be at least five feet (5').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 585/687
(6) No SES shall be located which may obstruct vision between a height of thirty inches (30") and ten feet (10') on any corner lot within a vision
triangle of twenty five feet (25') formed by intersecting street right of way lines.
b. Building mounted SES:
(1) The solar energy system shall be set back not less than one foot (1') from the exterior perimeter of the roof for every one foot (1') the system
extends above the parapet wall or roof surface.
(2) Should the solar energy system be mounted on an existing structure that does not conform to current setback requirements, the solar energy
system shall be installed to meet the current setback requirements applicable to the receiving structure.
(3) Shall be designed to minimize their visual presence to surrounding properties and public thoroughfares. Panel arrangement shall take in
account the proportion of the roof surface and place the panels in a consistent manner without gaps unless necessary to accommodate vents,
skylights or equipment.
(4) Access pathways for the SES shall be provided in accordance to all applicable building, fire and safety codes.
(5) Shall be located in such a manner that fall protection railings are not required or are not visible from the public thoroughfare.
c. Building integrated SES:
(1) No setback required.
(2) Access pathways for the SES shall be provided in accordance to all applicable building, fire and safety codes.
(3) Shall be located in such a manner that fall protection railings are not required or are not visible from the public thoroughfare.
d. No SES shall be constructed within twenty feet (20') laterally of an overhead electrical power line (excluding secondary electrical service lines or
service drops).
2. Height:
a. Ground mounted SES:
(1) The maximum height of the SES shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height as measured from existing grade.
b. Building mounted SES:
(1) The collector panel surface and mounting system shall not extend higher than eighteen inches (18") above the roof surface of a sloped roof.
(2) The collector panel surface and mounting system shall not extend higher than seven feet (7') above the roof surface of a flat roof.
c. Building integrated SES:
(1) The collector panel shall maintain a uniform profile or surface with the building's vertical walls, window openings, and roofing.
3. Size:
a. Size of the SES is calculated by measuring the total surface area of the collector panels for the system.
b. Ground mounted SES:
(1) In single-family residential used or zoned property the SES is restricted in size to no more than the allowed area for detached accessory
structures on the specific property. The SES would be included in the collective total of all detached accessory structures.
(2) In all other zoning districts the SES is restricted in size to no more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the primary structure(s) footprint.
c. Building mounted SES: System size will be determined by the available roof area subject to the installation minus the required setbacks or access
pathways.
d. Building integrated SES: System size will be determined by the available building surface area subject to the installation minus the required
access pathways.
e. In no case shall an SSES exceed the nameplate rated capacity of fifteen (15) kilowatts or fifty (50) KBTU.
4. Application Required: Application for an SES shall be made on forms provided by the city of West Des Moines. No action may be taken regarding
requests for SESs until completed applications have been filed and fees paid. (Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016)
9-14-15: FLAGPOLES:
The following regulations shall apply to permanent flagpoles. Temporary flags shall be regulated by the provisions in chapter 18, "Signs", of this title, under
the temporary sign regulations.
A. Bulk Requirements:
1. Maximum Number Of Flagpoles: Three (3) poles.
2. Pole Separation: Eight foot (8') minimum separation between flagpoles or as needed to prevent flag overlap; ten foot (10') minimum separation from
a building or as needed to prevent the flag from hitting the building.
3. Maximum Height: Thirty feet (30'), except in RC, CMC, and SC zoning districts the maximum height is forty feet (40') and in PCP, the maximum
height is sixty feet (60').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 586/687
4. Setback: Flagpoles shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any property line, except that in the VJHB zoning district no setback shall be
required. (Ord. 2169, 9-6-2016)
9-14-16: VARIANCES:
Application for a variance of any of the above provisions shall be made to the board of adjustment in the manner provided in title 2 of this code. (Ord.
2169, 9-6-2016)
Chapter 15
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
9-15-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WEST DES MOINES PARKING REGULATIONS. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
9-15-2: PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent of this Chapter to:
A. Protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens.
B. Prevent traffic congestion and hazards.
C. Provide for proper traffic safety by preserving the public thoroughfares for the unimpaired movement of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular traffic.
D. Provide attractive, secure, properly lighted, and well screened off-street parking facilities.
E. Assure the maneuverability of emergency vehicles.
F. Provide appropriately designed parking facilities in proportion to the needs generated by the varying types of land use.
G. Minimize the negative visual impacts of large expanses of parking by reducing the glare and hot spots from the parking lots through open space and
landscaping within the parking areas.
H. Ensure that loading and delivery services are compatible with adjacent parcels and surrounding neighborhoods.
Therefore, it shall be recognized that the requirements of this Chapter are minimum; and, after review of the site plan and intended land use, additional
restrictions may be imposed in appropriate circumstances to preserve the intent of this Chapter. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
9-15-3: APPLICABILITY:
In all districts, in connection with every industrial, commercial, business, trade, institutional, recreational or dwelling use, and all other uses, space for
parking and storage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with all of the following regulations except as elsewhere provided herein. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-
1996)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2350 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING. Go to new ordinance.
9-15-4: OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. General Provisions: All of the following standards shall apply to all off-street parking:
1. Off-Street Parking Required: No structure or use shall be permitted or constructed unless off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter.
2. Exceptions: The provision of off-street parking spaces is not required for uses located within the Valley Junction Historic Business District (VJHB),
however, any off-street parking that is provided within this District must comply with the regulations set forth in this Chapter.
3. Arrangement And Identification: All parking areas shall be so arranged and marked so as to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading,
parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
4. Accessory Uses: Parking requirements for accessory uses within the same commercial or industrial building as a principal use may be reduced up to
fifty percent (50%), upon the determination of the Director or the Commission, whichever has jurisdiction, that such a reduction is justified, based
upon the size, shape, and location of the site and the combination of intended uses involved.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 587/687
5. Calculation Of Spaces: Fractional space requirements shall be rounded up to the next whole space.
6. Combined Uses: When two (2) or more tenants which are not part of a planned commercial center are located in the same building or structure or
are common developments, the parking requirements shall be the sum of the separate requirements for each use.
7. Dead-End Parking: Parking lots accessed by only one entrance with only one drive aisle which is greater than two hundred fifty feet (250') in length
shall provide a second access or a turnaround equal to the dimensions of a cul-de-sac for a public street at the dead end of the aisle.
8. Double Counting: A reduction in the number of required parking spaces for uses with differing business hours which share a parking lot shall not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
9. Increase Or Change In Use: When any principal building is enlarged, or increased in capacity, or when a change in use creates an increase in the
amount of off street parking space required, additional off street parking spaces shall be required, in conformity with this chapter.
10. Mixed Use Buildings: For a building where a single tenant has multiple uses, parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the parking
requirements of each use. An example of a mixed use building is one containing a combination of both office and manufacturing uses. The area
dedicated to each use can be calculated at its individual requirement. At the discretion of the Community Development Director, the tenant may need
to demonstrate that the parking can meet the more restrictive standard if the uses are changed.
11. Outdoor Areas: Outdoor patron use areas or areas used for assembly shall be included in the gross floor area (gfa) for calculating parking
requirements. Outdoor dining areas shall be included in the gfa for restaurants when calculating parking requirements.
12. Parking Structures: Parking structures are subject to setbacks, building height, and other development standards. In addition:
a. Garages and carports are allowed in the side and rear yards for zero lot line homes and multi-family residential projects in each multi-family
residential zone.
b. Parking ramps, above or below ground shall be reviewed by the City as part of the site plan review process.
13. Reduction In Number Of Spaces: Any required parking spaces displaced by building expansion shall be provided elsewhere on the site. No
required off street parking facility shall be reduced in capacity below the minimum requirements of this chapter.
14. Tandem Parking: Parking spaces in tandem are not allowed in any zoning district unless otherwise noted for a specific use.
15. Use Of Parking Spaces: Required parking spaces shall be used only for parking of vehicles for property owners, guests, renters, patrons or
employees. Required parking spaces shall not be used for sale, display, rental or repair of motor vehicles on any permanent basis. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-
1996)
B. Provisions For Residential Uses:
1. Paving Required: All parking of vehicles, excluding recreational vehicles and trailers for residential uses that comply with subsection 9-5-4A1 of this
title, shall occur on paved areas and on private property only, and the entire length and width of the vehicles must be on paved surfaces. All parking
of recreational vehicles and trailers for residential uses that comply with subsection 9-5-4A1 of this title shall occur on hard surfaces other than gravel
sufficient to support the weight of the recreational vehicle or trailer in question and on private property only, but only the parts of the recreational
vehicle or trailer that contact the ground shall be required to be placed on a hard surface. The parked recreational vehicles and trailers which only
have the parts that contact the ground placed on a hard surface must be parked adjacent to the existing driveway, garage, or alley. City right-of-way
between the property line and the street shall not be used for parking vehicles. Gravel parking areas existing prior to September 1, 1996, may
continue in use; however, in no case shall the total pavement and gravel parking area exceed twenty percent (20%) of the square footage of the lot.
Paved driveways and any associated off street parking areas within the front yard of a single-family detached residence shall not occupy greater than
fifty percent (50%) of the area between the primary wall of the front plane of the dwelling structure and public right-of-way. (Ord. 2327, 10-1-2018)
2. Setback: On single-family lots, parking shall not be permitted within twenty feet (20') of an alley or street. Exception: Accessory garages which
access from the alley may have vehicles parked on the required twenty foot (20') access directly in front of the garage door provided no portion of the
vehicle encroaches into the alley or right-of-way.
3. Commercial Vehicles In Residential Zones: Refer to chapter 5, "Agricultural/Open Space And Residential Zoning District", of this title. (Ord. 2069, 11-
17-2014)
C. Provisions For Commercial Uses:
1. Parking Location: Off street parking for commercial uses shall be located on the same lot, or, with a reciprocal parking, ingress and egress easement
on a lot contiguous to the building, structure or use to be served. The required parking spaces shall not be located in the rear of commercial buildings
unless direct access for the customers to the facility is provided. Parking shall not be located across a street unless connected by an approved under
or over crossing.
2. Racks Not Counting As Parking Spaces: For auto repair shops or other similar uses, the racks shall not be considered in calculating required parking
spaces.
3. Spaces Not For Repair, Servicing Or Storage: Required parking spaces shall not be used or permitted to be used for the repair, servicing or storage
of vehicles, or for storage of materials.
D. Provisions For Office Uses:
1. Parking Location: Off street parking for office uses shall be located on the same lot, or, with a reciprocal parking ingress and egress easement on a
lot contiguous to the building, structure or use to be served. Parking shall not be located across a street unless connected by an approved under or
over crossing.
E. Provisions For Industrial Uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 588/687
1. Parking Location: For industrial uses, off-street parking shall be located on the same lot, or, with a reciprocal parking, ingress and egress on a lot
contiguous to the industrial building, structure or use to be served.
2. Racks Not Counting As Parking Spaces: For auto repair shops or other similar uses, the racks shall not be considered in calculating required parking
spaces.
3. Spaces Not For Repair, Servicing Or Storage: Required parking spaces shall not be used or permitted to be used for the repair, servicing or storage
of vehicles, or for storage of materials.
F. Provisions For Public Uses:
1. Bicycle Parking: Public uses with more than fifty (50) required parking spaces shall provide a bicycle rack for the purpose of storing and protecting
bicycles from theft. The minimum number of bicycle spaces required shall be one bicycle space per forty (40) parking spaces, up to a maximum of
twenty (20) required bicycle spaces per use. Such devices shall be located in such a way as not to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2. Parking Location: Off-street parking for public uses shall be located on the same lot, or, with a reciprocal ingress and egress easement on a lot
contiguous to the building, structure or use to be served. Parking shall not be located across a street unless connected by an approved under- or
overcrossing. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
9-15-5: HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. With respect to handicapped parking, all of the following shall apply:
1. The owner, contractor and developer shall comply with all Federal, State, and local laws regarding handicapped parking including, but not limited to,
Iowa Code chapter 321L and the Americans With Disabilities Act.
2. Handicapped parking spaces required by Federal, State, and local laws shall count toward meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1213, 11-
4-1996)
9-15-6: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private off-street parking area shall be developed and maintained in accordance with all of the following
requirements:
A. Location: All parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel as the structure or use, unless approved otherwise by the City Council and no parking
space required by this chapter shall be located in the parking lot setback area of any land use district.
B. Access: With respect to access, all of the following shall apply:
1. Width: Where a lot does not abut on a public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive not less than ten feet
(10') in width in the case of a single-family dwelling, and not less than twenty four feet (24') in width for all other uses. Except where provided in
connection with a use permitted in a residential district, such easement of access or access drive shall not be located in any residential district.
2. Flow Of Traffic: Off-street parking or loading facilities shall be designed so as to permit entrance and exit by a forward movement of the vehicle for all
uses, except single-family detached or townhouse dwellings with direct driveway access to City classified "collector" streets with projected average
daily traffic (ADT) of less than three thousand (3,000) ADT, which shall be permitted backward movement from a driveway. The backing or backward
movement of vehicles from a driveway, off-street parking or loading area onto a major thoroughfare, including all thoroughfares designated as arterial
streets or major collector streets, in the Comprehensive Plan, other than local residential streets as noted herein, shall be strictly prohibited for all
uses. Driveway approach returns shall not extend beyond the side lot line as extended into the right-of-way, unless such driveway is of joint usage by
the adjoining lots.
3. Paving Required: Paving of the alley shall be required whenever a property, except a single-family detached residence, utilizes an alley as an
ingress to an off-street parking area. The property owner shall be responsible for paving the alley in accordance with the specifications of the Des
Moines Metropolitan Design Standards, as modified by the City, to provide safe ingress and egress to the site.
4. Vertical Clearance: Access driveway vertical clearance shall be at least fourteen feet (14').
5. Private Drive/Street:
a. Access to four (4) or fewer single-family detached houses shall be considered a private drive. Access to more than four (4) single-family detached
houses shall be considered a private street.
b. Single-family attached developments having paved access to garages without adequate room to park an additional car between the roadway and
garage shall consider the access to be a private drive. If the length of paving in front of the garage is long enough to accommodate the parking of a
car, the roadway shall be considered a private street and the paving between the garage and roadway will be considered a private drive.
C. Driveways: With respect to driveways, all of the following shall apply:
1. The number of ingress/egress access points to public streets from off street parking areas are subject to approval by the City and located to limit
vehicular conflicts, provide acceptable location of driveway accesses to public streets, preserve proper traffic safety and, as possible, not impair
movement of vehicular traffic on public streets. The permitted number of ingress/egress driveway approaches to public streets for an off street
parking lot shall be dependent upon the existing and projected future average daily traffic (ADT) for the public street and, where possible, public
street accesses should be located in alignment with driveway approaches gaining access to the same public street from property on the opposite
side of the street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 589/687
2. Except for single-family detached dwellings, and unless expressly recommended otherwise by the Director of Public Works, access drives onto
public streets should have a minimum separation of one hundred feet (100') apart, measured centerline to centerline; on arterial streets, the required
distance should be three hundred feet (300'). No driveway shall be permitted to access a public street within twenty five feet (25') of the end of radius
at a street intersection. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
3. Individual residential driveways on private property shall not be greater than twenty feet (20') in width at the street right-of-way line. The driveway
may flare out at an angle on both sides of the driveway toward a point situated ten feet (10') from the right-of-way line to create additional parking
spaces within the driveway as long as the total paving for the parking of vehicles does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area between the rightof-
way line and the primary wall of the front plane of the dwelling structure. All paving must maintain a minimum setback of one foot (1') from a side
property line. Any retaining walls must comply with setbacks as defined in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 2327, 10-1-2018)
4. Driveways and associated off street parking areas for single-family residences shall not be located closer than one foot (1') from an adjoining
residential lot line, unless such driveway is jointly used by adjoining residential lot owners and a joint easement has been recorded.
5. Except for single-family residences, the minimum width of a one-way drive without parking stalls shall be fifteen feet (15'). The minimum width of a
two-way drive without parking stalls shall be twenty four feet (24').
D. Maneuvering/Circulation: Off street parking facilities shall accommodate the maneuvering and circulation of all vehicles on site, so as not to impair the
movement of vehicles on public streets. There shall be no backing of vehicles from an off street parking facility into the public street, or backing from
the public street into an off street parking facility. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
E. Parking Lot Setbacks: With respect to parking lot setbacks, all of the following shall apply:
1. Screening: The parking lot setback shall provide open space for screening of the lot and vehicles within the lot through berming, landscaping or other
similar screening in accordance with chapter 19 of this title. No part of any parking space shall be within the parking lot setback. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-
2009)
2. Public Street Right-Of-Way:
a. Residential Districts: In all residential districts except for single-family residences with driveway parking space shall have a minimum of fifteen feet
(15') from the public street right-of-way.
b. Setbacks: Parking on driveways parallel to a public sidewalk for single-family residences shall maintain a minimum setback of ten feet (10') from
the public street right-of-way. In all zoning districts, parking on driveways within the public street right-of-way or across public sidewalks shall not
comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
c. Office And Commercial Districts: Office and commercial districts, including the Warehouse Retail District, except for Professional Commerce Park
and Valley Junction Historic Business Districts, shall have a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from the public street right-of-way. (Ord. 1629, 4-
25-2005)
d. Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District: If a parking lot is proposed, a parking lot setback shall be determined through development
review which preserves the intent of the setback.
e. Light Industrial And General Industrial Districts: Light Industrial (LI) and General Industrial (GI) Districts shall have a setback of at least ten feet
(10') from the public street right-of-way.
f. Business Park And Professional Commerce Districts: Business Park (BP) and Professional Commerce Park (PCP) Districts shall have a minimum
setback of twenty feet (20') from the public street right-of-way.
g. Parking Lots: Parking lot setbacks shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way, as identified in the comprehensive plan.
3. Alley Line: An eight foot (8') setback from the public street right-of-way is required for all districts.
4. Adjoining Lot Line: A five foot (5') setback is required along an adjoining lot line, unless the parking space within the setback is part of a common
parking lot of joint usage between the adjoining lots.
F. Dimensions: With respect to dimensions, all of the following shall apply:
1. A parking space reserved for the parking of vehicles shall have a dimension of not less than nine feet (9') in stall width and nineteen feet (19') in
length for ninety degree (90°) parking without front end overhang, plus such additional parking bay stall aisle width based on proven traffic
engineering standards, acceptable to the City and conforming to the minimum standards for parking lot dimensions set forth herein necessary to
afford adequate ingress and egress.
2. The following dimensions are minimum standards for the design of a parking lot for parking stalls without an overhang over an open space area:
MINIMUM STANDARDS
Angle Of Parking1
(A)2
Stall Width
(B)3
Stall Length
(C)
Stall Depth
(D)
One-Way
Aisle
(D)
Two-Way
Aisle
Parallel 9.0' 23.0' n/a 15.0' 24.0'
30° 9.0' 34.5' 17.25' 15.0' 24.0'
45° 9.0' 28.0' 20.0' 15.0' 24.0'
60° 9.0' 24.0' 21.0' 18.0' 24.0'
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 590/687
90° 9.0' 19.0' 19.0' 24.0' 24.0'
Notes:
1. Any parking stalls proposed at any angle other than those specified above shall have a width of 9 feet, and a length and depth sufficient to allow a 9
foot by 19 foot rectangular parking area.
2. Any parking space located parallel to a wall or other solid barrier shall be widened by an additional 2 feet.
3. Where there is front end overhang over an open space area of at least 2 feet, the minimum stall length for a parking space may be reduced 2 feet.
When the front of a parking stall abuts a sidewalk, the minimum width of the sidewalk shall be 6 feet.
G. Surfacing: With respect to surfacing, all of the following shall apply: (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
1. Paving: All off street parking and loading areas and access roadways shall be paved with asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement in
accordance with the specifications as herein set forth. The off street parking of automobiles, vans, campers, trucks, trailers, tractors, recreational
vehicles, boats, construction equipment and any other mobile vehicle equipped for street and highway travel which is not otherwise located within an
approved storage yard in accordance with subsection 9-10-4A8 of this title, shall be on an asphaltic or portland cement concrete paved off street
parking area as required herein. No parking or storage of vehicles within the landscaped open space area of the front yard between the building and
public street right of way, shall be allowed unless otherwise approved by the city council during review of a development request. (Ord. 1860, 3-22-
2010)
2. Curbing: All off street parking areas and associated driveways, access roadways and frontage roads, except driveways for single-family residences,
shall be constructed with permanent, integrally attached portland cement concrete curbing not less than four inches (4") high at any given time, or
curbing of alternate height as approved by the city council; and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within
the area; and shall be so arranged and marked to facilitate and ensure the orderly and safe loading or unloading and parking and storage of selfpropelled
vehicles.
3. Pavement Thickness: The minimum thickness of pavement of the parking area shall be as follows:
a. Portland cement concrete shall have a minimum thickness of five inches (5") and the subgrade shall have a minimum subgrade modulus (k) of
one hundred fifty (150). Additional thickness of portland cement concrete may be utilized to create an equivalent subgrade modulus if the existing
subgrade modulus is less than one hundred fifty (150).
b. Asphaltic concrete shall have a minimum thickness of five and one-half inches (51/2") and the subgrade shall have a minimum California bearing
ratio (CBR) of 5, or equivalent standard measured in proctor. Additional thickness of asphaltic concrete may be utilized to create an equivalent
CBR if the existing CBR is less than 5. Pavement shall be designed in accordance with the Asphalt Institute's "Thickness Design Manual" (MS-1).
4. Subgrade Material: Material utilized in the subgrade shall be well drained and not susceptible to frost boils. The part of the parking area utilized for
driveways, access roadways and frontage roads shall be specifically designed to accommodate the type and load bearing of traffic that will be
utilizing the access roadway.
5. Driveways:
a. Driveway approaches and any other area within the city right of way shall be portland cement concrete per city specifications.
b. Driveways for individual single-family detached residences shall have a minimum thickness of four inches (4") of Portland cement concrete or a
thickness of asphaltic concrete of an equivalent strength. All other driveways shall have a minimum thickness of five inches (5") of Portland cement
concrete or a thickness of asphaltic concrete of an equivalent strength.
6. Testing: A review and report certified by a third party recognized testing agency acceptable to the city shall be submitted which documents the
thickness and compaction of the pavement and its compliance with the above standards.
H. Slope And Drainage: Parking areas shall be designed and improved with grades not to exceed a six percent (6%) slope. All required off street parking
areas shall be so designed that surface water will not drain over any sidewalk or adjacent property. Driveways are recommended not to exceed eight
percent (8%) slope and none shall have grades exceeding ten percent (10%) slope. Driveways shall be graded and drained to dispose of surface water
to the street or public designated stormwater drainage facilities.
I. Striping: All parking spaces, except parking spaces for single-family attached and detached residences, shall be striped in accordance with city
requirements. The striping shall be maintained in a clear and visible manner. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
J. Wheel Stops/Curbing: All off street parking areas and associated driveways, access roadways and frontage roads, except driveways for single-family
attached and detached residences, shall be constructed with permanent, integrally attached, continuous Portland cement concrete curbing of at least
four inches (4") high and six inches (6") wide or of alternate height and width acceptable to the city. Prefabricated portable curb or wheel stops shall not
be considered an acceptable alternative, unless otherwise approved by the city council during review of a development request. The curbing shall be at
least three feet (3') from any wall, fence, property line, walkway, or structure where parking and/or driveways or aisles are located adjacent thereto.
(Ord. 1387, 9-20-1999)
K. Landscaping, Screening, And Open Space: Refer to chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
L. Lighting: With respect to lighting, all of the following shall apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 591/687
1. Any lighting used to illuminate any off street parking or loading area shall be so arranged as to divert the light away from adjoining residential uses or
premises in any residential district and away from the traveled roadway of public streets.
2. Lighting fixtures shall possess sharp cutoff qualities at property lines.
3. Any project that proposes the use of wall pack lighting on the perimeter of the property shall be required to prepare an exterior lighting (photometric)
plan for review and approval by the city.
4. Any lighting which exceeds one foot-candle at the property line shall not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
5. Low pressure sodium lighting fixtures are prohibited.
6. At the discretion of the director of community development, an exterior lighting (photometric) plan may be required according to the following
standard: point by point foot-candle layout based upon a ten foot (10') grid center, extending a minimum of twenty feet (20') outside the property
lines.
M. Maintenance And Security: All parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained with security as a priority to protect the safety of the
users. All required parking facilities shall be permanently maintained, free of litter and debris.
N. Waiver Of Requirements: With respect to a waiver of requirements, all of the following shall apply:
1. The city council reserves the right to waive or modify to a lesser restriction any provision or requirement of off street parking and loading areas
contained in this chapter, provided said waiver or modification does not adversely affect the intent of these regulations to adequately safeguard the
general public and surrounding property.
2. Exceptions may be considered for those uses where special circumstances warrant a change and whereby the modification or waiver is determined
to be in the best interest of the general public. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
9-15-7: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
A. Uses Not Specified: In the case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use
which is mentioned and to which said use is similar shall apply, as determined by the director of community development.
B. Planned Commercial Center: An area to be planned and developed as a single entity, according to applicable standards and regulations, and containing
one or more structures as a single project. Planned commercial centers consist primarily of commercial uses with incidental accessory uses.
1.
Up to 200,000 square feet of
GFA
1 parking space per 225 square feet of GFA
200,001 to 600,000 square
feet of GFA
1 parking space per 250 square feet of GFA
Over 600,001 square feet of
GFA
1 parking space per 220 square feet of GFA, including any and all walkway areas that are leasable, rentable,
or usable for any and all booths and kiosks.
(Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
2. In planned commercial centers, if any restaurant, coffee shops, drinking places, or office uses individually exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross
floor area (GFA) of the center, that portion in excess of ten percent (10%) shall be calculated at its individual requirement as specified in this chapter.
If an event venue is located within a planned commercial center, the parking requirement will be equal to one space for each fifty (50) square feet of
assembly area in addition to the parking required for the planned commercial center. (Ord. 2123, 11-2-2015)
C. Multi-Tenant Office Building: Up to 20,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 200 square feet
Over 20,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
D. Multi-Tenant Industrial Building: 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
E. Individual Uses Not Part Of A Planned Commercial Center:
Residential
SIC Code/Land Use
Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use
are the minimum that must be met)
Single-family attached and detached
dwelling
*2 spaces per dwelling unit
*Tandem parking allowed
*1 space per 100 square feet of GFA for a building or portion of a building designated for multipurpose
recreational uses
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 592/687
Multi-family dwelling *Efficiency apartment - 1.5 spaces per unit
1 - 2 bedroom units - 2.0 spaces per unit
3+ bedroom units - 2.5 spaces per unit
*A maximum of 0.67 covered space per unit shall be allowed to count toward meeting the required number
of parking spaces
*1 space per 300 square feet of GFA for lease management offices
*1 space per 50 square feet of GFA for a building or portion of a building designated for multipurpose
recreational uses or assembly space, e.g., clubhouse
Manufactured housing park *2 spaces per unit
*1 space per 10 units required as visitor parking
*Tandem parking allowed
*1 space per 300 square feet of GFA for lease management offices
*1 space per 50 square feet of GFA for a building or portion of a building designated for multipurpose
recreational uses or assembly space, e.g., clubhouse
805Congregate care facility *1 space per 4 beds
*1 space per 2 employees on the maximum shift
Residential daycare facility (7 - 12
children/clients)
*2 spaces in addition to those required for the primary residence
Senior housing *1 space per unit
*1 space per 100 square feet of GFA for a building or portion of a building designated for multipurpose
recreational uses
7011Bed and breakfast/short term
rental/long term rental
*2 spaces required for the dwelling unit
*1 space per guestroom
704Dormitory/fraternity/sorority *1 space per 100 square feet of GFA
Agriculture, Forestry, And Fishing
SIC Code/Land Use
Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that
must be met)
01Agricultural production - crops
02Agricultural production - livestock and animal specialties
07Agriculture services (except 074, 075, 0752, 076, 078)
*1 space per employee
074Veterinary services
075Animal services, except veterinary (except 0752)
*1 space per 200 square feet of GFA
0752Animal specialty services, except veterinary (includes: kennels, grooming,
training, etc.)
*Up to 50,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
*Over 50,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 250 square feet
076Farm labor and management services
078Landscape and horticulture services
*Up to 20,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 200 square feet
*Over 20,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
08Forestry
09Fishing, hunting and trapping
*1 space per employee
Mining
SIC Code/Land Use
Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that must be met)
12Coal mining
13Oil and gas extraction
14Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic materials
*1 space per employee
Construction
SIC Code/Land Use
Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that must be
met)
15, 16, 17 Construction and contractors (offices only) *Up to 20,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 200 square feet
*Over 20,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
15, 16, 17Construction and contractor's operations and storage
yards
*1 space per 10,000 square feet of GLA
*For office areas:
Up to 20,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 200 square feet
Over 20,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
Manufacturing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 593/687
SIC Code/Land Use Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that must be met)
20Food and kindred products *3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
2082Malt beverages (breweries) in conjunction
with taproom
*3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA of the brewery plus 1.5 spaces per 100 square feet of
GFA of the taproom/beer parlor
2085Distillery with tasting room *3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for the distillery plus 1.5 spaces per 100 square feet of
GFA for the area of the distillery where the tasting room is located
21Tobacco products
22Textile mill products
23Apparel and other finished products from
fabrics and similar materials
24Lumber and wood products
25Furniture and fixtures
26Paper and allied products
27Printing, publishing and allied industries
28Chemicals and allied products
29Petroleum refining and related industries
30Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products
31Leather and leather products
32Stone, clay and glass products
33Primary metal industries (e.g., blast
furnaces, foundries, etc.)
34Fabricated metal products, except
machinery and transportation equipment
*3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
35Industrial and commercial machinery and
computer equipment
*1 space per 250 square feet of GFA
36Electrical and electronic machinery,
equipment, and supplies (except 3672)
*3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
3672 Printed circuit boards *1 space per 75 square feet of GFA
37Transportation equipment
38Instruments and related products
39Miscellaneous manufacturing industries
*3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Transportation And Public Utilities
SIC Code/Land Use
Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that must be
met)
40Railroad transportation *1 space per 200 square feet of GFA
41Local and suburban transit and interurban highway passenger
transportation (except bus terminal operation)
*1 space per 500 square feet of GFA
-Bus terminal operations *1 space per 300 square feet of GFA
42Trucking and warehousing
4212Local trucking without storage
4213Trucking, except local
*1 space per 500 square feet of GFA
4214Local trucking with storage
4215Courier services, except by air
4221Farm product warehousing and storage
4222Refrigerated warehousing
4225General warehousing and storage (except self-service storage
facility)
*Up to 10,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 500 square feet
*Over 10,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 5,000 square feet
-Exterior unit access self-service storage facility *1 space per 20,000 square feet of GFA
*1 space per 50 vehicle or boat storage spaces, with a minimum of 3
spaces
-Indoor access self-service storage facility *1 space per 200 square feet of GFA for office area
*1 space per 50 units or 1 space per 10,000 square feet of GFA,
whichever is greater or a minimum of 3 spaces
*Demonstrate parking availability for reuse of the building for a common
use in the zoning district in which it is located
4226Special warehousing and storage, not elsewhere classified (e.g., fur
storage, petroleum and chemical bulk stations)
-Document and office records storage
-Household goods and furniture storage
423Terminal and joint terminal maintenance facilities for motor freight
transportation
*Up to 10,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 500 square feet
*Over 10,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 5,000 square feet
43U.S. postal service *4 spaces per customer service station
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 594/687
*2 spaces per 3 employees
*1 space per company vehicle
4493Marinas *0.5 space per berth or mooring
45Transportation by air *1 space per 200 square feet of GFA
46Pipelines *2 spaces per distribution or maintenance facility
47Transportation services *1 space per 5,000 square feet of GFA
48Communications (except transmitting and receiving towers and/or
dishes)
*Up to 20,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 200 square feet
*Over 20,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
-Transmitting and receiving towers and/or dishes *2 spaces per tower or dish
49Electric, gas, and sanitary services *1 space per employee
Wholesale Trade
S.I.C. Code/Land Use
Requirement in all Districts except VJHB
(all requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that must be met)
50Wholesale Trade - Durable Goods
51Wholesale Trade - Non Durable Goods
*Up to 10,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 500 s.f.
*Over 10,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 5,000 s.f.
Retail
SIC Code/Land Use
Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that must be met)
52Building Materials, Hardware, Garden Supply and Mobile Home Dealers
521Lumber and Other Building Material
Dealers
*1 space per 1,000 s.f. of G.F.A.
*1 space per 2,000 s.f. of outside product storage
523Paint, Glass and Wallpaper Stores *Up to 50,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
*Over 50,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 250 s.f.
525Hardware Stores (may include lumber and
building materials)
*Up to 50,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
*Over 50,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 250 s.f.
*1 space per 2,000 s.f. of outside product storage
526Retail Nurseries and Garden Stores *1 space per 200 s.f. of G.F.A.
*2 space per 2,000 s.f. of outdoor display area
53General Merchandise Stores *Up to 50,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
*Over 50,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 250 s.f.
54Food Stores (except 541) *Up to 10,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 275 s.f.
*Over 10,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 300 s.f.
541Grocery Stores *Up to 50,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
*Over 50,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 250 s.f.
-Convenience Stores *1 space per 200 s.f. of G.F.A.
*1.5 spaces per 100 s.f. of G.F.A. for food areas with seating
*1 space per pump island for any gasoline sales
*1 space adjacent to each pump shall be counted toward meeting the parking requirement
55Automobile Dealers and Service Stations
551New and Used Car Dealers
552Used Car Dealers
555Boat Dealers
556Recreational Vehicle Dealers
*1 space per 250 s.f. of G.F.A. for showroom and office
*1 space per 2,000 s.f. of outdoor display area
*1 space per 300 s.f. of G.F.A. for vehicle repair
*1 space per 500 s.f. of G.F.A. for parts department
*Paved surface area shall be provided for each automobile on display for sale
553Auto and Home Supply Stores *Up to 50,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 595/687
*Over 50,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 250 s.f.
554Gasoline Service Stations-without repair *2 spaces for employees
*1 space per pump island
*1 space adjacent to each pump shall be counted toward meeting the parking requirement
*1 space per 200 s.f. of G.F.A. for any convenience retail
-Gasoline service stations with repair *3 spaces for employees not associated with repair service
*1 space per pump island
*1 space adjacent to each pump shall be counted toward meeting the parking requirement
*3 spaces per service bay
*1 space per service vehicle
*1 space per 200 square feet of GFA for any convenience retail
-Drive-through oil change/tune up *3 spaces per service bay
*3 space queuing lane per bay
56Apparel and accessory stores *Up to 50,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
*Over 50,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 250 square feet
57Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment
stores
*3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
58Eating and drinking places
5812Restaurant - takeout only *1 space per 500 square feet of GFA
*11 queuing spaces per drive-through (5 of which shall be designated for the ordering station if it is
separate from the pick up window)
-Restaurant - sit down fast food *1.5 spaces per 100 square feet of GFA
*11 queuing spaces per drive-through (5 of which shall be designated for the ordering station if it is
separate from the pick up window)
-Restaurant - sit down, no fast food,
delicatessen/donut shop
*1 space per 100 square feet of GFA
-Coffee shop - with or without drive-through *1 space per 100 square feet of GFA
*5 queuing spaces per drive-through (4 spaces must clearly be out of the main traffic lanes of the
site)
5813Drinking places *1.5 spaces per 100 square feet of GFA
-Taprooms/beer parlor in conjunction with a
brewery
*1.5 spaces per 100 square feet of GFA of the taproom/beer parlor in addition to that parking
required of SIC 20: food and kindred products
-Tasting room in conjunction with a distillery *1.5 spaces per 100 square feet of GFA of the tasting room in addition to that parking required of
the distillery
59Miscellaneous retail (except 598 and 5999-
053 fireworks)
*Up to 50,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
*Over 50,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 250 square feet
598Fuel dealers *Up to 20,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 200 square feet
*Over 20,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
5999-053 Fireworks *10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of sales area
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate And Other Office Uses Not Elsewhere Classified
SIC Code/Land Use
Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that must be met)
60Depository institutions (banks)
61Nondepository credit institutions
62Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchange and
services
63Insurance carriers
64Insurance agents, brokers, and services
65Real estate office
67Holding and other investment offices
*Up to 20,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 200 square feet
*Over 20,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
*3 queuing spaces per drive-through lane
Services
SIC Code/Land Use
Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that must be met)
70Hotels, rooming houses, camps, and other lodging places
701Hotels and motels
*1 space for each guestroom
*1 space for each employee on the maximum shift
*Additional parking spaces are required in accordance with the applicable
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 596/687
standards for the accessory retail/service/entertainment areas (such as eating and
drinking places, convention, conference and meeting facilities)
703Camps and recreational vehicles parks *2 spaces for management and visitors
*1 space per campsite or RV site
72Personal services
7211Power laundries, family and commercial
7212Garment pressing, and agents for laundries and dry
cleaners
7213Linen supply
7216Dry cleaning plants, except rug cleaning
7217Carpet and upholstery cleaning
7218Industrial launderers
7219Laundry and garment service, not elsewhere classified
*1 space per 500 square feet of GFA
7215Coin operated laundries and dry cleaning
722Photographic studio, portrait
725Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors
*Up to 50,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
*Over 50,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 250 square feet
723Beauty shops *3 spaces per beautician station
724Barbershops *2 spaces per chair
726Funeral service, crematories
7291Tax services
7299Miscellaneous personal services, not elsewhere
classified (except event venues [see chapter 10,
"Performance Standards", of this title] and wedding chapels)
*Up to 50,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
*Over 50,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 250 square feet
-Wedding chapels *1 space per 4 fixed seats
(18 linear inches of bench = 1 seat)
*1 space per 50 square feet of assembly area
73Business services (except 734, 738) *1 space per 200 square feet of GFA
734Services to dwellings and other buildings *3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
7381Detectives, guard and armored car services
7382Security systems services
7389Business services, not elsewhere classified (office
related)
*Up to 20,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 200 square feet
*Over 20,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
7383News syndicates
7384Photofinish labs
7389Business services, not elsewhere classified
(manufacturing related)
*1 space per 200 square feet of GFA
75Automotive repair, services, and parking
751Automotive rental and leasing, without drivers *1 space per 1,000 square feet of GFA
*1 space per 2,000 square feet of GLA
7542Car washes - full service *1 space per 3 employees on maximum shift
*Queuing capacity equal to 2 times the capacity of the washing operation (length of
the washing conveyor, in feet, divided by 20)
-Car washes - self-service *2 spaces per stall. The wash bay itself does not count as a space to meet the
requirement
*2 space queuing lane for each stall
753Automotive repair shops
7549Automotive services, except repair and car washes (e.g.,
diagnostic centers, towing service, etc.)
*3 spaces for management and employees not associated with repair service
*1 space per 300 square feet of GFA
*3 spaces per service bay
*1 space per service vehicle
76Miscellaneous repair services
762Electrical repair shops
763Watch, clock, and jewelry repair
764Reupholstery and furniture repair
769Miscellaneous repair shops and related services (listed
below)
-Professional instrument repair services
-Hospital equipment repair services
-Scientific equipment repair services
-Recreational sporting equipment repair services
-Musical instrument repair services
-Lock and key services
-Household appliance repair services
-Cleaning services
-General household repair services
-Leather goods and luggage repair services
*1 space per 200 square feet of GFA
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 597/687
-Customizing services
-Gun services
-Window blind repair services
-Hobby and collectors' services
-Photographic and optical goods equipment repair services
769Miscellaneous Repair Shops and Related Services (listed
below)
-Tank Repair and Cleaning Services
-Boiler and Heating Repair Services
-Industrial Equipment Services
-Nautical Repair Services
-Metal Reshaping and Replating Services
-Recreational Vehicle Repair Services
-Agricultural Equipment Repair Services
-Aircraft and Heavy Equipment Repair Services
-Tool Repair Services
-Miscellaneous Automotive Repair Services
-Miscellaneous Building Item Repair Services
*1 space per 400 s.f. of G.F.A.
78Motion Pictures
781Motion Picture Productions and Allied Services *Up to 20,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 200 s.f
*Over 20,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
*Production studio- 1 space per 500 s.f.
area of G.F.A.
*Seating area- 1 space per 4 fixed
seats
782Motion Picture Distribution and Allied Services *1 space per 500 s.f. of G.F.A.
7832Motion Picture Theaters, Except Drive-In *1 space per 4 fixed seats
7833Drive-In Motion Pictures *1 space per customer speaker
*1 space per 3 employees
784Videotape Rentals *Up to 50,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
*Over 50,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 250 s.f.
*3 space queuing lane for a drive thru drop box
79Amusement and Recreation Services
791Dance, Studios, Schools, and Halls *1 space per 100 s.f. of G.F.A.
792Theatrical Productions (Except Motion Picture), Bands,
Orchestras, Entertainers, Auditoriums and Theaters
*1 space per 4 fixed seats
(18 lineal inches of bench = 1 seat)
793Bowling Centers *3 spaces per lane
*1 space per 200 s.f. of floor area for associated eating and drinking places
7941Professional Sports Clubs and Promotions *1 space per 200 s.f. of G.F.A.
7948Racing, Including Track Operations *30 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of G.F.A.
7991Physical Fitness Facilities/Health Club *1 space per 150 s.f. of G.F.A.
*Additional parking spaces are required in accordance with the applicable
standards for the accessory retail/service/entertainment areas
-Golf Courses *6 spaces per hole
*1 space per 200 s.f. of floor area for associated eating and drinking places
*1 space per 250 s.f. of floor area designated for conference, banquet, and
assembly rooms
7993Coin-Operated Amusement Devices (Video Arcades) *1 space per 200 s.f. of G.F.A.
*1 space per 3 persons at maximum capacity
7996Amusement Parks *6 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of G.F.A.
*6 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of G.L.A. used for outdoor recreation
7997Membership Sports and Recreation Clubs
7999Amusement and Recreation Services, Not Elsewhere
Classified (e.g., circus companies, fairs)
*1 space per 150 s.f. of G.F.A.
*Additional parking spaces are required in accordance with the applicable
standards for the accessory retail/service/entertainment areas
-Arenas, Stadiums, Athletic Fields, and Gymnasiums *1 space per 4 fixed seats
(18 lineal inches of bench = 1 seat)
-Driving Ranges *3 spaces, plus 1 space per tee
-Gambling Facilities *1 space per 200 s.f. of G.F.A.
*1 space per 3 persons at maximum capacity
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 598/687
-Miniature Golf Courses *1.5 spaces per hole
-Swimming Pools, public, neighborhood or private (does not
include backyard pools for personal use)
*1 space per 40 s.f. of pool area
-Tennis Courts *4 spaces per court
80Health Services
801Offices and Clinics of Doctors of Medicine
802Offices and Clinics of Dentists
803Offices and Clinics of Doctors of Osteopathy
804Offices and Clinics of Other Health Practitioners
*1 space per 200 s.f. of G.F.A.
805Nursing and Personal Care Facilities *1 space per 4 beds
*1 space per 2 employees on the maximum shift
806Hospitals *1 space per bed
807Medical and Dental Laboratories
809Miscellaneous Health and Allied Services, Not Elsewhere
Classified
*1 space per 200 s.f. of G.F.A.
808Home Health Care Services *Up to 20,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 200 s.f.
*Over 20,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
81Legal Services *Up to 20,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 200 s.f.
*Over 20,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
82Educational Services
821Elementary Schools
Junior High Schools
*1 parking space per employee
*1 parking space per 10 student desks or classroom seating capacity
*25 space pickup/drop off queuing lane
*School auditoriums and gymnasiums - 1 space per 8 seats (18 lineal inches of
bench = 1 seat)
-Secondary Schools
822Colleges and Universities
824Vocational Schools
829Schools and Educational Services, Not Elsewhere
Classified
*1 parking space per employee
*1 parking space per 2.5 student desks or classroom seating capacity
*School auditoriums and gymnasiums - 1 space per 8 seats (18 lineal inches of
bench = 1 seat)
823Libraries *1 space per 300 s.f. of G.F.A.
83Social Services
832Individual and Family Social Services (except Adult Day
Care, Senior, Use, Community and Neighborhood Centers)
839Social Services, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g., advocacy
groups, community development groups)
*Up to 20,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 200 s.f.
*Over 20,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
-Adult Day Care, Senior, Use, Community and Neighborhood
Centers
*1 space per 50 s.f. of assembly area
833Job Training and Vocational Rehabilitation Services *1 parking space per employee
*1 parking space per 3 student desks or classroom seating capacity
835Child Day Care Services *6 spaces, or 1.5 spaces per 10 clients at maximum capacity, whichever is greater
*1 space for vans or buses
836Residential Care *1 space per 4 beds
*1 space per 2 employees on the maximum shift
84Museums, Art Galleries *1 space per 300 s.f. of G.F.A.
-Botanical and Zoological Gardens *1 space per 2,000 s.f. of G.A.
86Membership Organizations (except 864 with Food/Drink
Service; 866)
*Up to 20,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 200 s.f.
*Over 20,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
864Civic, Social, and Fraternal Associations with Food/Drink
Service
*Up to 20,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 200 s.f.
*Over 20,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
*Additional parking spaces are required in accordance with the applicable
standards for the accessory retail/service/entertainment areas
866Religious Organizations *1 space per 4 fixed seats
(18 lineal inches of bench = 1 seat)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 599/687
*1 space per 50 s.f. of assembly area
*Additional parking requirements for any day care, preschool, or school uses may
be required at the discretion of the Community Development Director
87Engineering, Accounting, Research, Management and
Related Services
*Up to 20,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 200 s.f.
*Over 20,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
89Services, Not Elsewhere Included *Up to 20,000 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 200 s.f.
*Over 20,001 s.f.
of G.F.A.- 1 space per 225 s.f.
Public Administration
SIC Code/Land Use
Requirement In All Districts Except VJHB
(All requirements listed for each land use are the minimum that must be
met)
92Justice, public order, and safety *1 space per 175 square feet of GFA
93Finance, taxation and monetary policy
94Administration of human resource programs
95Administration of environmental quality and housing
programs
96Administration of economic programs
*Up to 20,000 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 200 square feet
*Over 20,001 square feet of GFA - 1 space per 225 square feet
(Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996; amd. Ord. 1716, 11-20-2006; Ord. 2085, 3-9-2015; Ord. 2113, 9-8-2015; Ord. 2123, 11-2-2015; Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2145,
5-16-2016; Ord. 2225, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2265, 12-11-2017)
9-15-8: GENERAL OFF STREET LOADING REGULATIONS:
No off street loading spaces are required. If off street loading spaces are provided, they shall be in accordance with all of the following standards:
A. Each loading space shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width and twenty feet (20') in length for loading spaces not requiring loading dock access, and
fifty feet (50') in length for loading dock access for trucks. They shall be designed in a manner acceptable to the City providing adequate space for
loading access.
B. Such loading area may occupy part of a rear yard, side yard or court space, provided the loading area and access roadways meet all setbacks required
of off street parking areas as set forth in this chapter.
C. Loading yards and loading docks shall be buffered from general public view, public streets, public buildings, recreation facilities, parks, schools, places
of assembly for worship, residential zoned districts and uses, and screened from all other adjoining properties of contrasting and conflicting uses.
D. All loading yards and accesses to loading yards and loading docks shall be paved with asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement in accordance
with surfacing requirements set forth in the design standards of this chapter.
E. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting fixtures shall be energy efficient and in
scale with the height and use of the structure. Any illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed away from adjoining properties and public
rights-of-way.
F. Loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for loading only. The striping shall be permanently maintained in
a clear and visible manner.
G. Continuous concrete curbing of at least six inches (6") high and six inches (6") wide shall be provided for all loading spaces, and shall be set at least
three feet (3') from any wall, fence, property line, walkway, or structure. Wheel stops are not allowed as a substitute for curbing.
H. Loading areas and docks shall be permitted only in rear and side lot areas.
I. Loading doors shall not open toward public streets.
J. Sufficient space for turning and maneuvering loading vehicles shall be provided on the site.
K. Loading spaces shall be located and designed so that trucks shall not back into or from a public street or alley.
L. No part of an alley or street shall be used for loading except as designated by the City for loading.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 600/687
M. No area may be utilized and counted both as a required parking space and a loading dock. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
Chapter 16
TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
9-16-1: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to temporary use permit applications submitted to the City. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
These regulations prescribe the conditions through which temporary uses of limited duration may be permitted to occur within the City on private property,
such as agricultural, commercial, and civic activities (e.g., Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales, landscape material sales, sidewalk and tent sales, grand
openings, and planned events held on private properties that do not create anticipated significant impacts to City property or right-of-way), and for which it
is unnecessary to include City staff in the preparation, planning, and coordination of the requested temporary use.
The intent is to allow certain uses and activities on an interim or limited basis that would not be allowed on a permanent basis on private property. This
chapter establishes minimum standards for the operation of temporary uses in a manner which will promote the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons,
employees, and general public, which utilize or would be affected by the establishment of the temporary use. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-3: APPLICATION AND PERMIT PROCESSING:
A temporary use permit shall be required for all temporary uses that relate to the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. A temporary use permit must be
applied for and issued by the City prior to the commencement of any temporary use. Applications must be submitted not less than ten (10) calendar days
prior to the proposed start date of the temporary use, unless the City decides to waive the deadline. The City reserves the right to reject any applications
that have not been timely submitted to the City. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage, sponsor, or participate in any temporary use
described herein without having first applied for and obtained a permit in accordance with this chapter. The Director of Development Services or designee
may, from time to time, specify the form of the temporary use permit application. Applications for said temporary use permit shall be secured from the
Development Services Department, who shall cause the application to be directed to all concerned City departments and divisions for review and
comment. Receiving approval of a temporary use permit from the City shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the applicant's responsibility to
obtain any additional permits, licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, State, and Federal regulations. The City reserves the right to impose
special guidelines and restrictions for any temporary use based upon the nature of the proposed use, the proposed location of the use, and the anticipated
attendance of the use. City staff shall be responsible for the issuance of temporary use permits. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-4: PRIOR DETERMINATION FOR TEMPORARY USE PERMIT APPROVAL:
The Director of Development Services or designee shall only approve an application for a temporary use permit if all of the following findings can be made:
A. The proposed temporary use will be compatible with adjacent uses and will not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood by means of odor, noise,
dust, or other nuisance.
B. The additional parking required by the temporary use will be provided on site, if applicable, or adequate street parking is available in the immediate
area.
C. Increased traffic caused by the temporary use will not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood or City at large.
D. The proposed temporary use is consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan, this Code, and any other applicable, local, State, or Federal regulations.
(Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-5: USES PERMITTED WITH A TEMPORARY USE PERMIT:
A. The following uses are eligible for a temporary use permit, provided they satisfy the following criteria specified in section 9-16-7 of this chapter:
Grand openings and planned events held on private properties that do not create anticipated significant impacts to City property or right-of-way.
Group assembly activities (e.g., carnivals, fairs, rodeos, sport events, concerts, worship services, and shows).
Parking lot sales, sidewalk sales (private sidewalks only), clearance sales, or other temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Director of Development
Services or designee, are similar to the uses listed in this section. Parking lot sale of fireworks is not permitted under a temporary use permit.
Retail sales of Christmas trees.
Retail sales of landscape nursery material.
Retail sales of pumpkins.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 601/687
Stands for the sale of agricultural produce.
Temporary concrete and asphalt mixing and storage facilities in accordance with regulations elsewhere in this chapter.
Temporary food and beverage uses not regulated as a mobile food unit under the provisions of title 3, "Business And Licensing", of this Code.
Other temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Director of Development Services or designee, are similar to the uses listed in this section. (Ord.
2225, 5-30-2017)
B. Garage sales are exempt from these provisions, provided they do not occur any more frequently than one (1) 3-day event per one hundred eighty (180)
day period. Garage sales occurring more frequently shall be considered a commercial retail sales business in a residential zone, which is prohibited.
C. A "temporary use" may be defined as short term or long term. A "short term" use shall be defined as those uses with a maximum duration of two (2)
consecutive days or less. A "long term" use shall be defined as those uses with a duration of more than two (2) consecutive days. The City may issue
multiple short term temporary use permits for consecutive two (2) day periods without declaring the use to be long term, subject to, not to exceed eight
(8) events within a calendar year limitation provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
9-16-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
Each temporary use shall:
A. Permit: Be described in a permit thereby issued by the Director of Development Services or designee prior to commencement of the use. This permit
shall be in addition to all other licenses, permits, or approvals otherwise required by any governmental entity.
B. Parking Spaces:
1. The number of additional parking spaces required, if any, and the location of such additional parking spaces, for the temporary activity shall be
determined by the Director of Development Services or designee. The number of permanent parking spaces allowed to be used under the short term
temporary use permit shall be reviewed and determined by the Director of Development Services or designee. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-
2014)
2. The maximum number of permanent parking spaces allowed to be used for the operation of a long term temporary use shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the parking included on a site plan that was approved by the City to be counted toward the allowable size of the proposed use or
twenty percent (20%) of the site area, whichever is more restrictive. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
C. Preventing Dust: All unimproved parking areas and main walk areas shall be kept damp or shall be covered with a material to prevent the rise of dust.
D. Clean Sites: All sites shall be completely cleaned of debris and temporary structures including, but not limited to: trash receptacles, signs, stands, poles,
electric wiring, or any other fixtures and appurtenances or equipment connected therewith, within five (5) days after the termination of the temporary
use. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
E. Cleanup Bond: Except as provided in this section, a bond or cash deposit shall be deposited with the Department of Development Services to assure
adequate cleanup of temporary uses that occur on vacant or undeveloped lots, and/or involving the construction or placement of temporary structures.
The amount of the bond or cash deposit shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. Temporary uses located in fully developed shopping
centers will be exempt from bonding or cash deposit, with the exception of uses that involve construction or placement of a temporary structure, and
any long term temporary food and beverage facilities shall be required to post a bond or cash deposit.
F. Sanitary Facilities: When determined necessary, sanitary facilities, either portable or permanent, shall be made available to all employees, attendants,
customers, and participants of the temporary use during its operational hours, as approved by the Director of Development Services or designee, in
concurrence with the City Engineer and the County Health Department, unless stipulated otherwise in this chapter. If the restroom facilities are located
within an adjacent building, the written authorization of the owner of the adjacent building shall be required, specifically stating that the restroom
facilities will be made available to the employees, attendants, customers, and participants at all times during the hours of operation of the temporary
use. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
G. Proof Of Ownership Or Permission Required: Proof of ownership, or a signed letter from either the property owner or their authorized representative, for
the property on which the activity is to take place, shall be presented at the time the temporary use permit is requested.
H. Conform To Setback Requirements: All temporary structures including, but not limited to, greenhouses, trailers, and mobile homes, shall conform to the
zoning setback requirements unless stated otherwise in this chapter.
I. Multiple, Concurrent Temporary Uses: Multiple concurrent temporary uses on the same property shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-
2014)
9-16-7: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
A. Retail Sales Of Christmas Trees:
1. Permitted zone locations: All commercial districts and the agricultural/open space district (OS).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 602/687
2. Maximum duration: Forty (40) calendar days prior to December 25.
B. Retail Sales Of Pumpkins:
1. Permitted zone locations: All commercial districts and the agricultural/open space district (OS).
2. Maximum duration: October 1 through November 1.
C. Lot And Sidewalk Commercial Activities:
1. Permitted Zone Locations: All commercial districts. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
2. Maximum Duration: Two (2) consecutive days, not to exceed eight (8) events within a calendar year. This time limitation shall be accordingly reduced
if any grand openings or planned events, pursuant to subsection D of this section, have occurred within the same calendar year. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-
2016)
3. Setbacks: All merchandise, trucks, trailers, and other equipment shall be set back a minimum number of feet equal to the parking lot setback, and
none of these items shall be placed closer to the right of way than the parking lot. In an area where there is no parking lot, the distance shall be equal
to or greater than the parking lot setback required by the zoning ordinance for that district.
4. Area Of Operation: The area of the temporary use operation shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet and no dimension shall exceed forty
(40) linear feet.
D. Grand Openings And Planned Events Held On Private Properties That Do Not Create Anticipated Significant Impacts To City Property Or Right Of Way:
1. Permitted zone locations: All zoning districts. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
2. Maximum duration: Two (2) consecutive days, not to exceed eight (8) events within a calendar year. This time limitation shall be accordingly reduced
if any lot or sidewalk commercial activities, pursuant to subsection C of this section, have occurred within the same calendar year. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-
2016)
3. Other: All such events shall be conducted by a business located on the property.
E. Group Assembly Activities:
1. Permitted Zone Locations: Any zoning district.
2. Maximum Duration: Fourteen (14) consecutive days, not to exceed four (4) events within a calendar year.
3. Exception: Upon approval of the director of development services or designee, the number of events in the Valley Junction historic business district
may exceed four (4) within a calendar year.
4. Hours Of Operation: Residential zones, seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. except on Fridays and Saturdays to twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight with approval of the chief of police; all other zones as determined by the director of development services or designee. (Ord. 2008,
10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
F. Real Estate Sales Offices And Model Homes: (Rep. by Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
G. Agricultural Produce Stands:
1. Permitted zone locations: Any zoning district.
2. Termination: Stands and displays shall be removed when not used for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-
2014)
H. Construction Yards And Offices: (Rep. by Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
I. Caretaker's Dwelling: (Rep. by Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
J. Retail Sales Of Landscape Nursery Materials:
1. Permitted Zone Locations: All commercial districts.
2. Maximum Duration:
a. Spring sales: March 15 - July 15.
b. Fall sales: September 1 - October 31.
3. Restrictions Of Merchandise And Products: This use is limited to the display of green goods, i.e., living plants and associated garden products.
Associated garden products may include:
a. Bagged bulk materials such as topsoil, mulch, compost, peat, and fertilizer.
b. Garden pavers, stone, and prefabricated stepping stones.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 603/687
c. Birdbaths or similar lawn ornaments as a minor portion of the products displayed.
d. Other products determined to be consistent with the intent of this subsection J with the approval of the director of development services or
designee.
4. Prohibited Merchandise And Products: The following items and products are strictly prohibited as part of the merchandise for sale or displayed as
part of a temporary garden center:
a. Garden tractors, lawn mowers, or other motorized lawn/garden equipment.
b. Fencing, deck materials, landscape timbers, and concrete.
c. Trailers, wagons, carts, and wheelbarrows.
d. Lawn furniture, patio furniture, grills, benches, hot tubs, and play structures.
e. Sheds, playhouses, storage cabinets, and swimming pools.
f. Any other products or merchandise that the director of development services or designee determined to be inconsistent with the intent of this
subsection J.
5. Safety Standards: In order to promote the safety of the patrons of these facilities, the following shall be required:
a. Bulk material shall be neatly stacked no higher than forty eight inches (48") above the pavement.
b. All sales areas shall be separated from vehicular uses by the placement of a fence, or barrier acceptable to the director of development services
or designee to prevent pedestrian and vehicular conflicts. If a barrier is of an open nature where patrons can reach through and obtain access to
the merchandise, a four foot (4') walkway shall be located adjacent to the barrier to prevent patrons from standing outside the barrier in trafficways
to shop.
c. The door openings for any greenhouses, shade structures, or similar enclosure shall have a minimum ten foot (10') setback from drive aisles
where an opening in the barrier is provided aligned with the door of the structure.
d. Where openings in the barriers occur for pedestrian access, sight visibility shall be maintained so that vehicles can clearly see pedestrians
approaching the opening from a distance of no less than fifty feet (50').
e. Temporary drive aisles shall be maintained at a minimum twenty four feet (24') width for two-way traffic and shall be delineated by the placement
of traffic barriers, fencing, or some other physical marker that clearly informs drivers of the end of the parking area and the start of the drive aisle.
A clear line of sight shall be maintained at the entrance and exit of the temporary drive aisles.
f. Vehicle loading areas shall be located in an area that minimizes pedestrian and vehicle conflict and provides for the safe loading of merchandise
and vehicle access to and from the traffic lanes to the loading area, preferably without backing movements.
6. Application For Temporary Garden Center Permit: Application for a temporary garden center permit shall be made on the prescribed form(s)
provided by the department of development services. The application shall be accompanied by the prescribed number of copies of a project plan and
such other detailed elevations, plans, and other information as may be required to adequately evaluate the proposed use.
A plan of the layout of the proposed use shall be submitted to the development services department with the application on a base plan prepared in
accordance with the site plan requirements of the city. The proposed layout of the garden center area may be drawn onto a copy of a previously
approved site plan for the temporary use permit submittal. The layout plan shall identify the following:
a. The area on the site proposed to be utilized as part of the temporary garden center and associated sales areas.
b. The areas dedicated to the display of green goods, i.e., flowers, trees, and shrubs and the area of the site dedicated to bulk material storage.
c. Proposed modifications to the traffic patterns and methods proposed to notify patrons and identify the temporary traffic pattern changes, i.e.,
signage, traffic cones, fencing, and barriers.
d. Proposed vehicle loading zone.
e. Proposed temporary barriers or corral with an architectural elevation, photo, or sketch of the barriers' proposed construction.
f. Location of electrical connection and water connection, if applicable.
7. Waste Disposal: The applicant shall provide, as determined by the director of development services or designee, adequate facilities for disposal of
trash, waste, pallets, dead plants, broken bags, and empty plant transport and display racks.
8. Restroom Facilities: Permanent restroom facilities shall be provided in an adjacent building at all times during the temporary use activity. No portable
restroom facilities shall be allowed.
9. Indemnification And Proof Of Insurance: The owner or operator of any long term temporary use shall provide evidence of comprehensive general
liability coverage and contractual liability insurance by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of Iowa in the limits of at least one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each personal injury accident and/or death; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each aggregate personal injury
and/or death; and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each property damage accident. The evidence shall name the city as a coinsured and shall
state that it cannot be canceled or materially altered without giving the city at least thirty (30) days' written notice by registered mail, return receipt
requested.
The owner or operator of a temporary garden center, or the property owner, shall execute an agreement, acceptable to the city, which indemnifies
and holds harmless the city from any and all liability, damages, claims, costs, expenses, interest, and reasonable attorney fees relating to the garden
center and associated facilities on the property.
10. Electrical Service: Any electrical service shall be provided as follows: a) overhead power connection with a minimum clearance above grade of
fourteen feet (14'); b) installation of an underground conduit; or c) other method acceptable to the city. The use of an overhead connection shall only
be allowed in those areas where overhead electrical service currently exists in the area. Use of extension cords, cables or wires laying on the ground
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 604/687
or otherwise connected to a power source is expressly prohibited for long term garden center uses. An electrical permit shall be obtained prior to any
electrical installation or connection.
11. Removal: At the expiration of the temporary use permit, any structures, barricades, shelving, pallets, leftover merchandise, or other facilities
associated with the temporary use shall be removed from the site in accordance with provisions stated in section 9-16-6, "General Regulations", of
this chapter. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
K. Temporary Food And Beverage Facilities: Short term temporary food and beverage facilities that are not regulated as a mobile food unit shall comply
with the regulations stated elsewhere in this chapter for lot and sidewalk commercial activities, grand openings, and planned events held on private
properties that do not create anticipated significant impacts to city property or right of way.
Long term temporary food and beverage facilities are temporary facilities that dispense food or beverages from a specific location for a period longer
than would be allowed under the short term temporary use regulations and which are not on wheels and are not easily portable or movable, such as a
shed or kiosk. Mobile or movable temporary food and beverage facilities (i.e., mobile food units and pushcarts) are regulated under title 3, "Business
And Licensing", of this code.
Long term temporary food and beverage facilities shall comply with the following standards:
1. Permitted Zone Locations: All nonresidential zoning districts.
2. Maximum Duration: April 1 through October 31 of a calendar year, inclusive.
3. Maximum Square Footage Of Structure: One hundred sixty (160) square feet.
4. Health Standards And Licensing: The applicant must obtain licensing, certificates of inspection, or any other documentation necessary to comply
with all applicable requirements of the state, county, or municipality regarding health standards whenever applicable.
5. Electrical Service: Electrical service shall be provided as follows: a) overhead power connection with a minimum clearance above grade of fourteen
feet (14'); b) installation of an underground conduit; or c) other method acceptable to the city. The use of an overhead connection shall only be
allowed in those areas where overhead electrical service exists. Use of an extension cord, cable or wire laying on the ground or otherwise connected
to a power source is expressly prohibited for long term temporary food and beverage uses. An electrical permit shall be obtained prior to any
electrical installation or connection.
6. Signage: No detached or freestanding signage shall be permitted except with the issuance of a short term temporary sign permit. The maximum
amount of allowed wall signage shall be based upon one foot (1') of sign for each foot of length on the longest side of the structure. All other
provisions of the city's sign code shall apply.
7. Removal: At the expiration of the annual temporary use permit, all things associated with the temporary use shall be removed from the site in
accordance with provisions stated in section 9-16-6 of this chapter. No temporary food and beverage facilities shall be allowed to be stored on a site
that is not zoned appropriately for storage and warehousing, screened in accordance with city code requirements, and/or having received prior city
council approval through an entitlement process for storage and warehousing. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
L. Temporary Concrete And Asphalt Mixing And Storage Facilities (Temporary Plant): The erection and operation of facilities which manufacture, mix, and
prepare concrete or asphalt for the construction of roads, bridges, retaining walls, parking lots, and other large structures on a temporary basis, which
are generally to be in operation for periods of time longer than thirty (30) days and used to fill trucks for transport to the project site, may be allowed
subject to the following:
1. Zoning Districts: Allowed in all zoning districts.
2. Separation Requirements: The areas of operation within the facility shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') from an existing residential
dwelling, unless all owners and tenants, if any, of the dwellings have submitted written consent to the city with the application for approval. Areas of
operation shall include any buildings, structures, or equipment used in the mixing, transporting, loading, or storage of materials used in the operation.
3. Site Access: Access to the site shall only be allowed from an arterial street or major collector as identified on the city's comprehensive plan.
4. Other Applicable Laws, Rules, And Regulations: Any operation shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable city, county, state, and federal
laws, rules, and regulations (i.e., air quality, water pollution, and erosion control).
5. Permit: Permits are issued for the calendar year and may be issued or renewed on an annual basis at the discretion of the director of development
services or designee. The director's decision shall be based upon the following findings:
a. The proposed use is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and any applicable subarea plan.
b. All applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
c. There is adequate on site and off site public infrastructure to support the proposed use.
d. The proposed use has satisfied all the requirements contained in this code.
e. The proposed use shall not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood which will be subjected to the use, including the haul routes, in a way
that would affect the stability or integrity of the zoning ordinance and the quality of the existing neighborhood.
6. Conditions Of Approval: The director of development services or designee may impose any such conditions on the permit as deemed necessary to
meet the purpose and intent of this chapter.
7. Request Referral: The director shall have the discretion to refer any temporary plant request to the city council for its review and action.
8. Submittal Requirements: The applicant shall file an application and be required to submit the following information with the temporary use permit
application for consideration:
a. A map showing the proposed location of the facilities and the existing land uses within one thousand feet (1,000') of the perimeter of the facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 605/687
b. Site plan showing the layout of the facility, material stockpile areas, access points to the site, washout areas, truck staging and parking areas, and
any other applicable information needed for the director to make the appropriate findings.
c. A map showing the proposed haul routes for incoming materials and for trucks to and from the project site.
d. Explanation of the method(s) to ensure the control of noise and dust at and around the site.
e. Proposed method for the containment of site runoff and washout areas to protect surrounding properties and drainageways.
f. Method for providing, when weather and site conditions necessitate, daily cleaning of streets to and from the job site to remove dirt, mud, and other
debris from streets and roads. A contact person shall also be named to facilitate cleanup, if necessary.
g. Explanation of reclamation of the site following the completion of the use.
h. Proposed hours of operation and expected duration of the use.
9. Removal And Reclamation: Upon completion of the project or the expiration of the permit, the applicant shall be responsible for the removal and
reclamation of the property in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. All equipment, trailers, debris, unused materials, and temporary
structures shall be removed from the plant site within thirty (30) days of the completion of the operation. The soil restabilization and postoperation
erosion control measures shall be established as soon as possible and maintained until permanent erosion measures have been established in
accordance with the reclamation plan.
10. Revocation And Suspension Of Permit: The city may, for just cause, suspend, revoke, or not allow for the renewal of a permit, upon serving the
owner of the operation with written notice of the charges forming the basis for the proposed penalty. Just cause shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Obtaining the permit through fraud or misrepresentation; or
b. Operating contrary to the terms of this code and any conditions of approval imposed; or
c. Suspending doing business for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days, unless permission is applied for and approved by the director of
development services or designee. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-8: USE OF TENTS AND CANOPIES:
Tents and canopies may be used for promotional and recreational functions, provided they comply with subsections A through E of this section as listed
herein:
A. Permit Required: All tents and canopies are required to be issued a permit. The tent permit fee will be established by resolution of the city council. The
application for a permit shall include the following information:
1. Plot plan showing exact location of the tent or canopy and traffic circulation when located in a parking lot. Adjacent parking areas must also be
shown.
2. Size of the tent.
3. Fire retardancy certificate.
4. Dates and time of use.
B. Fire Protection And Existing Requirements: Tents and canopies of any size shall conform in all respects with the fire code adopted by the city.
C. Anchorage: Tents shall be anchored so that they resist the wind loads as specified in the building code adopted by the city.
D. Location: The location of tents and canopies shall be in accordance with the fire code adopted by the city.
E. Size: Tents and canopies shall be limited to four thousand (4,000) square feet in area. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-9: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The director of development services or designee may impose such conditions on a temporary use permit as is necessary to meet the purposes of this
chapter and protect the public health, safety and welfare and adjacent uses. Conditions which may be imposed may include, but are not limited to:
A. Yard setback and open space requirements.
B. Parking.
C. Fences, walls, or other screening.
D. Signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 606/687
E. Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress.
F. Property maintenance during the course of the temporary use.
G. Control of illumination, noise, odor, vibration, or other nuisances.
H. Hours of operations. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-10: FEES:
The applicant for a temporary use permit shall pay the applicable nonrefundable application fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees the city council
has adopted by resolution. The application fee must be paid at the time of submittal of the application. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-11: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. City staff's decision to approve or deny a temporary use permit may be appealed to the city council by making a written request to the city clerk. The
appeal will be placed on the agenda for the next available city council meeting.
B. After receiving the appeal and considering any submitted comments, the city council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of city staff. The
decision of the city council shall be the final determination as to whether or not the city approves the temporary use permit. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff.
1-1-2014)
9-16-12: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A temporary use permit for any event in progress may be revoked and the event terminated by the chief of police or the fire chief, or their respective
designees, if the safety of the public is imminently endangered by activities generated by the event, the event has caused injury to persons or damage to
property, or if there is a major violation of the conditions of the permit such that the standards of issuance have not been satisfied. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013,
eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
The operation of a temporary use is a privilege allowed by this chapter. Failure to maintain a temporary use in compliance with the conditions of approval
and the regulations of this chapter may be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code.
A written notice of a minor violation of the temporary use permit shall be sent to the operator of the temporary use and the property owner, if different than
the operator, and the operator shall have a minimum of five (5) calendar days and a maximum of ten (10) calendar days, as determined by the director of
development services or designee, to bring the site into compliance. If the operator fails to correct the violation in the prescribed time, the city may revoke
the temporary use permit and issue a cease and desist order for the temporary use. There shall also be a one year moratorium from that date on the
issuance of any other temporary use permits on the property and a one year probationary period for the second year following the violation. During the
probationary period, if the operator of a temporary use fails to maintain the premises and the use in conformance with the conditions of approval and this
code, after the notification procedures noted above, the city may revoke the temporary use permit and no other temporary use permits shall be issued on
the property for a period of two (2) years. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
Chapter 17
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
9-17-1: PURPOSE:
In adopting this Chapter, it is recognized that adult entertainment facilities have certain objectionable side effects which render these adult facilities
incompatible with residential and family-oriented uses, when the adult facilities are located directly adjacent to such uses. This Chapter seeks to ensure
that residential and family-oriented uses, and adult entertainment facilities will be located in separate and compatible locations. It is a subject of legitimate
concern for the City to use its zoning power to preserve the quality of life, preserve the City's neighborhoods and to meet effectively the increasing
encroachments of urbanization upon the quality of life within the City. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-93)
9-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: Includes but is not limited to the following:
A. Adult Bookstore: An establishment having as the primary portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which are substantially
devoted to the depiction of "specified sexual activities" and "specified anatomical areas".
B. Adult Business: Any business or establishment where a "specified sexual activity" or a "specified anatomical area" is displayed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 607/687
C. Adult Motel: A motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed
circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
D. Adult Movie Theater: Any theater, arcade or similar establishment where enclosed building or open air facility is used for presenting material in the
form of motion picture film, video tape or other similar means which is substantially devoted to the depiction of "specified sexual activities" and
"specified anatomical areas" for observation by persons therein.
E. Adult Newsrack: Any coin-operated machine or device which dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of "specified sexual activities"
and "specified anatomical areas".
F. Adult Nightclub: Any club, cabaret, nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment where an enclosed building or open air facility is used for live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" and "specified anatomical areas" for observation by persons
therein.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals;
2. Mature human buttocks;
3. Mature human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
C. Fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; and
D. Minors engaged in a prohibited sexual act or simulation of a prohibited sexual act. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-93)
9-17-3: LOCATION OF ADULT BOOKSTORES, MOVIE THEATERS, NIGHTCLUBS, MOTELS, ADULT BUSINESSES AND
NEWSRACKS:
No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, shall
place, maintain, own or operate any adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult nightclub, adult motel, adult business or adult newsrack in the following
locations:
A. Locations:
1. In any residential area in the City including upon any sidewalk abutting upon such residential area;
2. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residentially zoned or used property, or any property designated on the City's Comprehensive Plan as
residentially oriented;
3. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon which is located any of the following facilities:
a. An elementary school, junior high school or senior high school;
b. A church which conducts religious programs;
c. Park or recreational facilities operated and improved by the City, Polk or Dallas County, the Polk or Dallas County Conservation Board or the State
of Iowa;
d. Federal, State, County, City or special district governmental offices;
e. Supermarket or convenience market primarily engaged in the sale of food;
f. Restaurant, fast-food or food establishment catering to family trade;
4. Within two thousand feet (2,000') of any other adult entertainment facility, as defined in Section 9-17-2 of this Chapter. "Adult newsrack" for the
purpose of this Section means a single coin-operated device, and not a machine with double or triple dispensing capacity.
B. Measurement Of Distance: The distance between any two (2) adult entertainment facilities shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any adult entertainment facilities and any
religious institution, school or public park, government office, supermarket, restaurant or any property designated for residential use or used for
residential purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the adult
entertainment facilities to the closest property line of the religious institution, school, public park, government office, supermarket, restaurant or the
property designated for residential use or used for residential purposes. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
C. Signs: All on-site signage shall conform to the Sign Ordinance1 of this Title. (Ord. 1380, 7-26-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 608/687
D. Viewing Area:
1. It is unlawful to maintain, operate or manage or permit to be maintained, operated or managed any adult theater or arcade in which the viewing
areas are not visible from a continuous main aisle or are obscured by a curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. For purposes of this Section, "viewing
area" means the area where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching the performance, picture, show or film.
2. It is unlawful for more than one person at a time to occupy any individually partitioned viewing area or booth.
3. It is unlawful to create, maintain or permit to be maintained any holes or other openings between any two (2) booths or individual viewing areas for
the purpose of providing viewing or physical access between the booth or individual viewing area.
4. The opening to the viewing area shall be from the main aisle. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
9-17-4: IDENTIFICATION OF NEWSRACKS:
The owners of adult newsracks shall have their name, address and telephone number clearly visible on each newsrack located within the City. If the
identification is not clearly visible that shall be grounds for immediate impoundment of the newsrack by the City. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
9-17-5: IMPOUNDING OF ADULT NEWSRACKS:
A. Impoundment:
1. The provisions of this Code dealing with nonconforming uses shall not be applicable to the location of adult newsracks existing on the effective date
hereof, but thereafter the location of adult newsracks shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of this Code.
2. An adult newsrack found in violation of this Chapter may be impounded by any police officer or Code enforcement officer of the City after the
following actions have occurred:
a. A notice of violation has been affixed to the adult newsrack stating the section of this Chapter which has been violated and stating that the adult
newsrack will be impounded if the violation is not abated within seven (7) days;
b. A notice of violation has been sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the adult newsrack as identified on the newsrack, if
readable, stating the section of this Chapter which has been violated and stating that the adult newsrack will be impounded if the violation is not
abated within seven (7) days; (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
c. The violation has not been abated within seven (7) days of the posting of the notice of violation or the mailing of the certified letter, whichever
occurs later; (Ord. 1380, 7-26-1999)
d. The Police Department or Code enforcement office has presented to any magistrate affidavits or other evidence sufficient to show a prima facie
violation of this Chapter;
e. A magistrate has issued a written order permitting the impounding of the adult newsrack pursuant to this Chapter.
3. Whenever an adult newsrack is impounded, a complaint for violation of Section 9-17-3 of this Chapter must be filed within fourteen (14) days of the
impounding. If a final appealable decision in such action is not rendered within sixty (60) days from the filing of the action, the complaint shall be
dismissed; provided, however, that no complaint shall be dismissed because a final appealable decision was not rendered within sixty (60) days of
the filing of the action if the defendant named therein is responsible for extending the judicial determination beyond the allowable time limit.
4. The person who provides sufficient proof of ownership of such adult newsrack may have such adult newsrack, together with all monies, if any,
impounded, returned immediately after the filing of a complaint for violation of Section 9-17-3 of this Chapter upon application to the Police
Department or Code enforcement officer. The person who provides sufficient proof of ownership of such adult newsrack may have the contents of
such newsrack returned upon the date that a final appealable decision in such action is rendered or upon the date the action is dismissed, upon
application to the Police Department or the Code enforcement officer. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
9-17-6: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Chapter upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1380, 7-26-1999)
9-17-7: MINIMAL DISTANCE VIOLATIONS:
It is recognized that adult newsracks may be jostled or inadvertently moved minor distances by third persons with a resulting violation of the provisions of
Section 9-17-3 of this Chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, such a minimal distance violation, not exceeding five feet (5'), shall not
constitute a violation of this Chapter, and the City's Police Department or the City's Code enforcement officer shall notify the owner of the adult newsrack
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the existence of the minimal distance requirements. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, all adult
newsracks shall comply with the encroachment permit provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
9-17-8: PERMITTED AREAS:
The areas in the City in which adult entertainment facilities are permitted are defined in the Commercial Use Matrix2 of this Title. (Ord. 1380, 7-26-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 609/687
Chapter 18
SIGNS
9-18-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SIGN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA. (Ord. 2210, 4-
17-2017)
9-18-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive and balanced legal framework for the regulation of signs and graphics. These regulations
preserve the right of free speech and expression, protect the public safety and welfare, preserve the visual character of the City of West Des Moines and
protect property values. It is the intent of this chapter to:
A. Set standards and provide uniform controls that permit a reasonable use of signs that are compatible with their surroundings; and
B. Prohibit the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, designs, illumination and locations as may create a hazard to pedestrians, bicyclists and
motorists; and
C. Avoid excessive signage and visual competition, so that legal signs provide adequate avenues of free speech and communication, while minimizing
clutter, unsightliness, confusion and blighting influences; and
D. Ensure that sign design builds on the image, character and visual environment that the City of West Des Moines seeks to promote and protects
property values; and
E. Protect and prevent possible damage or obstruction to public utilities and infrastructure. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-3: GENERAL STATEMENT OF INTENT AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES:
Signs are an integral part of the community and a necessary method for communication for many types of messages and information. As technology
evolves, so do the methods and means of communication in the sign industry. It is difficult to anticipate all the possible scenarios where signs will be
utilized. This chapter intends to outline minimum standards for signs and associated structures, but also recognizes that more restrictive standards may be
necessary to protect and guide users in the community's desires for sensitive sign design and placement, as well as to enhance and protect specific areas
of the community. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method not
specifically prescribed by this Code, provided that any such alternative material, design, or method can be shown to meet the intent of the provisions of
this Code and is at least equivalent to that prescribed by this Code. The Director of Development Services shall have the authority to grant minor
exceptions and render interpretations of these regulations for individual cases where the strict letter of this chapter would not be possible and an
alternative solution can be identified that would still comply with the intent of this Code. The following provisions should be used as a guide to the overall
design and development of sign proposals within the community and provide a minimum basis for interpretations that may be required in the application of
the regulations of this chapter:
A. Integral Design Element: All signs should be an integral design element of a building's architecture, and be compatible with the project's overall
character and building design in terms of size, shape, color, texture, and lighting. Signs should not visually compete with the architecture of the building
and design of the site. Wherever possible, signs within new developments should also complement the character and style of existing developments
within the context area of the new development. Signs should be integrated so that they become a natural part of the building facade and the site
design.
B. Balance: Commercial signs should reflect a balance between allowing adequate signage for business identification while protecting the visual aesthetic
of West Des Moines streetscapes and natural environment.
C. Business Identity: Business identity, either by awnings, accent bands, paint or other applied color schemes, signage, parapet details, decorative roof
details or materials should not be the dominant architectural feature of a building. Accent colors should be used judiciously.
D. Logical Sign Areas: New building design should anticipate signage locations. Building elevations should provide logical areas for signs and allow
flexibility for new users as the building is re-used over time.
E. Integrate Sign Locations: Sign locations should be integrated with the overall design of the site with significant landscape elements to enhance the
appearance or the sign structure.
F. Multiple Tenant Signs: When more than one (1) tenant shares a development site, signs should be integrated as one (1) unit to create a shared identity
for the property or be located and/or designed as a unified package so that signs do not visually compete with each other.
G. Safe Location: Signs should be carefully located for safety, not blocking the views of oncoming traffic at street intersections or driveways. Placement
should also consider the safety of pedestrians and other modes of transportation, such as bicycles and maintain clear lines of site where conflicts may
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 610/687
occur on and around a site.
H. Landscaping: Signs should be placed so they will not be obstructed by landscaping when the growth reaches maturity. Sign locations should be
considered as a part of the design of a site and landscaping used to enhance the appearance of the sign and aid in drawing attention to the sign.
I. Lighting: Illumination of signs should be accomplished in a manner to minimize glare, intensity, light spillage and trespass to prevent distractions to
drivers and impacts to adjacent streets and properties to the greatest extent possible. Sign design and lighting methods should respect and maintain
consistency with the ambient light levels of the area.
J. Readability: Signs should be located to promote ease of readability and serve their intended function. The scale of the sign should relate to the intended
viewer; signs for pedestrians would therefore be of a smaller scale than signs for moving vehicles. Design simplicity is a key factor in good design and
readability. Individual, dimensional letters are preferred and required in most locations. Exceptions may be granted if the design of the sign cannot be
reasonably accomplished through typically accepted standards, as long as the intent of the overall regulations can be addressed.
K. Materials: Materials used in signs and their structures should be compatible with those used on the site and associated buildings and designed to be a
unifying feature that is relevant to the overall site.
L. Color: On most signs, no more than three (3) colors (excluding black and white) should be used. Any illustration or graphic incorporated into the sign
should use complementary colors that are in harmony with the general architecture and color palette of the building. Light colored graphics on a dark
background are preferred as this makes the signs more readable. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise:
ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign remaining in place for a period of ninety (90) days or more which no longer advertises, identifies, promotes or draws
attention to an activity, business, product, or service available on the premises on which the sign is located.
ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION: A decision made by the Director of Development Services.
ARCHITECTURAL DETAIL: Any projection, relief, cornice, column, change of building material, window, or door opening on any building.
AWNING: Flexible, non-structural coverings over a structural frame that projects from a building wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 611/687
BACKER PANEL: A background behind the graphics of a sign that is made from a solid opaque material on which the graphics may be attached and
intended to hide a wireway or minimize the number of potential penetrations into the surface that the sign is being mounted onto.
BANNER: A temporary sign on a lightweight material which may be mounted between posts, on or in a ridged frame, secured to a structure or hung from a
bracket or pole.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 612/687
BILLBOARD: An off premises sign that identifies or communicates a message or information related to an activity conducted, a service rendered, or a
commodity available at a location other than where the sign is located.
BILLBOARD EXTENSION: Any structure used as a continuation of a billboard sign face.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 613/687
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: That wall or side of a building which is adjacent and most nearly parallel to a street.
CANDELA: The standard unit of luminous intensity in the International System of Units.
CANOPY: A rigid, multifaced, permanent structural roof like element that projects from a building wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 614/687
CHANGEABLE GRAPHIC: The visual display, which can be changed or altered through manual, mechanical or electrical means.
COMMERCIAL: Any activity or communication done on behalf of an entity, company or individual with the intent of engaging in commerce, where the
activity has the intent of convincing the audience to partake in a particular action, often purchasing a specific product or service.
CONTOURED: Used to describe the shaping of a background, raceway, or other material to closely outline the shapes of the graphics of a sign.
COPY: The graphical content of a sign surface in letter or alphabetical form.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES: The Director of Development Services Department or his/her designee in the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa.
DYNAMIC ELEMENT: Any characteristic of a sign that has or appears to have movement or that appears to change, caused by any method other than
physically removing and replacing the sign face or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the sign, the sign structure itself, or
any other component of the sign. This definition includes a display that incorporates a technology or other method allowing the sign face to change the
image without having to replace the sign face or its components physically or mechanically. This definition also includes any rotating, revolving, moving,
flashing, blinking, or animated graphic or illumination, and any sign that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital
ink" or any other method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or displays.
EASEMENT: The portion of a property for which access or use is allowed by a person or agency other than the owner.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix. Shall also include the painting of wall graphics.
FACADE: The side of a building below the eaves.
FOOTCANDLE: The basic unit of illuminance used to determine the amount of light falling on a surface. One (1) footcandle is equivalent to the illuminance
produced on one (1) square foot of surface area by a source of one (1) candle at a distance of one foot (1'). Footcandle measurement is taken with a hand
held light meter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 615/687
FRONTAGE: See definition of street frontage.
GRADE, AVERAGE FINISHED: The average final elevation of the ground level surrounding a sign, wall, or building after development.
GRAPHIC: Any display, including copy, logos or images that are an announcement, declaration, demonstration, illustration or insignia used to advertise,
promote, or draw attention to the interests of any person or firm when the same is placed in view of the general public.
GROUND SIGN: A sign supported by one (1) or more uprights, posts or bases placed upon or affixed in the ground and not attached to any part of a
building.
HANGING SIGN: Ground sign where the sign is hung from a bracket or arm mounted on a single post.
HEIGHT, SIGN: The vertical measurement from the average finished grade nearest the supporting base or columns of the sign to the highest point of said
sign. No mounding of earth (except berms required otherwise by this Code for buffering) may be permitted to achieve a greater sign height.
ILLUMINATION: A source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly from a source of light incorporated in or indirectly from an artificial source.
INDIRECT ILLUMINATION: A light source of external illumination, located away from the sign that lights the contents of the sign, but which itself is not
visible to persons viewing the sign from any street, sidewalk or adjacent property. For the purposes of this chapter, indirect illumination shall also include
halo lighting, reverse channel letters or similar reflected lighting used to illuminate a graphic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 616/687
LANDMARK: Any site, permanent structure, or natural feature, unaccompanied by graphic or copy to identify a particular use or business, located in a
conspicuous place to draw attention to or identify a particular locality and to act as a point of orientation when locating other structures or uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 617/687
LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, but which was lawfully erected in accordance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 618/687
with this Code in effect at the time it was erected.
LUMEN: A unit used to measure the actual amount of light that is produced by a bulb and quantifies the amount of light energy produced by a lamp at the
lamp, as compared to wattage which is the energy input to light a lamp.
MARQUEE: A permanent roof like structure, other than a building canopy or roof that projects from the facade of the building and is typically used to
highlight the entrance to the building. Marquees are often ornate and incorporate lighting and signage to attract attention and identify activities associated
with the business, such as theaters, convention centers, concert halls or hotels.
MONUMENT SIGN: A ground sign anchored to the ground which has a monolithic or columnar line and which essentially maintains the same contour from
grade to top.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 619/687
MOVING SIGN: Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position or light intensity by any movements or rotation or that gives the visual impression
of such movement or rotation.
NONCOMMERCIAL: Any activity or communication that does not have the intent of promoting or encouraging the viewer to engage in commerce, involve
monetary compensation, or the purchase of a specific product or service.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: Any sign, for which the purpose is to advertise, identify and/or direct attention to a profession, business, service, activity, product,
campaign, or attraction which is not carried on, sold, offered or manufactured in or upon the premises.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign that advertises, identifies and/or directs attention to a profession, business, service, activity, product, campaign or attraction
which is carried on, sold, offered or manufactured in or upon the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 620/687
PANEL SIGN: A sign consisting of a frame covered by a translucent material which may be internally illuminated. The entire sign structure is one (1) unit
and the copy is not intended to include three-dimensional individual letters.
PENNANTS AND/OR STREAMERS: A long, narrow ribbon like flag or tapering flag used individually or attached to a rope or structure to allow movement
caused by the atmosphere.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 621/687
POLE SIGN: A freestanding ground sign that is permanently supported in a fixed location by one (1) or more visible uprights that are narrow and less than
the width of the sign and are more than one-fourth (1/4) of the entire height of the sign and sign structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 622/687
PORTABLE SIGN: A freestanding sign that is movable and self-supporting, and is not permanently attached to the ground or a building or designed to be
permanently attached to the ground or a building.
POST AND PANEL SIGN: A freestanding sign that is not portable, with a solid panel mounted to two (2) or more supporting posts. These types of signs
are typically used for temporary signs or specifically allowed in certain districts as permanent signs with design considerations.
PREMISES: The lot or lots, plots, portions, or parcels of land considered as a unit for a single use or development, whether owned or leased, and not
located in a shopping center or multi-use building.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign attached to and projecting away from the wall of a building and not in the same plane as the wall.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 623/687
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 624/687
RACEWAY: An enclosed visible conduit or physical pathway for housing electrical wiring, transformers, and other non-visible sign components and used to
protect these elements from environment factors. Usually mounted between the sign graphics and the mounting surface.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, trail, pedestrian
way, public (and private) utilities and/or other public uses.
ROOF SIGN: A sign that is displayed upon or above a roof or parapet of a building and visible from adjacent roadways, properties or ground level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 625/687
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a sign and the property lines, street right-of-way, or right-of-way easements if abutting a public
street, or the distance from the back of curb on a private street.
SIGN: Any visual display or graphics, visible from a street or in view of the general public and designed to identify, announce, direct, draw attention,
promote or inform.
SIGN AREA: That area of a sign as determined by the Director of Development Services using actual dimensions where practical, or approximate
dimensions when irregularity of a sign shape warrants.
SIGN WALKER: A person (or persons) holding, wearing, or waving signs, graphics, or wearing costumes at entrances to major highways, at corners of
high traffic intersections, or on the premises of the commercial activity being promoted to actively attract attention and direct customers to the event. Also
called sign twirlers, sign holders, human billboards, sign events. This definition is not intended to include logos and graphics that are incidentally worn or
carried by individuals who are not "actively" attempting to attract attention to themselves or the message of the graphic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 626/687
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 627/687
STREET: For the purpose of sign regulations, a street shall be defined as any public roadway that is dedicated to the City or the State, and any private,
non-City owned streets which serve the same purpose as a public roadway. This definition does not include alleys, controlled access interstate highways,
private drives and drive aisles in parking lots.
STREET FRONTAGE: That boundary of a lot or parcel abutting a street. Each side of a lot or parcel so abutting a street shall be considered as a separate
frontage.
STRUCTURE: Anything built that requires a permanent or temporary location. This term includes a building.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign intended to be displayed for a transitory or temporary period. Portable signs, or any sign not permanently embedded in the
ground or not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is permanently embedded in the ground, are considered temporary signs.
VARIANCE: A discretionary entitlement as determined by the Board of Adjustment which permits the departure from the strict application of the standards
contained in this Code.
VEHICLE SIGN: Any graphic placed, painted, attached to or displayed on a vehicle, including trailers, used to promote or advertise a company, business
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 628/687
or service.
VISION TRIANGLE: That area bounded by the street right-of-way lines of a corner lot and a straight line joining points on said right-of-way lines located
twenty five feet (25') from the point of intersection of said right-of-way lines. Greater dimensions may be required on streets with higher traffic volumes,
based upon the standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers or the Association of American State Highway Officials.
WALL SIGN: Any permanent sign or graphic attached to, erected against, or applied to the surface of the exterior wall of a building or an interior sign that
is primarily placed to be viewed from outside of the building.
WARNING AND REGULATORY SIGNS: Traffic control or other governmental signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and such temporary
emergency or non-advertising signs.
WINDOW SIGN: Any graphic that is installed, adhered to, or painted upon an individual glazed surface panel for purposes of viewing from outside the
building. This term does not include merchandise located in a window holiday display.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 629/687
WIREWAY: An enclosed conduit less than three inches (3") in depth that forms a screened physical pathway for electrical wiring between sign components
and the mounting surface to allow for a method for protected connections and a means to minimize the number of wall penetrations necessary. Used in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 630/687
conjunction with a backer panel to screen the visibility of the wireway from the viewer.
(Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-5: PERMITS:
A. Permits Required: Unless specifically noted otherwise in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate within the City any
sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Department of Development Services and making payment of the permit fee. No sign shall be erected
on a property without the authorization of the property owner or authorized agent.
B. Application For Permit: Application for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the Director of Development Services. Additional information may
be required to clarify the submittal including, but not limited to, the following information:
1. Plans And Specifications: Drawings of the plans and specifications of the sign and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the
ground.
2. Location Plan: Drawing showing the location of the sign or sign structure, setbacks, the distance from other signs and signs on adjacent properties,
location of the sign on a building, and any other information needed to determine compliance with Code provisions.
3. Calculations: Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the sign is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in accordance
with Building Code regulations as adopted by the City of West Des Moines.
4. Other: Such other information as the Director of Development Services shall require to show full compliance with this and all other laws and
ordinances of the City.
C. Application Review: It shall be the duty of the Director of Development Services upon the filing of an application for a permit, to examine such plans and
specifications and other data and make a determination of compliance with the Code within twenty (20) business days. The applicant shall be notified
of any additional information or clarifications required, any modifications or suggestions to make the proposed sign compliant with the Code, or if the
permit is rejected with the reasons for the rejection. Should the City be unsuccessful in contacting the applicant through other methods of
communication, written notification shall be sent within the twenty (20) business days stipulated by this section.
D. Approval Or Denial: If the proposed sign is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter, approved site plans, and all other requirements and
laws of the City, the Director of Development Services shall issue a permit. If the permit is denied, the applicant may resubmit a modified proposal in
response to the comments which shall initiate a new twenty (20) business day response time outlined in subsection C of this section.
E. Expiration Date: If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the said permit
shall become null and void and refund of the fee shall not be allowed.
F. Permit Fees: Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay the permit fee, as determined by City Council resolution, for each such
sign. Failure to obtain a valid permit prior to the installation of a sign, may cause the fee to be doubled, require the removal of the sign, or any other
enforcement remedies available to the City.
G. Revocation Of Permits: The Director of Development Services is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permits issued upon failure of the
holder thereof to comply with any provisions of this chapter or conditions of approval included with the issuance of said permit. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 631/687
9-18-6: LICENSE FEE, BOND AND INSURANCE:
A. Licenses Required And Fees:
1. Erector License: Any person engaging in the act of erecting, maintaining, servicing, installing or removing signs, regardless of size or weight, must
first apply to the City for a license. The fee for said license shall be in the amount determined by City Council resolution payable every even
numbered year. This license shall expire on December 31 of every odd numbered year.
2. Proration Of Fees: Proration will be calculated on a semiannual basis for renewal.
B. License Exception: No license is required for the following:
1. A nonelectrical sign erected by an owner on their property which is exempt from the owner's insurance or certificate of liability.
2. Installation of a temporary ground sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in area.
C. Erector's Bond: Any person making application for an erector's license shall execute and file with the application a surety and performance bond in the
amount determined by the City Council resolution and duly executed by sureties.
D. Insurance: Any person making application for an erector's license shall furnish to the City a certificate of liability insurance with a Municipality
endorsement included, either as a single policy or as a rider to a blanket policy showing the City as additional insured in the amount of one hundred
thousand dollars/three hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00/$300,000.00) bodily injury and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damage or a
single limit liability of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). In addition, the City shall receive at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice of any
cancellation or change in any of the required insurance policy or policies under this provision.
Said certificate of insurance shall be so conditioned as to defend, indemnify, protect and save harmless the City and its employees from and against
any and all liability, claims, losses of whatsoever kind or nature, arising out of or by reason of the erection, hanging, repair or maintenance of such sign
or signs.
E. Revocation Of Licenses: The Director of Development Services is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any license issued by the City upon
failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-7: INSPECTIONS:
A. It is the applicant's responsibility to insure that all materials, designs, workmanship and methods are done in such a manner so as to be in compliance
with manufacturer's specifications and any Federal, State, County and local regulations and codes.
B. All illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the Electrical Code of the City and shall be approved and labeled by a nationally recognized
testing lab and the permit fees required thereunder. If in the opinion of the City, there are extenuating circumstances that cause concern that the scope
of work may require a greater level of understanding or expertise, some work may require a separate electrical permit and the work to be done by a
licensed electrical contractor.
C. All construction or work for which a permit is required may be subject to inspection by the Director of Development Services. All such construction or
work including footings and foundations (structural and location), electrical connections, etc., shall be verified to be in compliance with Code, or be
made available for inspection upon request by the City. Neither the Director of Development Services nor the City shall be liable for expense entailed in
the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
D. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other City ordinances.
Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or other City ordinances shall not be valid. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-
2017)
9-18-8: MAINTENANCE:
The conditions of this section are applicable to all signs in this chapter.
A. All existing legal signs shall be kept in good repair and in proper state of preservation and working order. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept
neatly painted or posted at all times.
B. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind
shall be attached to a standpipe or fire extinguisher. No sign shall obstruct or interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
C. Signs and their supporting structures shall not interfere with any equipment or lines for utilities including, but not limited to water, sewage, gas,
electricity, or communications.
D. All signs and the premises surrounding the sign shall be maintained by the sign owner thereof in a clean, sanitary condition, and free and clear of
rubbish and weeds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 632/687
E. Failure to maintain a legally approved sign, sign structure, and area around the sign in good order may deem the sign unsafe or unlawful, and the City
may cause action against the owner of the sign, or the property owner where the sign is located in accordance with any enforcement actions available
to the City. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-9: LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. Intent: It is the intent of this chapter to allow existing legal nonconforming signs to continue to be maintained and used until they are removed under the
terms of this chapter, but not to encourage their survival.
B. Change And Modification: A legal nonconforming sign or sign structure shall be brought into conformity with this chapter if it is altered, reconstructed,
replaced, expanded, or relocated. A mere change in copy, or the replacement of a sign face, is not an alteration or replacement for purposes of this
subsection, but conditions may be placed on the approval to bring the sign closer to compliance with the intent of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Maintenance: Legal nonconforming signs must be maintained in good condition. Maintenance required by this subsection shall include replacing or
repairing of worn or damaged parts of a sign or sign structure in order to return it to its original state, and it is not a change or modification for purposes
of subsection D1 of this section.
D. Removal: Removal of a nonconforming sign or replacement of a nonconforming sign with a conforming sign is required when:
1. A legal nonconforming sign, or a substantial part of a legal nonconforming sign, is blown down, destroyed, or for any reason or by any means taken
down. As used in this subsection, "substantial" means fifty percent (50%) or more of the entire sign structure; or
2. The condition of the legal nonconforming sign or legal nonconforming sign structure has deteriorated without maintenance as required by this
section; or the legal nonconforming sign structure or building it is mounted on is destroyed or damaged by a fire, flood, windstorm, or similar
abnormal event; and the cost of restoration of the sign to its condition immediately prior to such deterioration or event exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the cost of reconstruction of the sign structure; or
3. The use of the legal nonconforming sign, or the property on which it is located, has ceased, become vacant, or been unoccupied for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive days or more. An intent to abandon is not required as the basis for removal under this subsection.
E. De Minimus Differences: For purposes of this chapter, a sign conforms to the size, height, and setback regulations of this chapter if its size, height, and
setback do not exceed the size, height, and setback regulations in this chapter by more than one hundred one percent (101%).
F. Sign Permit Application: For any new sign permit applications filed under this chapter, the City may review all signs within the subject property for
compliance with the current City Code. Should it be determined that there are legal nonconforming signs on the premises, the City may require that any
nonconforming sign displayed on the premises that would affect the compliance of the new sign with the current Code be altered or removed before
that new permits may be issued under the provisions of this chapter.
G. Development Permit: Any permit that authorizes the development of a premises, any building addition, an increase in gross floor area of twenty five
percent (25%) or more, or any exterior structural remodeling of a building facade on which a nonconforming sign is located shall require all
nonconforming signs on the premises for which the permit is issued to be brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
H. Amortization Period: Any legal nonconforming sign which violates or does not conform to this chapter shall be brought into conformance by alteration or
removal within the following time schedule:
1. Up to and including two hundred dollars ($200.00) within thirty (30) days.
2. Two hundred one dollars ($201.00) to nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($999.00) within one (1) year.
3. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to one thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($1,999.00) within two (2) years.
4. Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to two thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($2,999.00) within three (3) years.
5. Three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to three thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($3,999.00) within four (4) years.
6. Four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) and over within five (5) years.
The determination of the time schedule according to the value shall rest with the Director of Development Services.
If the sign is not removed or altered in accordance with the provisions of this section, the Director of Development Services shall give notice of
noncompliance to the owner of the building or land where such sign or advertising structure is located, and to the owner of the sign, if same can be
determined, to remove or alter said sign or advertising structure within thirty (30) days to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of said notice, the owner of the building or land on which said sign is located may present documentary proof to
the City's Building Inspection Division that the value of the sign or advertising structure is of such value that it should fall within a longer time
schedule for removal or alteration as required herein. If after presentation of documentary proof to the City of the value of the sign, the owner is
dissatisfied with the determination as reconsidered by the Director of Development Services, the owner may proceed in District Court of Polk County,
Iowa, in law or in equity to determine the value of such.
If the owner fails to present documentary proof to the City's Building Division within the fifteen (15) day period prescribed herein, it shall be concluded
that the value of the sign falls within the time schedule as determined. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 633/687
9-18-10: COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS AND MESSAGES:
This chapter is primarily intended to address and regulate commercial messages and advertising, however it is recognized that noncommercial messages
hold an equal, or greater obligation to allow and to protect free speech. Nonetheless, there is also a need to balance these rights with the need to maintain
order and safety in the community. Commercial signs and messages are only permitted in the zones explicitly authorized elsewhere in this chapter;
therefore, the following regulations have been adopted to address noncommercial signs:
A. In all zoning districts, on-premises, temporary signs under six (6) square feet in sign area and less than four feet (4') in height, shall be allowed. No
permit is required for these signs but they are limited to one (1) sign, per street frontage, per parcel or tenant in the case of multiple tenant occupancy.
B. In any single family residential district (RE, RS, R-1, SF-CR, SF-VJ and MH) and any RM District that has been developed with single family detached
residential units, each parcel or lot shall be allowed to display on premises noncommercial signs up to sixteen (16) square feet in size and no taller than
five feet (5') high without obtaining a permit; however, the total aggregate amount of noncommercial signage allowed per street frontage under this
section shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet. The aggregate amount may be accomplished by any combination of individual noncommercial
signs up to sixteen (16) square feet each, however no more than six (6) signs shall be allowed on any one (1) street frontage. Any signs allowed under
this section shall maintain a minimum separation of ten feet (10') from another sign on the same property.
C. In any nonresidential district (OS, RC, CMC, NC, CVC, SC, SO, HC, VJC, VJHB, WR, BP, VJLI, LI, GI, OF, and PCP) and in the RH District and any
RM District that has not been developed with single family detached residential units, each parcel or lot shall be allowed to display on premises
noncommercial signs up to thirty two (32) square feet in size and no taller than five feet (5') high without a permit. The total aggregate amount of
noncommercial signage allowed per street frontage under this section shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. The one hundred (100) square
feet may be a combination of any number of individual noncommercial signs up to thirty two (32) square feet each, however no more than eight (8)
signs shall be allowed on any one (1) street frontage. An additional thirty two (32) square feet of signage, and an additional two (2) signs, shall be
allowed for each additional one hundred feet (100') of street frontage over five hundred feet (500') on any one (1) street frontage. Any signs allowed
under this section shall maintain a minimum separation of ten feet (10') from another sign on the same property.
D. Any noncommercial sign that exceeds the provisions listed above, may be allowed in accordance with the provisions for temporary signs listed
elsewhere within this chapter. Any sign authorized to be displayed by this chapter may contain a noncommercial graphic or message. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-
2017)
9-18-11: EXEMPTED SIGNS:
The following signs are exempted from the regulations in this chapter:
A. Any sign required by the International Fire Code or the International Building Code.
B. Warning and regulatory signs approved by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-12: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
These regulations are intended to be exclusionary. Any type of sign not specifically listed in this chapter is prohibited. In addition, the following signs are
specifically prohibited:
A. Animated signs.
B. Off-premises signs, except billboards as provided by this chapter.
C. Spinners, balloons, pennants and streamers, except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
D. Flashing or moving lights.
E. Structurally or otherwise unsafe or dilapidated signs.
F. Pole signs, except where allowed through specific district regulations.
G. Portable signs, including signs on wheels, trailers, and truck beds, except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
H. Roof signs visible from adjacent roadways, properties or ground level.
I. Signs with dynamic elements or movement, except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
J. Signs containing obscenity or pornography.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 634/687
K. Vehicle signs. No vehicle, including trailers, shall be parked in such a way that it functions primarily as a sign. It shall be a violation if such vehicle is
conspicuously parked in a prominent location for more than three (3) hours and there are no other stated or apparent reasons, other than signage
purposes.
L. Abandoned signs.
M. Unlawful signs.
N. Signwalkers, sign spinners, sign holders, human billboards, or similar human advertisements.
O. Signs that obstruct vision, are in the vision triangle on private property or erected at or near the intersection of any streets or near a private access to a
street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision.
P. Signs at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device.
Q. Signs which make use of the words "STOP", "LOOK", "DANGER" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with,
mislead or confuse the motoring public.
R. Signs on City property not installed by agents of the City, except as permitted elsewhere within this chapter. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-13: AREAS OF SPECIAL CHARACTER:
A. Designation: This chapter cannot adequately regulate all signs in an area as diverse as the City of West Des Moines. The City Council after public
notice and hearing, may by ordinance designate a contiguous area as an area of special character, if it contains unique architectural, historic, scenic, or
visual features that require special regulations so that signs will enhance its character. Areas of special character may include, but are not limited to:
1. Architecturally significant, history and scenic areas.
2. Planned unit developments.
3. Specific plan areas.
4. Development overlay districts.
B. Zoning Map: The Director of Development Services shall maintain and continually revise a zoning map of the City which shall identify the boundaries of
all designated areas of special character.
C. Special Regulations: The City shall adopt special regulations for signs in areas of special character which shall be consistent with the character of
existing development and/or the proposed development within the area of special character.
D. Effect Of Special Regulations: Special regulations for areas of special character shall supersede and may be either more or less restrictive than the
regulations for signs contained in this chapter. Any regulations for areas of special character shall respect the intent of this chapter as it would apply to
the specific properties regulated within the designated area. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-14: ILLUMINATION:
The intent of sign illumination is to provide a method for viewing the message during periods when it is dark or weather conditions may reduce visibility, but
not create glare, light spillage or trespass with a large illuminated area or excessive brightness. Unless otherwise specified herein, a sign may be
illuminated with a number of methods depending upon the type of sign and the district in which the sign is located.
To the greatest extent possible, signs shall be designed to minimize the illumination of excess unused areas of a sign and to reduce the amount of light
glow. Unless noted otherwise, direct or unprotected light sources used to illuminate a sign shall neither be visible from any street, nor cause glare,
hazardous light trespass or distraction to pedestrians, drivers, or adjacent properties.
A. General Sign Illumination Standards:
1. All illuminated signs are subject to the provisions of the Electrical Code as adopted by the City of West Des Moines.
2. A balance should occur between the ambient light levels of the area, project or development and the illumination of a sign. The lighting design of a
sign must take into account background lighting levels, lighting from other sources and the characteristics of the surrounding area. If the area has
relatively low night lighting levels, like in or adjacent to residential properties, sign illumination should be reduced or designed to lessen the impact
and light trespass. In no event shall any illuminated sign exceed a maximum illumination of five thousand (5,000) candelas per square meter during
daylight hours and a maximum illumination of five hundred (500) candelas per square meter between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign's face
at maximum brightness.
3. All sign illumination shall be static in color and intensity, unless noted otherwise within this chapter. Blinking, rotating, cycling, flashing, moving,
hanging, or reflecting lights are prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 635/687
4. Signs in residential areas, or which face residential dwellings within three hundred feet (300') of the light source, shall be designed to comply with
one (1), or a combination of the following illumination options:
a. First consider if the sign needs to be lighted at all. Lights in the window display may be sufficient to identify the business, which is particularly true
if good window graphics are used or the patrons are primarily pedestrians. There may also be businesses that have hours of operation that are
primarily daytime hours or have limited patron traffic that could be adequately served with window graphics or other non-illuminated signage.
b. Use external illumination that is down cast, or uses full cut off or fully shielded fixtures that are designed and aimed so the light falls entirely upon
the sign and are positioned so the light source is not visible from any point off the property or from roadways to reduce glare.
c. Illuminate the sign with halo lighting or comparable indirect lighting method.
d. Any sign surface so situated shall not exceed a maximum of two (2) footcandles as measured at ground level.
B. Hours Of Operation: Internally illuminated signs on non-residential properties may be illuminated from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. until eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M., or one (1) hour past the close of business of the facility being identified or advertised, whichever is later. Signs shall provide an automatic
timer to comply with the intent of this section.
C. Illumination Methods:
1. External illumination, is where the light source that illuminates the sign content is remote or separate from the sign and aimed at the face of the sign,
i.e., spot lights, gooseneck lighting, or similar. External illuminated signs are subject to the following regulations:
a. The source of the light must be concealed by translucent covers or positioned in such a manner that they are not visible to the general public and
glare is minimized.
b. External illumination shall be a stationary light source, shielded and directed solely at the sign.
2. Internal illumination, is when the sign or sign structure, includes light sources that are contained within the sign or structure to produce light through
or around the graphics of the sign. The following descriptions define the types of internal illumination and sign design that will be used to identify
what signs are acceptable in what areas of the City:
a. Reverse Channel Letters: Also known as halo lighting, channel letter with opaque face and side walls where the individual graphic has an opaque
face and a light source inside of the sign that projects the illumination back onto the surface behind the sign with softer, indirect light. The light
source is shielded from view by returns on the sign. This type of sign would comply with sections that limit lighting to indirect lighting.
b. Individual Face Lit Channel Letters: Three-dimensional letters illuminated from behind or containing a light source, with translucent face that
conveys light forward. These types of signs may be in combination with halo lighting.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 636/687
c. Opaque Face With Push Through Sign: Lettering or graphic image is cut through the sign face and backing material and mounted or inlaid so the
sign looks as if the lettering or image had been pushed through, up, and out of the sign face and the lettering is translucent to allow lighting the
imagery from behind.
d. Contoured Panel Sign: Three dimensional graphic where the edges are fabricated to closely follow and form an outline of the letter, word or
graphic. This type of sign may be a viable option for script lettering and complex logos where more preferred options would not be possible
because of the graphic being presented. Where this option is determined to be an acceptable alternative, the image shall be designed to minimize
the illumination of the background so that only the copy or graphic are illuminated.
e. Panel Sign/Cabinet Sign/Box Sign: A sign consisting of a frame covered by a translucent material where the entire sign structure is one (1) unit
with a common internal lighting source and the graphics are not intended to include three-dimensional individual images. This type of sign is
prohibited in most districts in the City except as gasoline canopy signage. In situations in which they are allowed, the image shall be designed to
minimize the illumination of the background so that only the copy or graphic are illuminated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 637/687
f. Exposed Neon Sign: Sign fashioned from continuous hollow tubing filled with gases that glow when an electrical current is passed through the
tubing, where the tubing is visible to the viewer. The tubing is bent in the shape of letters or images and is only allowed to convey an architectural
theme, period signage, or a unique sign design that is only possible with the use of exposed neon.
g. Exposed LED Sign: Illumination through the use of exposed LEDs is allowed only as specified for electronic changeable graphic. All signs using
LEDs must have installed ambient light monitors and must at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the brightness level of the
electronic sign based on ambient light conditions. At no time shall the sign be operated at a brightness level greater than allowed by this Code.
(1) Time and temperature signs: Where allowed, shall be limited to a maximum of twelve (12) square feet of sign area and shall be counted toward
the allowable sign area established for the method of display (wall or ground) for the property. The sign shall be a static display that changes no
more frequently than once every eight (8) seconds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 638/687
(2) Digital readerboards: Electronic, changeable message displays of static graphics for which the change sequence is determined by computer
software or similar means and the image change may be accomplished by means of fade, dissolve or scrolling the message. These types of
signs are prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 639/687
(3) Video display boards: A programmable, electronic graphic display that has the capacity for signage that features changeable text, illustrations
or animation, using computer software or other technology to automate the messages. These types of signs are prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 640/687
h. Architectural Lighting: There are a variety of lighting options that are sometimes used to accent the architecture features of a building and can be
creatively used in attractive and effective ways, but there are also lighted architectural elements that can be used to draw attention to the uses and
be considered signage, even without words or graphics. As part of the Planning Division's architectural review of a building, these lighting features
may be allowed as part of the architectural theme of a building or tenant space. Architectural lighting must be identified on the site plan building
plans. Any such lighting, (not intended to include seasonal holiday lighting displays), that is not approved as a part of the architecture of a project
during the site plan review, shall be considered signage and be included in the wall signage calculations. The following are examples of
architectural lighting that should be presented and reviewed as part of the architecture of the building:
(1) Neon, LED banding, illuminated accent bands, or similar application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 641/687
(2) Festoon lighting or similar draped or outline lighting.
(3) Backlit facades, architectural lighted facades or similar lighted building faces (this is not intended to include normal interior room lighting seen
through windows).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 642/687
(4) Accent lighting and projected images.
(5) Specialty lighting, such as illuminated site or building features or changing colors.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 643/687
TABLE 9-18-1
ILLUMINATION METHODS AND SIGN DESIGN OPTIONS
* Allowed in this district * Allowed with design considerations X Prohibited
Districts
External
Internal Illumination Source
Reverse Channel/ Halo
Channel
Letters
Push
Through
Contoured
Panel
Panel Or
Cabinet
Exposed
Neon
Exposed
LED
OS, RE, RS, R-1, SF-CR, SF-VJ, MH
* * X X X X X X
RM, RH * * X X X X X X
RC, CMC, SC, WR * * * * * X * *
PCP, BP * * * * * X X *
NC, CVC, VJC, OF * * * * * X * X
VJHB * * X X X X * X
LI, GI, VJLI * * * * * * * X
Institutional uses * * * * X X X X
Areas of special character * * * * * * * *
(Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-15: GROUND SIGNS:
A. Ground signs are defined as any permanent sign that is installed on posts or other supports that are placed on, or anchored into the ground and is
independent and detached from any building or other structure. Also called freestanding signs.
B. The intent of a ground sign is primarily to provide on-premises information to the general public, typically away from the building, near a street,
thoroughfare or entrance to the site. They are generally placed in a location and manner necessary to identify the name of the development,
subdivision or identify the users within the site, or to provide information needed to navigate and locate a business or uses within the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 644/687
C. Billboards are ground signs that are an exception as they are off-premises signs that are intended to identify or communicate a commercial or noncommercial
message related to activity or events conducted, services rendered, or a commodity sold at a location other than where the sign is located.
D. Specific criteria for various ground signs:
1. Access Identification And Directional Signs: Signs intended to provide instruction and/or information to the motoring public to move them into and
around a site. These signs do not include logos or business identification, and are limited to generic information for the viewer's needs, such as:
enter, exit, main entrance, employee parking, deliveries, drive thru, etc.
a. Maximum dimensions for these signs, including the support structure, is four feet (4') high and four feet (4') wide.
b. A minimum ten foot (10') setback from the public right-of-way line shall be required and a minimum twenty foot (20') setback from the back of curb
for any private street or drive. Consideration should be given to the placement of these signs so as to not obstruct visibility and create potential
safety hazards.
c. There is no restriction as to the number of these signs allowed per site, but a layout plan and design need to be submitted to the City for review
and approval. The City retains the authority to determine the appropriateness and need for the signs with the intent of preventing visual clutter.
d. No permit required for these signs.
e. Raised copy or lettering shall not be required for this sign type.
f. Illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection 9-18-14C, table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
2. Ground Directory Signs: Pedestrian scale ground signs located near a building entrance intended to identify and provide information on the tenants
within the building.
a. Limited to one (1) ground directory sign per building entrance located within fifty feet (50') of the building entrance.
b. No lettering on a directory sign shall be larger than four inches (4") high.
c. No permit is required if the sign is set back more than one hundred feet (100') from a street frontage or the face of the sign is not visible from the
public street. If set back one hundred feet (100') or less and/or the ground sign face is visible from the street, a sign permit will be required and it
will be considered one (1) of the allowed monument or landscape signs for the property.
d. Maximum size for a ground directory sign shall be twenty (20) square feet.
e. Raised copy or lettering shall not be required for this sign type.
f. Illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection 9-18-14C, table 9-18-1 of this chapter. As these signs are intended to be viewed at a closer
distance, the lighting should be minimized as much as practical.
3. Interstate Signs: Elevated ground sign allowed on private properties adjacent to the interstate to be viewed by and directed towards the motoring
public on the interstate. These signs are intended to identify on-premises businesses or services. May also be referred to as freeway or highway
signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 645/687
a. Where Allowed: Any non-residential use with a minimum of three hundred feet (300') of interstate frontage is eligible to have an interstate sign.
Each parcel shall be limited to one (1) interstate sign, unless the parcel has more than nine hundred feet (900') of interstate frontage, in which
case a second interstate sign may be allowed provided that there is a minimum five hundred foot (500') separation between the two (2) ground
signs. No business or tenant shall be identified on more than one (1) interstate sign within a parcel.
b. Height Allowed: The maximum height of the interstate sign structure as measured to highest element shall be thirty feet (30'). In those situations in
which it can be proven through an engineer's survey that the elevation at the base of the intended interstate sign structure at the closest edge of
interstate pavement is lower than the roadway surface of the interstate, the height of the sign structure may be increased to achieve a maximum
height of thirty feet (30') above the height of the adjacent interstate pavement elevation. In no case shall the highest element of interstate sign
structure exceed sixty feet (60') in height.
c. Setbacks: Interstate signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the interstate right-of-way but no greater than one hundred feet (100')
parallel and adjacent to the interstate frontage. Interstate signs shall also be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from the property line
of any adjacent parcels.
d. Sign Area Allowed: The total sign area shall be measured based upon the actual square footage of a square or rectangle that encloses the copy,
logos, and graphics of one (1) sign face. Double sided signs may be permitted with the maximum square footage permitted on each side. The
maximum sign area for a single tenant sign shall be one hundred (100) square feet. If the interstate sign is to have two (2) or more tenants, the
sign area may be increased to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet.
e. Structure Design: The interstate sign structure shall be monolithic in design which maintains essentially the same dimension from grade to top.
However, up to one-third (1/3) of the upper base area may be open to decrease the visual mass and surface area affected by wind loads while
maintaining structural integrity. In no situation shall the base of the structure appear as a single post as that would be considered a pole sign,
which is prohibited. The interstate sign structure shall be constructed with similar building materials and colors used on the principal building on the
parcel where the structure is located. The maximum width of an interstate sign structure shall be twelve feet (12').
f. Sign Design: All interstate signs shall be composed of individual dimensional letters (channel letters, reverse channel letters or solid letters),
routered face or designed in a similar manner such that only the text, copy or graphic content of the sign is illuminated and the background is
opaque. Panel and box signs with letters painted or adhered to the face of the sign shall be prohibited, except as follows as determined by the
Director of Development Services:
(1) A panel sign is the only reasonable type of signage that will preserve the integrity of a known and identifiable corporate logo or trademark, and
(2) The panel sign is installed so that the box of the sign is hidden and the panel face is mounted flush with the surface of the interstate monument
sign structure, and
(3) The sign is designed such that only the text, copy or graphic content of the sign is illuminated and the background is opaque.
4. Landscape Signs: Signs that are incorporated into a landscape feature such as a retaining wall, decorative fence, fountain, etc., and allowed in lieu
of a monument sign. The intent of this section is to encourage creative designs and unique entry features and to establish a method to allow for the
incorporation of signage in these features that would not normally comply with regulations for monument signs. It is not the intent to allow for a larger
monument sign surrounded with a limited number of landscape plantings to qualify as a landscape sign. A landscape sign requires a more significant
site enhancement of which the sign is integrated into the overall landscape feature or theme.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 646/687
a. Allowed: In lieu of a monument sign.
b. Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum one hundred fifty feet (150') of lot frontage on a street is required.
c. Number Allowed: One (1) landscape sign is allowed per street frontage that has the minimum frontage requirement. A sign may be reallocated
from a qualifying frontage to a frontage that is less than the minimum required, or elsewhere on the property, but no additional sign would be
allowed on the qualifying frontage. On a nonresidential property, one (1) additional landscape sign shall be allowed for a lot with frontage in excess
of five hundred feet (500') on any one (1) street, but must maintain a minimum three hundred feet (300') separation from any other landscape or
monument sign on the same property.
d. Minimum Separation: There must be a minimum separation of one hundred fifty feet (150') from another landscape or monument sign on the same
parcel.
e. Height Allowed: The maximum height of any structure associated with a landscape sign is eight feet (8') as measured to highest element of the
structure.
f. Setbacks: A minimum setback of ten feet (10') from a public right-of-way line and twenty feet (20') from the back of curb of a private street or drive
shall be required. Consideration should be given to the placement of the sign and landscape features so as to not obstruct visibility and create
potential safety hazards.
g. Sign Area Allowed: The total sign area shall be measured based upon the actual square footage of one (1) square or rectangle that encloses the
copy, logos, and graphics of one (1) sign face. The maximum sign area allowed at the minimum setback shall be forty five (45) square feet. Signs
with two (2) equal sized sign faces that are back to back, or have an interior angle of less than forty five degrees (45°) between the sign faces,
shall be allowed and only one (1) face shall be counted towards the total sign area. Signs where the interior angle between two (2) equal sized
sign faces is greater than forty five degrees (45°), each sign face shall be counted independent of the other to calculate the total sign area.
h. Non-Residential Uses: For non-residential uses, an additional fifteen (15) square feet of sign area shall be allowed if an additional setback of ten
feet (10') or greater is provided.
i. Nine Hundred Thousand Square Feet GFA: A building with a minimum of nine hundred thousand (900,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA) is
allowed a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of sign area for a landscape sign. Said sign must be set back a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from the public right-of-way line and thirty feet (30') from the back of curb of a private street or drive.
j. Structure Design: Since the design requirements for these signs require that they be incorporated into the landscape features of the site, it would
be difficult to define specific criteria without limiting creative options. The structure needs to be designed to create visual interest and be integrated
into, or at a minimum, complement the surroundings, incorporating architectural elements and unique design elements consistent with the
materials and colors of site and building elements of the site. A plan for the proposal needs to be submitted to the City for review and, if the feature
has not been previously approved as a part of a site plan review, an amendment to the approved site plan may be required if the change is
determined to be a significant departure from the approved plan.
k. Sign Design: A three-dimensional appearance of the copy, graphics, or design elements is required and may be achieved by individual dimension
letters or graphics, cut out, push through, engraved, embossed, pin mounted with stand-offs, or alternative acceptable to the City.
l. Sign Illumination: Sign illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection 9-18-14C, table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
m. Special District Regulations:
(1) Residential Subdivision Signs: A landscape sign may be allowed in lieu of a monument sign at each entrance into a defined residential
development or subdivision, however, an easement shall be recorded for the sign and acceptable documentation, as determined by the City, that
outlines the responsibility and strategy for the long term maintenance of the sign and removal, or repair at such time that the sign is no longer
desired or being maintained appropriately. Illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection 9-18-14C, table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
5. Monument Signs: A permanent sign structure, typically located near the street and directed at the motoring public to identify businesses, complexes,
centers, and tenants within the property on which the sign is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 647/687
a. Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum one hundred fifty foot (150') lot frontage on a street is required to qualify for a monument sign.
b. Number Allowed: One (1) monument sign is allowed per street frontage that has the minimum frontage requirement. A sign may be reallocated
from a qualifying frontage to a frontage that is less than the minimum required, or elsewhere on the property, but no additional sign would be
allowed on the qualifying frontage. On a nonresidential property, one (1) additional monument sign shall be allowed for a lot with a frontage in
excess of five hundred feet (500') on any one (1) street, but must maintain a minimum three hundred feet (300') separation from any other
monument or landscape sign in the same property.
c. Minimum Separation: Signs must maintain a minimum separation of one hundred fifty feet (150') from another monument sign on the same parcel
and fifty feet (50') from a sign on an adjacent property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 648/687
d. Height Allowed: The maximum height of a monument sign at the minimum setback, including the structure, is five feet (5') as measured to highest
element of the structure. Additional height may be allowed with additional setback as outlined below.
e. Setbacks: A minimum setback of ten feet (10') from a public right-of-way line or twenty feet (20') from the back of curb of a private street or drive
shall be required, unless noted otherwise in this section. Consideration should be given to the placement of the sign and landscape features so as
to not obstruct visibility and create potential safety hazards.
f. Sign Area Allowed: The sign area for a monument sign shall be the area of one (1) rectangle or square that encloses the extreme edges of the
entire structure of said sign of one (1) sign face. The maximum size for a monument sign at the minimum setback is thirty five (35) square feet,
unless noted otherwise within this section. Signs with two (2) equal sized sign faces that are back to back, or have an interior angle of less than
forty five degrees (45°) between the sign faces, shall be allowed and only one (1) face shall be counted towards the total sign area. Signs where
the interior angle between two (2) equal sized sign faces is greater than forty five degrees (45°), each sign face shall be counted independent of
the other to calculate the total sign area.
g. Non-Residential Uses: For non-residential uses, the sign area may be increased up to maximum of sixty four (64) square feet and the height of the
structure may be increased to a maximum of seven feet (7') with an additional ten feet (10') of setback provided in all required setbacks.
h. Structure Design: The intent of this section is to have regulations that require that a monument sign be designed to create visual interest and be
unified with the architecture, colors and materials that are relevant to the overall site. Monument signs need to be more than just a box with tenant
names placed on a slab in the ground; they need to be an attractive feature, incorporating architectural elements on the sides, bottom and top to
frame the sign area. These elements are to help provide unification with the architectural theme of the site.
Monument signs shall be designed to include a solid base at least twelve inches (12") high, along with columns, pilasters, cornices, or similar details
to provide design interest. The design of the structure needs to be consistent with the materials and colors of site and building elements of the site.
The signage portion of a monument sign may be elevated above the base on exposed posts but the height of the exposed posts shall not be
greater twelve inches (12"), or one-quarter (1/4) of the total height of the structure and sign, whichever is more restrictive.
i. Sign Design: A three-dimensional appearance of the copy, graphics, or design elements is desired and may be achieved by individual dimension
letters or graphics, cut out, push through, engraved, embossed, pin mounted with stand-offs, or an alternative acceptable to the City. Panel and
box signs with letters or graphics painted or adhered to the face of the sign shall be prohibited.
j. Sign Illumination: Sign illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection 9-18-14C, table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
k. Special District Regulations:
(1) Residential Subdivision Signs: A monument sign may be allowed in lieu of a landscape sign at each entrance into a defined residential
development or subdivision. However, an easement shall be recorded for the sign and acceptable documentation, as determined by the City,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 649/687
that outlines the responsibility and strategy for the long term maintenance of the sign and removal, or repair at such time that the sign is no
longer desired or being maintained appropriately. Illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection 9-18-14C, table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
(2) Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District: Due to the small lots and minimal building setbacks in the district, any lot within the VJHB
District with a minimum frontage on a public street of fifty feet (50') may qualify for a ground/monument sign.
(A) A minimum setback of five feet (5') from the public right-of-way shall be required. The maximum square footage of the sign and structure
shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
(B) Post and panel signs may be allowed as a monument sign if the maximum height of any exposed post, or similar support structure, is not
greater than one-quarter (1/4) of the total height of the sign. All other requirements for a monument sign shall be met for these types of signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 650/687
(C) Hanging signs on a single post shall be allowed as a monument sign with the maximum post height of seven feet (7'). Sign shall be set back
a minimum of five feet (5') from the public right-of-way. The maximum sign area of a hanging sign shall be ten (10) square feet.
(D) All signs in the Valley Junction Historic Business District should be designed to reflect the unique character and eclectic nature of the district.
6. Project Directory Sign: A permanent, diagramed representation of the complex located near the entrance of a multiple building complex which shows
the location and address of the building or unit designations within the complex. This sign is intended to help emergency service and visitors with a
visual map of the complex to determine how to get to a particular building or unit most efficiently. These signs are not intended to be additional signs
or graphics to promote, advertise or identify the complex for motorists on a roadway.
a. May be required at the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 651/687
b. No sign permit is required.
c. Maximum sign area shall be thirty five (35) square feet.
d. Maximum height shall be eight feet (8') above grade.
e. Post and panel sign design shall be allowed but the height of the exposed post shall not be more than three feet (3'), or one-quarter (1/4) of the
total height of the sign, whichever is more restrictive.
f. A three-dimensional appearance of the copy, graphics, or design elements is not required for this sign type.
7. Billboards: An off premises sign, that identifies or communicates commercial or noncommercial messages related to an activity conducted, a service
rendered, or a commodity sold at a location other than where the sign is located.
a. General Provisions: No billboard shall be permitted within one hundred feet (100') of any dwelling unit, public park or property line of public or
parochial school site, church site, hospital site, cemetery, similar institution or zoning district not permitting billboards or off premises signs.
Furthermore, no billboard sign shall be permitted to face and be located within three hundred feet (300') of a residential zoned district or use.
b. Documentation: Any off-premises signs along an interstate and primary highway must provide documentation that the sign has been approved by
the Iowa Department of Transportation (IDOT) prior to review by the City.
c. Districts Permitted In: Billboards which conform to the provisions of this section shall be permitted in the following zoning districts:
(1) General Industrial District (GI).
(2) Agricultural/Open Space District (OS).
d. Minimum Setback: No billboard shall be established closer than one hundred feet (100') from a public right-of-way or one hundred twenty feet
(120') from the back of curb of a private street.
e. Size And Height Standards: The following size and height standards shall apply to all billboards regardless of zoning district:
Maximum
Size
Maximum
Height Extensions
Single
billboard
350 square
feet
35 feet 1 sign extension shall be allowed per sign at no more than 10 feet outside the area of the sign and no
more than 100 additional square feet in size
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 652/687
Maximum
Size
Maximum
Height Extensions
Double
billboard1
675 square
feet
35 feet
Note:
1. A double billboard is 2 sign faces mounted on the same structure and shall only be allowed on parcels of 10 acres or more.
f. Structure Design: A minimum distance of ten feet (10') between ground level at the base of the supporting uprights and the bottom of the sign face
shall be provided.
g. Spacing Of Billboard Signs:
(1) On Federal and State highways, Federal and State regulations for spacing and setbacks shall apply; provided, however, if the regulations of
this chapter are found more restrictive, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
(2) No billboard shall be established within three hundred feet (300') of any other billboard sign facing the same direction.
h. Prohibited: Electronic changeable graphics on billboards shall be prohibited.
i. Three-Dimensional: A three-dimensional appearance of the copy, graphics, or design elements is not required for this sign type.
j. Building Permit Required: For any new billboard structure, or any structural alteration of an existing billboard, a building permit shall be required
prior to the commencement of work.
k. Illumination: Interior illumination shall be prohibited. External illumination shall be allowed but must be designed to minimize light spillage onto
adjacent properties and roadways.
TABLE 9-18-2
FREESTANDING SIGN DESIGN AND ILLUMINATION METHODS
OS X X X * * X * * *
RE, RS, R-1, SF-CR,
SF-VJ
X X X * * X X * X
MH * X X * * * X * X
RM (SF) * X X * * X X * X
RM * X X * * X X * X
RH * X X * * * X * X
PCP, BP * * * * * * X * *
RC, CMC, SC, WR * * * * * * X * *
NC, CVC, VJC, OF * * X * * X X * *
VJHB * * X * * X X * X
* Allowed in this district * Allowed with design considerations or as needed X Prohibited
Districts
Sign Design Illumination
Access
ID And
Directory
Signs
Ground
Directory
Signs
Interstate
Signs
Landscape
Signs2
Monument
Signs2
Project Directory
Signs
Billboards
External
Or
Indirect
Internal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 653/687
LI, VJLI * * X X * * X * *
GI * * * * * * * * *
Institutional uses * X * * * X X * *
PUD or Specific
Plan1
* * * * * * X * *
Notes:
1. Specific regulations are identified in the applicable PUD or Specific Plan. If nothing is noted in the language of the PUD or Specific Plan, the
regulations of the underlying zoning for any parcel shall apply.
2. Landscape and monument signs are allowed as an either/or sign option and must meet specific design criteria to be allowed in any of the noted
districts.
(Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-16: WALL SIGNS:
A. Wall Signs Generally: Wall signs are defined as any permanent sign attached to, erected against, or applied to the surface of the exterior wall of a
building or an interior sign that is placed primarily for viewing outside of the building. The intent of a wall sign is to provide identification for the
occupants of a building so that motoring traffic can locate the user or business they seek to find. There are also pedestrian scale wall signs that are
designed to communicate information to foot traffic, or close up viewing, and not design to attract the attention of a viewer traveling in a motor vehicle
or seeing the information from a greater distance. It is the intent of these regulations to facilitate these intents by establishing design criteria that will
guide the design of signage to provide opportunities for creative design options while minimizing sign clutter, excessive illumination, and possible
annoyances to the general public.
B. Specific Criteria For Various Wall Signs:
1. Awning Signs, Building Canopy Signs And Marquee Signs:
Awning Signs: Signs attached to or adhered to an awning (awnings are flexible, non-structural coverings over a structural frame that projects from a
building wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window).
Building Canopy Signs: Signs that are attached to, or constructed into a building canopy (building canopies are permanent, rigid, structural, roof like
elements that project from a building wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window).
Districts
Sign Design Illumination
Access
ID And
Directory
Signs
Ground
Directory
Signs
Interstate
Signs
Landscape
Signs2
Monument
Signs2
Project Directory
Signs
Billboards
External
Or
Indirect
Internal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 654/687
Marquee Signs: Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. (A marquee is a permanent roof like structure, other than a building canopy or
roof, that projects from the facade of the building and is typically used to highlight the entrance to the building. Marquees are often ornate and incorporate
lighting and signage to attract attention and identify activities associated with the business, such as theaters, convention centers, concert halls or hotels.)
Under Awning Sign: A sign which is attached beneath the structural support frame of an awning or hangs below an awning, canopy, or marquee and is
designed to provide business identification information for pedestrians walking under these overhead structures.
a. Awnings, canopies or marquees without lettering or other advertising are not regulated as signage, unless back lit (see below), but may require
review for compliance with the approved architecture of the building and/or a building permit.
b. Shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet (8') about the grade below.
c. Sign copy will count towards the allowable wall signage for the tenant/building.
d. Sign copy may be placed on the top of a building canopy or marquee, provided that the top of the sign is still below the principal roof line of the
building.
e. No awning, canopy or marquee shall located closer than three feet (3') to a public right-of-way line or easement, with the exception of the VJHB
District (see below).
f. Exterior illumination, such as gooseneck down lighting, or interior lighting which only illuminates the copy of the sign, shall be allowed. If an awning,
canopy or marquee is back lit, the entire awning, canopy, or marquee will be considered signage.
g. No awning, building canopy or marquee shall be mounted on a building wall so that it extends above the parapet or roof line of a single story
building, or the bottom of the second story windows.
h. Due to the minimal setback of the buildings in the VJHB District, awnings may be allowed over the public right-of-way, but a hold harmless
agreement, indemnification of the City, and proof of insurance must be provided in accordance with section 7-1-1, "Use Of Public Ways
Restricted", of this Code.
i. Under awning signs are limited to one (1) per tenant frontage with a maximum sign area of three (3) square feet. A minimum clearance of eight feet
(8') between the bottom of the sign and the grade below shall be maintained.
2. Projecting Sign (Also Called A Blade Sign): A double-sided sign with two (2) faces that is generally mounted perpendicular to the building wall by
way of brackets or hanging supports. This type of sign does not include awning, canopy, or marquee signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 655/687
a. One (1) projecting sign, per building frontage, per tenant is allowed.
b. A minimum fifty feet (50') of separation shall be provided from any other projecting sign.
c. Shall not be less than eight feet (8') from the bottom of the sign to the grade below. If the sign is erected over a driveway or street, it shall not be
less than fifteen feet (15') from the bottom of the sign to grade below.
d. No sign shall extend away from the building wall greater than five feet (5') as measured to the furthest edge; however, no projecting sign shall be
closer than five feet (5') to a public right-of-way line or easement, with the exception of the VJHB District as prescribed below.
e. The dimension between the principal sign faces of a projecting/blade sign shall not exceed twelve inches (12").
f. One (1) square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building or tenant frontage may be used for a projecting sign, up to a maximum of twenty
(20) square feet. Only one (1) face of a projecting sign shall be counted towards the allowed wall signage of a building or tenant frontage.
g. No projecting sign shall be located so as to extend above the parapet or roof line of a single story building, or the top of the second story windows.
h. Projecting sign shall be designed to adhere to structural and load capacities of the West Des Moines area and of the building that it is attached.
Structural and load calculations may be required prior to sign approval.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 656/687
i. Unless restricted elsewhere in this chapter, projecting signs may be externally or internally illuminated. If internally illuminated, all projecting signs
shall be designed in such a manner that only the text, copy or graphic of the sign is illuminated and the background is opaque. This may be
accomplished with individual channel letters, halo lit letters, routered face with push through letters, or comparable design acceptable to the City.
j. Complex shapes are encouraged for projecting signs rather than simple rectangle, square and circle shapes.
k. Due to the minimal setback of the buildings in the VJHB District, projecting signs may be allowed over the public right-of-way, but a hold harmless
agreement, indemnification of the City, and proof of insurance must be provided in accordance with section 7-1-1, "Use Of Public Ways
Restricted", of this Code; however, renewal and provision of proof of insurance annually is not required.
3. Facade Wall Signs: Any permanent sign attached to, erected against, or adhered onto the exterior surface of the wall of a building with the exposed
face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall.
a. All facade wall signs shall have a three-dimensional appearance with a minimum dimensional depth of three-quarters of an inch (3/4") for the copy,
graphics, or design elements. The dimensional depth may be achieved by individual dimension letters or graphics, cut out, push through,
engraved, embossed, pin mounted with stand-offs, or alternative acceptable to the City.
b. Raceways shall be prohibited, except in situations where the architecture of a building would prevent any other alternative as determined by the
City. In such situations, the visibility of the raceway shall be minimized through one (1) or more of the following options:
(1) Contoured raceway as a design element of the sign proposal; or
(2) Concealed behind a backer panel or similar architectural feature.
(3) When no other option exists, the raceway shall be minimized in size and painted to blend in with the building it is mounted onto.
In an effort to accommodate desires to minimize wall penetrations for signage, an acceptable alternative is the installation of a wireway. The
wireway shall have a maximum depth of three inches (3") and be located behind a contoured backer panel upon which individual channel letters
can be mounted. The backer panel must screen the wireway from visibility and become a design element of the entire sign. If the backer panel is
a contrasting color from the wall behind, the backer panel will be included in the sign area calculation.
c. If internally illuminated, all facade wall signs shall be designed in such a manner that only the text, copy or graphic content of the sign is
illuminated, and the background is opaque. This may be accomplished with individual channel letters, halo lit letters, routered face with push
through letters, or comparable design acceptable to the City.
d. Where allowed elsewhere in this Code, panel sign shall be contoured around the copy of the sign with an opaque background.
4. Other Wall Signs:
a. Building Directory Sign: A sign internal to a site and not intended to attract people off a street, but intended to provide information on the tenants
within the building to the public once they are within the site.
(1) No lettering shall be larger than four inches (4") high.
(2) No permit is required if the sign is set back more than one hundred feet (100') from a street or the sign face is not visible from the street. If one
hundred feet (100') or less and the sign face is visible from the street, a sign permit will be required and the sign area will be counted towards
the allowable wall signage for the building.
(3) Maximum size is thirty two (32) square feet.
(4) Limited to one (1) sign per building entrance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 657/687
b. Icon Sign: A unique, three-dimensional object or sign that describes a business's product or services. As a three dimensional sign, these signs will
be treated as a projecting sign and must comply with those requirements. The square footage of an icon sign will be measured by the smallest
rectangle that outlines the entire sign on the largest dimension of the sign.
c. Freestanding Structure Sign: Any sign that is not attached to a building, but rather is attached to a canopy, or similar open-air, overhead structure,
such as a gasoline canopy, or a freestanding structure, such as a kiosk, or ATM.
(1) If the freestanding structure is associated with a principal use in a building on the same site, any signage on the structure shall be counted
towards the wall sign area earned by the building or tenant frontage of the principal use.
(2) For structures described in subsection B4c(1) of this section, a maximum of one (1) sign per freestanding structure face shall be allowed with a
maximum of fourteen (14) square feet per structure face.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 658/687
(3) If the freestanding structure is the principal use (no principal use in an associated building), the maximum amount of signage per structure face
shall be no greater than five percent (5%) of the structure face, or fourteen (14) square feet, whichever is more restrictive.
(4) No sign shall extend about the parapet or roof line of the canopy or structure.
(5) A panel sign is allowed as a freestanding structure sign, but shall be designed in such a manner that only the text, copy or graphic content of
the sign is illuminated and the background of the sign face is opaque.
d. Incidental Wall Signs: Signs on a building that display general site information, dates of construction, instructions, directives, or restrictions that are
primarily oriented to pedestrians or motor vehicle operators who have entered the property from the street. These signs are not intended to contain
a commercial message or advertising.
(1) Maximum of six (6) square foot per sign.
(2) No permit required.
e. Murals: An image, picture or representation painted on or adhered to the exterior surface of a building that is intended to serve as an artistic and/or
historic function, and is not related by language, logo or graphic to the advertisement of any product, service or identification of any business. It is
designed and intended to serve as public art, to enhance public spaces, but is not necessarily publicly owned.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 659/687
(1) Any graphic that includes a commercial message would be considered a wall sign and must comply with wall sign regulations. The City shall
make this determination and notify the applicant of that finding.
(2) If the City determines that the graphic would qualify as a mural, then the applicant shall be directed to submit a minor modification proposal to
the Planning Division for a facade change on private property, or to the West Des Moines Arts Advisory Commission for review and
recommendation if on public property.
f. Window Signs: Any graphic installed, adhered to, or painted upon an individual glazed surface panel. This term does not include merchandise
located in a window and holiday displays.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 660/687
(1) Permanent window signs, which are graphics that are expected to remain in place for more than thirty (30) days and are not easily changed,
such as window vinyl, shall be allowed for non-residential uses. Said graphics shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the window area of
that facade of the building. Up to one hundred percent (100%) of the window area may be covered for the purpose of privacy or sunscreen, but
only a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) may include a graphic with the balance of the background being a solid neutral color.
(2) Temporary window signs, which are graphics that are short term and intended to be in place less than thirty (30) days, such as posters,
temporary painted signs, etc., shall be allowed for non-residential uses on an additional fifteen percent (15%) of the window area of that facade
of the building.
(3) For permanent window signs, if the amount exceeds the allowed twenty five percent (25%), the entire sign shall be counted as wall signage
and regulated as such.
(4) No permit is required for window signs but, proof may need to be provided to the City of the calculations to show compliance upon request.
(5) Any sign that is not window signage that is placed inside a building for the primary purpose of being viewed from outside of the glazed surface
and cannot be easily read from within the building, shall be considered wall signage and included in the count for allowable wall signage.
g. Special District Regulations:
(1) Residential Wall Signs: Wall signs are not allowed in single family residential districts, however, there is the potential for a need for wall signage
in a multifamily residential development. A multifamily project shall be allowed one (1) wall sign per street frontage, including frontage on an
interstate, at a rate of one (1) square foot per linear foot of building frontage facing the street up to a maximum of sixty four (64) square feet.
Illumination of the sign shall be allowed with external or indirect lighting as shown in table 9-18-3 of this subsection B. Signs shall be allowed to be
illuminated from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and shall provide an automatic timer to comply with the intent of this section.
TABLE 9-18-3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 661/687
WALL MOUNTED SIGN DESIGN AND ILLUMINATION METHODS
* Allowed in this district * Allowed with design considerations or
for specific types of signs
X Prohibited
Districts External
Internal Illumination Source
Reverse Channel/ Halo
Channel
Letters
Push
Through
Contoured
Panel
Panel Or
Cabinet
Exposed
Neon
Exposed
LED
OS, RE, RS, R-1,
SF-CR, SF-VJ, MH
* * X X X X X X
RM, RH * * X X X X X X
RC, CMC, SC, WR * * * * * X * *
PCP, BP * * * * * X X *
NC, CVC, VJC, OF * * * * * X X X
VJHB * * X X X X * X
LI, GI, VJLI * * * * * * X X
Institutional uses * * * * X X X X
PUD or Specific Plan1 * * * * * * * *
Note:
1. Specific regulations are identified in the applicable PUD or Specific Plan. If nothing is noted in the language of the PUD or Specific Plan, the
regulations of the underlying zoning for any parcel shall apply.
C. Sign Area Formula For Wall Signs:
1. Sign Area Formula: The area of a wall sign is determined by the City using actual dimensions, where practical, or approximate dimensions when
irregularity of a sign shape warrants. The area of each sign is to be measured by adding the sum of the area of two (2) rectangles or squares that
enclose the extreme points or edges of all copy, logos, and graphics of said sign.
(A1 x B1)+(A2 x B2) = sign area
2. Sign Area Allowed:
a. One (1) square foot of sign area is earned for every linear foot of building, or tenant, frontage facing a street when said building is set back a
distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') or less from the right-of-way line or back of curb of a private street.
b. One and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign area is earned per linear foot of building, or tenant, frontage facing a street when said building is set
back a distance of two hundred fifty one feet (251') to five hundred feet (500').
c. Two (2) square feet of sign area is earned per linear foot of building, or tenant, frontage facing a street when said building is set back greater than
five hundred feet (500').
d. If the front of a building faces away from the street frontage, or there is an intervening building between the applicant building and the street, that
wall area for the front of the building would earn signage at a rate of one-half (1/2) square foot of sign area per linear footage of said wall, unless
the building has no other building frontage facing a public street. In these situations, the building or tenant would earn one (1) square foot of sign
area for every linear foot of building, or tenant, frontage for the wall that contains the primary entrance into the building or tenant space.
e. For multiple story buildings, those tenants located on the second or higher floors, shall earn signage at a ratio of one-half (1/2) square footage per
linear footage of the exterior wall of their leasable area facing a street.
f. At no time shall more than two (2) walls be used to compute allowable signage.
3. Limit: There is no limit on the number of signs allowed on a building, unless restricted elsewhere within this Code, however the total amount of sign
area earned, based upon the formulas above, shall not be exceeded. Additionally, the total amount of sign area that may be placed on any one (1)
wall shall not exceed what that wall would earn at a one (1) square foot per linear foot of frontage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 662/687
4. Maximum Size Of Letters, Graphics, And Logos: No letter, graphic or logo dimension greater than six feet (6') shall be allowed, except in those
situations in which a use occupies in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of building area. In these instances, individual letters,
graphics or logos may be up to, but shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-17: SPECIAL SIGNS:
A. Changeable Graphics Sign: These are permanent signs which have graphic content that can be changed or altered through manual, mechanical or
electrical means.
1. Where allowed, changeable graphics signs shall be counted as part of the wall or ground signage allowed elsewhere in this chapter.
2. The changeable graphics area shall be no more than one-third (1/3) of the total allowable sign area of the sign, up to a maximum of twenty (20)
square feet.
3. Manually changeable graphics are characterized by the letters or graphics being placed in a holder on the sign face either individually, with slide in
panels with the message, or as a complete sign panel face that gets changed manually. This type of changeable graphic may be included as a part
of any allowed sign.
4. Electronically changeable graphics and video displays, shall be prohibited, except for time and temperature signs.
a. Time and temperature signs: Where allowed, shall be limited to a maximum of twelve (12) square feet of sign area and shall be counted toward
the allowed sign area established for the method of display (wall or ground) for the property. The sign shall be a static display that changes no
more frequently than once every eight (8) seconds.
B. Institutional Signs: Since an institutional use, such as a government, church or school, can be allowed in any zoning district under certain conditions,
standards need to be adopted that define what signage will be allowed in the event that the use is placed in a district that may not allow a particular
sign. To the greatest extent possible, signage for an institutional use should blend in with the underlying zoning district standards. Should the use be
located in a district that has less stringent standards that those listed in this section, the more lenient standards may be utilized.
1. Zones Allowed: Institutional signs shall be allowed in all zones in accordance with the following:
a. Ground Signs:
(1) Monument/Landscape Signs: A freestanding monument/landscape sign shall be allowed for any parcel with a minimum of one hundred twenty
five feet (125') of street frontage. The Director of Development Services may grant an exception of the minimum frontage requirement if the site
has no frontage that would comply with the minimum and they determine that identification of the institutional use by other available sign options
may not clearly identify the use to the motoring public. One (1) sign shall be allowed per vehicle entrance. A minimum separation of one hundred
twenty five feet (125') between signs along the same street frontage shall be provided. The standards established in the table below shall be the
minimums allowed. If the institutional use is located in a zoning district that would allow greater signage, the monument/landscape signs may be
allowed in accordance with the applicable zoning district.
(2) Bulletin Board Signs: A bulletin board sign may be an independent ground sign, combined with a monument/landscape sign, or may be
attached to the building as a wall sign. As the information for a bulletin board sign is considered temporary and changes over time, the method
of providing changeable graphics shall comply with all City regulations regarding changeable graphic/reader board signs.
(A) Freestanding Bulletin Board Sign: One (1) freestanding bulletin board sign shall be allowed per street frontage in addition to any allowed
monument/landscape sign. Separation requirements for monument/landscape signs shall not apply to bulletin board signs. If a freestanding
bulletin board is allowed in addition to a monument sign, the use of any other temporary signs, such as banners, bandit signs, etc., shall be
prohibited on the site. The intent of the bulletin board sign is to establish a permanent location for the display of temporary signage for
activities, events and announcements for the use.
(B) Combination Monument/Landscape Sign And Bulletin Board Sign: In the event that the bulletin board sign is combined with a
monument/landscape sign, the additional sign area provided under this Code for the bulletin board may not be utilized to increase the sign area
allowed for the identification of the institutional use, i.e., the combined sign is allowed to be sixty four (64) square feet total, fifty (50) square feet
of a combined sign for identification of the institutional use and fourteen (14) square feet for the changeable graphics for the bulletin board. The
area dedicated to the permanent identification of the institutional use shall not exceed the total allowed for a monument/landscape sign under
this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 663/687
(C) Wall Mounted Bulletin Board Sign: The square feet allowed for the bulletin board sign shall be in addition to allowed building/wall signage.
(3) Access Identification And Directional Signs: These signs shall comply with Sign Code provisions for access identification and directional signs.
b. Building Signage: Institutional uses shall be allowed one (1) square foot of building (wall) signage per linear foot of building frontage facing a
street. In the event that an institutional use is located on a parcel with no public street frontage, the frontage of the building with the primary
entrance shall be used to determine the maximum allowed square footage of signs. In no case shall more than two (2) building frontages be
allowed to be counted toward allowed signage. The maximum letter height shall be six feet (6') high.
c. Site Plan Approval: Landmark, statue, mural, or non-commercial symbol may be allowed but shall be presented to the City Council for approval as
part of a site plan.
d. Illumination: Signs may be illuminated in a manner allowed based upon the zoning district the use is located in (see subsection 9-18-14C, table 9-
18-1 of this chapter). However consideration shall be given to sign design and type of illumination to keep in character with the surrounding
neighborhood.
e. Standards: The following standards shall apply to institutional signs:
TABLE 9-18-4
Type Of Sign
Permit/
Approval1
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Sign Height
Sign
Setback
Other Requirements
Bulletin board - freestanding or building sign S 32 sq. ft. 5 ft . 10 ft . See "signs not needing a permit"
Combination monument/landscape and bulletin
board
S 64 sq. ft. 10 ft . 20 ft . See "bulletin board signs"
Directional A 8 sq. ft. 4 ft . 10 ft .
Landmark, statue, mural, or religious symbol C - - - Must be approved as part of a site plan
Landscape S 30 sq. ft. 8 ft . 10 ft . In lieu of monument sign
Monument S 35 sq. ft. 5 ft . 10 ft . In lieu of landscape sign
Note:
1. Sign permit (S), administrative review (A), City Council approval (C).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 664/687
C. Landmarks, Sculptures And Statuary: These items are not intended to communicate a commercial message and therefore would not include
commercial messages, business identification, logos or other identifying graphics. They do not require a sign permit but would be approved as part of a
site plan or minor modification process through the Planning Division. An allowed sign may be placed on a separate structure in close proximity to the
site feature with the issuance of a sign permit, provided that the placement of the sign near the site feature would not change the perception of the
landmark, sculpture or statuary to be a commercial message (i.e., a coffee cup as a sculpture may be considered artwork, but if you place a sign near it
identifying a coffee shop business, that would change the artwork into a promotional piece that would be identified with the coffee shop).
D. Lots Without Street Frontage:
1. A buildable lot without lot frontage on a private or public street is allowed one (1) off premises sign per entrance to the street.
2. The sign must be located within fifteen feet (15') of the roadway and the private easement that provides access to the lot.
3. Setback shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the public street right-of-way or back of curb of a private street.
4. The maximum dimensions for a sign under this section is four foot (4') tall and two feet (2') in width.
5. Illumination of the sign shall be allowed in accordance with the zoning district in which the sign is located.
6. If more than one (1) sign is allowed under this section, the signs must be located at least fifty feet (50') away from another sign allowed by this
section.
7. The provision of written consent of the owner of the property upon which the sign is located is required.
8. Only allowed in all zoning districts that have not been developed with single family detached residential units.
E. Signs On Public Property: It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to place, affix, or erect any "sign", defined in this chapter, on any property owned
by the City or on any easement granted to the City, except in accordance with the provisions herein. Any sign that overhangs, protrudes over, or has
been posted on any structure on property owned by the City or easement granted to the City shall also be considered unlawful, except as otherwise
provided herein or as allowed in section 7-1-1 of this Code.
F. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs are signs that are erected for a limited duration and not to be continued after the expiration of the allowed time
period. The intent of this section is to prescribe the conditions in which temporary commercial signs, or attention attracting devices, may be allowed for
a limited duration in addition to any permanent permitted signs. All temporary signs allowed under this section must be located on-premises of the
activity, product, service or event that is the subject of the sign.
1. Allowed With No Permit: In all zoning districts, temporary, on-premises, commercial signs under six (6) square feet in sign area and less than four
feet (4') in height, are allowed with no permit required. No more than one (1) temporary commercial sign per street frontage per parcel, or tenant in
the case of multiple tenant occupancy, shall be allowed unless otherwise allowed within this chapter. The use of more than one (1) commercial sign
per street frontage requires the approval of a sign permit and will be regulated under the provisions provided for short term temporary signs. In a
situation where there is temporary activity on a site, such as a contractor doing work on a home or lawn care, a temporary sign would be allowed on
the property only at those times there is someone on site actively working. Signs under this provision would be expected to be removed upon
completion of the work and in instances in which there are three (3) or more consecutive days in which no work is being performed on-site.
2. Short Term Temporary Signs: A sign permit shall be required for any on premises temporary commercial sign which is larger than six (6) square feet
in size or taller than four feet (4') in height, or when the aggregate total of the signs per street frontage for one (1) entity or event exceeds six (6)
square feet. Short term temporary signs include all freestanding or ground mounted banners, temporary flags, aerial signs and balloons tethered
over a site, inflatable signs and attention attracting devices, such as searchlights. Building mounted and hard material signs may also be allowed
under the provisions of a short term temporary sign.
a. These signs are allowed on private property in any non-residential district, and in the Residential High Density (RH) District and any Residential
Medium Density (RM) District that has not been developed as detached single family residential units.
b. At the minimum setback, the maximum height for any short term temporary sign shall be ten feet (10') above grade.
c. Shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from a public street right-of-way and/or twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb for a private street
or drive. The setback shall be increased equal to the height of the proposed sign for any sign exceeding ten feet (10'). Aerial signs are an
exception and are limited to one (1) per site and shall be tethered in such a way that the sign remains wholly located on or above the site for which
the permit is issued. Signs taller than ten feet (10') may be allowed with additional setback above the minimum required equal to the height of the
proposed temporary sign.
d. All signs shall be securely anchored in such a way to comply with the wind pressure and dead load regulations outlined within the Building Code
as adopted by the City of West Des Moines.
e. The maximum duration of each sign permit per property or tenant, in the case of a multi-tenant building, shall be four (4) consecutive days or any
portion thereof. Permits may be issued for consecutive events but shall not exceed four (4) events in a calendar year, and a maximum of sixteen
(16) days per year.
f. The maximum size for any individual sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet and the aggregate total of the combination of signs allowed
under any one (1) short term temporary sign permit allowed under this section shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
g. No illumination, amplified sound, animation, dynamic elements, or attachments, including, but not limited to, balloons, ribbons, streamers,
pennants or speakers, shall be allowed.
3. Long Term Temporary Signs: A permit is required for any temporary sign over six (6) square feet in size that is proposed to be installed for longer
than the maximum sixteen (16) days allowed under short term temporary sign regulations. Long term temporary signs are on premises commercial
signs constructed of a hard material, such as plywood or similar rigid material, or soft material (e.g., banner) if the sign is mounted onto a hard
surface, such as the wall of a building.
a. These signs are allowed in any nonresidential district, Residential High Density (RH) District, and any Residential Medium Density (RM) District
which has not been developed with detached single family residential units.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 665/687
b. The maximum height shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height.
c. Signs must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from a public street right-of-way and twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of a private
street or drive. Building mounted temporary signage shall not be allowed above the roof or parapet of the building.
d. All signs shall be securely anchored in such a way to comply with the wind pressure and dead load regulations outlined within the Building Code
as adopted by the City of West Des Moines.
e. The owner of a lot of record shall have the authority to determine who may use a long term temporary sign for on premises uses allowed by this
section. The authorization by the owner shall be required prior to the issuance of a permit by the City. A new permit shall be required anytime a
sign is proposed or altered. For any long term temporary sign that shall remain in place at the end of each year (December 31), the filing of a sign
permit shall be required (annual renewal). An exception shall be made for a long term temporary sign permit that was issued in the last two (2)
months of the year (after October 31). In such a situation, the permit shall be considered valid until the sign is altered or the expiration of the permit
at the end of the following year, whichever should occur first.
f. A maximum of one (1) 32-square foot sign per street frontage shall be allowed per property or tenant, in the case of a multi-tenant building. An
additional thirty two (32) square foot sign shall be allowed for each additional one hundred feet (100') of any one (1) street frontage over five
hundred feet (500'). Signs allowed under this section shall have a minimum separation of ten feet (10') from another sign, temporary or permanent,
on the same property.
g. No illumination, amplified sound, animation, dynamic elements, or attachments, including but not limited to balloons, ribbons, streamers, pennants
or speakers, shall be allowed.
4. Sites With Active Development: Sites with active development are construction projects in which construction activities are visible to the general
public and for which there has been a site plan, permitted conditional use permit, plat or similar development entitlement approved by the City. At
such time that a building permit has been issued, a temporary sign(s) shall be allowed in all zones and are subject to the following size, number and
location restrictions:
a. One (1) temporary ground sign per property frontage of a street (including interstate highways) shall be allowed.
b. Signs shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and a maximum sign graphic area of sixty four (64) square feet.
c. Illumination of these signs shall be prohibited.
d. A ten foot (10') setback from the property line of the development shall be required.
e. Post and panel signs or printing on a construction fence shall be allowed.
f. Three-dimensional lettering is not required.
g. For individual project sites, signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy, completion of the final
inspection by the City or upon the expiration of the building permit for the project.
h. For development sites with multiple individual or unrelated construction/development projects, signs permitted under this section shall be allowed
to remain in place on the site until all tenant spaces have been occupied initially or all individual parcels within the development have been built
upon.
i. Sign(s) shall be separated by a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-18: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Abandoned Signs: Any sign or part of a sign remaining in place for a period of ninety (90) days or more after it is no longer an on-premises sign shall be
considered abandoned. An abandoned sign shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building
or land upon which such sign may be found within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Director of Development Services. Upon failure to
comply within the time specified in such order, the Director of Development Services is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any
expense thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure upon which the sign is located or attached.
B. Unsafe Signs: If the Director of Development Services finds that any sign regulated herein is unsafe, unsecured, and/or deemed a potential hazard to
the public, the Director of Development Services shall promptly give written notice by mail or personal service to the entity to which the sign applies or
to the owner of premises or building upon which the sign is located. If measures are not taken to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the
standards herein set forth within twenty four (24) hours after such notice, the Director of Development Services, at the expense of the permittee or
owner of the property upon which it is located may initiate removal or alteration of the sign. However, if the owner of the sign has promptly ordered the
necessary parts to repair the sign and has not received them or has promptly ordered the repair work done by an authorized erector and the erector
has failed to respond within the twenty four (24) hour period, then a further extension of time may be granted by the Director of Development Services
upon a verified statement that such delay is not the result of any act of the permittee or owner of the premises.
C. Unlawful Signs: If the Director of Development Services finds that any sign regulated herein has been maintained, constructed, or erected in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, they shall promptly give written notice by mail or personal service to the owner of the premises upon which the sign is
located to remedy the violation. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within
one (1) business day after such notice, the Director of Development Services, at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is
located may initiate removal or alteration of the sign. The Director of Development Services may refuse to issue a permit to any permittee or owner who
refuses to pay costs so assessed provided such authority is confined to the premises where the violation occurred.
D. Signs On City Property: Any sign unlawfully placed on any property owned by the City or any easement granted to the City shall be forfeited and subject
to confiscation. The Director of Development Services shall issue a written warning for a first violation of this section. For any and all subsequent
violations of this section, the Director of Development Services shall be authorized to issue written citations. The fine for subsequent violations shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 666/687
Citations may be issued to any person, or entity identified on the unlawful sign or property owner upon which the sign is located. There is a prima facie
presumption that any person, property, or entity identified on the sign is responsible for the placement of the sign. Because the unlawful signs shall be
removed from property owned by the City or easement granted to the City, the Director of Development Services shall document or photograph the
sign at its location prior to its removal. Written citations may be personally served or sent via regular mail to the responsible person, entity or property
owner. If notice of the citation is sent via regular mail, a copy of the citation may also be posted on a conspicuous place on property owned or leased by
the responsible person or entity, where possible.
Payment of the fine resulting from a written citation for a violation shall be made to the City Clerk's Office within thirty (30) calendar days of the date
issued. A person, entity or property owner wishing to contest the written citation shall appear in person or by authorized representative in the City
Clerk's Office or do so in writing on a form provided by the City Clerk's Office within thirty (30) calendar days of the date which the citation was issued.
Failure to pay or to timely contest the written citation under the provisions of this section shall render the charges contained therein admitted.
E. General Maintenance: The Director of Development Services, after ten (10) days' notice to the sign owner, may order the removal of any sign that is not
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All costs associated with the removal of a sign may be assessed against the property or
building upon which the sign is located. However, if the owner of the sign has promptly ordered the necessary parts to repair the sign and has not
received them or has promptly ordered the repair work done by an authorized erector and the erector has failed to respond within the twenty four (24)
hour period, then a further extension of time may be granted by the Director of Development Services upon a verified statement that such delay is not
the result of any act of the permittee or owner of the premises. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-19: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. Appeal Procedure: The individual or entity affected by any decision, interpretation, or order made by the Director of Development Services regarding the
enforcement of this chapter may appeal to the Board of Adjustment within ten (10) days from the date of the decision by filing with the City Clerk a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal and tendering the filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The City Clerk shall forthwith
transmit to the Board of Adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from except for unsafe signs which present an immediate and serious danger to the public and the provisions
elsewhere provided for in this chapter shall be applicable.
B. Public Hearing: The Board of Adjustment shall, upon the filing of an appeal, fix a reasonable time for a hearing on same, giving public notice thereof as
well as due notice to the parties in interest. All interested persons may offer oral or written testimony at the public hearing on the appeal and every
variation and exception granted or denied by the Board of Adjustment shall be written testimony or evidence submitted in connection therewith. A vote
of three (3) members of the Board of Adjustment may affirm, modify or reverse the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Director of
Development Services.
C. Appeal To District Court: Any person or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment on matters subject to this chapter may within thirty (30) days from date of the filing of the decision by the Board of Adjustment, appeal
therefrom to the District Court of Polk County in accordance with the rules of civil procedure. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-20: VARIANCES:
A. Variance Procedure: A variance may be granted from the terms of this Code as will not be contrary to the public interest when owning to special
conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. Such variance shall be filed with the
Director of Development Services with written documentation specifying the believed grounds for the variance and a filing fee as determined by the City
Council resolution. In order to grant any variance from the terms of this Code the following must be found:
1. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings similarly sited.
2. That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant.
3. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to other lands, buildings or
structures similarly sited.
4. That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this Code would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties similarly sited
under the terms of this Code and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant.
5. That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure.
6. That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code and that such variance will not be injurious to
the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
B. Conditions And Safeguards: In granting any variance the following may be prescribed:
1. Appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code or other applicable County ordinances. Violation of such conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Code.
2. For any variance granted for the construction of a specific project, the applicant shall have a period of one (1) year to execute a permit and
commence with construction. If after the one (1) year period these requirements have not been met, the variance shall become null and void.
C. Board Of Adjustment Decision: The Board of Adjustment shall, upon the filing of a variance, fix a reasonable time for a hearing on same, giving public
notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties of interest and in accordance with State Code noticing requirements. All interested persons may offer
oral or written testimony at the public hearing on the variance and every variation and exception granted or denied by the board shall be based on the
written testimony or evidence submitted in connection therewith. A vote of three (3) members of the Board of Adjustment may grant, modify, or deny a
request for a variance. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 667/687
9-18-21: PENALTIES:
Any person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-4-1 of this Code. After a conviction of violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, each day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate and distinct violation. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
Chapter 19
LANDSCAPING
9-19-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA. (Ord.
1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-2: PURPOSE:
A. The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended to foster aesthetically pleasing development which will preserve, protect, and enhance the
appearance, character, general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of West Des Moines. Through this chapter the following objectives
will be achieved:
1. Promotion of responsible land use and development;
2. Mitigation of the negative environmental consequences of development including noise, heat transfer, glare, erosion, sedimentation, and stormwater
runoff;
3. Protection, conservation, and regeneration of natural and renewable resources;
4. Enhancement of our community's environmental and visual character;
5. Safeguarding and enhancement of property values and protection of public and private investment;
6. Screening between and buffering of incompatible land uses and undesirable views;
7. Promotion of the retaining of natural and creation of manmade landscapes that encourage the natural percolation and filtration of water and the
recharge of aquifers. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-3: DEFINITIONS:
BERM: A mound of earth, either natural or manmade, designed and used to provide visual interest and/or aid in the buffering or screening of undesirable
uses or views.
BUFFER: A combination of horizontal space (land) and vertical elements (plants, berms, fences, walls) used to physically separate and partially or wholly
screen views of incompatible adjacent land uses or undesirable features.
BUILDING STREET WALL: A building wall that is more or less parallel to an adjacent public street. Such building wall line shall follow and include irregular
indentations or juxtapositions in the building, excluding steps and unenclosed porches.
CALIPER: Trunk diameter measurement taken six inches (6") above the ground for trees up to and including four inches (4") in diameter, measured twelve
inches (12") above the ground for trees ranging between four (4) and twelve inches (12") in diameter, and measured four and one-half feet (41/2') above
the ground for trees over twelve inches (12") in diameter.
DECIDUOUS TREE - OVERSTORY: A plant with one vertical stem or main trunk that generally begins branching at a height of six feet (6'), which has an
elevated and distinct crown, and which reaches a mature height of at least thirty feet (30').
DECIDUOUS TREE - UNDERSTORY: A plant with one or more stems or trunks which has an elevated and distinct crown and which reaches a mature
height of less than thirty feet (30'). Understory trees are usually planted for aesthetic reasons such as flowers, interesting bark, or colorful fall foliage.
Smaller understory trees may be suitable for planting under overhead utility lines.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet (41/2') above the ground.
DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES: The director of the department of development services for the city of West Des Moines or his/her designee.
EVERGREEN/CONIFER: A cone bearing seed plant that retains its foliage year round. Evergreens are good for screening purposes and providing year
round color and substance to the landscape.
FOUNDATION PLANTING: Plants placed in near proximity to the foundation of a building. Usually arranged within planting beds.
GROUND COVER: A plant other than turf grasses which grows more horizontally than vertically. Ground covers are an alternative to turf grasses and may
provide erosion control on slopes.
LANDSCAPED ISLAND/POD: An unpaved area located within or adjacent to a parking lot and used to guide traffic, separate lanes, and provide protection
to parked vehicles and to pedestrians and which are also used to promote green within parking areas by providing trees, shrubs, and ground covers.
Landscaped islands are used to promote green within parking areas by providing trees, shrubs, and ground covers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 668/687
MULCH: A protective layer of materials, either organic or inorganic, placed around plants to prevent erosion, aid in soil moisture retention, prevent freezing
of roots, and control weeds thus providing an environment suitable for growth of selected vegetation.
OPEN SPACE: That portion of the lot which is free of buildings, parking lots or other vehicle use areas.
SCREENING: Vegetation, walls, fencing, or berms used individually or in combination to obstruct or conceal views of undesirable elements.
STREETSCAPE: Combination of vegetation or other special visual features along either side of vehicular travel lanes for purposes of aesthetics or
environmental mitigation.
VEGETATION: Living plant material including trees, shrubs, grasses, and flowers. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-4: APPLICABILITY:
A. These regulations apply to all new development or redevelopment of land including expansions or major modifications of an existing development on
any parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the city, or outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by law.
1. The requirements herein shall not apply to:
a. Individual detached single-family structures;
b. Structures and sites existing at the effective date of this code that do not undergo a land use change or major modification;
c. Reconstruction of existing structures suffering less than fifty percent (50%) loss of the total value by destruction from natural or unnatural causes;
d. Proposed structures that have received development approval prior to the effective date of this chapter.
2. The requirements herein do apply to:
a. All new nonresidential structures;
b. All new multi-family and single-family attached dwellings;
c. Major modifications to structures or sites;
d. All subdivision plats where buffers are required;
e. Minor modifications except that the requirements of this chapter shall only apply to the area of the site impacted by the minor modification.
B. Phased projects shall implement the required landscaping for that portion of the site being implemented or phased, except for buffers required of singlefamily
detached residential developments. Said buffers shall be installed in their entirety in conjunction with the associated final platting of the parcel.
Fulfillment of any missing or replacement of dead landscaping in any portion of the site will be required to be implemented when the last area is phased
or complete site build out is achieved. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-5: INTERPRETATION:
A. Where a question arises as to the applicable standards to be applied, the director of development services shall review the proposed use when
requested to do so by letter, and based upon the characteristics of the use; determine which performance standards shall apply. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-
2009)
9-19-6: PREPARATION OF THE LANDSCAPE PLAN:
A. Landscape plans shall be required to be prepared by a state licensed landscape architect, certified nurseryman, or other qualified professional
knowledgeable in plant materials as acceptable to the director of development services. Said requirements are to ensure the long term viability of plant
materials chosen and to ensure landscape plans fulfill the desired outcomes described above. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-7: APPROVAL PROCESS:
A. Landscape plans are required to be submitted for review as part of the development application process as denoted in the entitlement chapter of this
title. Landscape plans shall be approved by the City Council following the recommendation of the Plan and Zoning Commission except for landscape
plans associated with variance requests which shall be approved by the Board of Adjustment. Landscape plans associated with minor modification
requests may be reviewed and approved administratively provided no reduction to the standards presented herein is proposed. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
B. No building permit shall be issued or any development, master, or subdivision plan or plat be recommended for approval without compliance with all
provisions and requirements set forth in this chapter.
C. Lack of compliance with this chapter may result in the withholding or revocation of a building permit or certificate of occupancy.
D. Prior to final plat approval for any single-family detached residential plats and prior to issuance of a final occupancy permit for any buildings or
structures, the Development Services Department shall inspect installed landscaping for compliance with the approved landscaping plan. Said final plat
approval shall not be given nor shall a final occupancy permit be issued if landscaping is not in accordance with the approved plan or if landscape
materials are dead, unhealthy, or demonstrate lack of proper maintenance. Landscaping must be installed by November 1 to be counted as fulfilling
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 669/687
landscaping requirements. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued to projects ready for occupancy after November 1 with provision of surety as
stated below with expiration of the permit being May 31 of the following calendar year to allow the developer time to bring the landscaping into
compliance with approved development plans. If a developer desires to receive final plat approval for any single-family detached residential plat prior to
installation of landscaping or a builder or property owner desires to receive a temporary occupancy permit prior to the installation of landscaping then
the developer, builder, or property owner shall be required to provide to the City surety in an amount one and one-half (11/2) times the cost of
landscaping installation. Failure to complete required landscaping by May 31 following receipt of final plat approval or of a temporary occupancy permit
may result in forfeiture of surety provided and/or revocation of the final plat approval or temporary occupancy permit. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-8: LANDSCAPE PROVISIONS:
A. General Landscape Provisions:
1. Harmonious With Existing Environment: Landscape plans shall be harmonious with the existing environment and architectural design and shall
demonstrate a recognizable pattern or theme through the choice and location of materials for the overall development of the project.
2. Easements: Overstory trees and large upright evergreen trees shall not be planted within public utility easements. Understory trees, shrubs, and
ground covers are permissible within said easements except that a corridor wide enough for truck access to utility lines must be preserved through
the easement. Whenever possible, buffers should not overlap utility easements.
3. Existing Vegetation And Natural Features: Existing significant and worthwhile vegetation and natural features such as land forms shall be preserved
and incorporated into development to the greatest extent possible.
a. At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, credit for the preservation of existing vegetation and natural land forms may be given
towards fulfilling the planting requirements of this chapter. Credit for said preservation must be requested at the time of development application
and all such vegetation to be preserved must be clearly identified on the landscape plan. Vegetation must be of a desirable variety and in an
overall healthy condition and form to be considered suitable for preservation.
b. Credit for preservation of vegetation may only be given for required landscaping in the area of the vegetation being preserved. For example,
vegetation in the middle of a site could be counted towards open space landscaping requirements but would not be counted towards fulfilling
buffering requirements.
4. Pedestrian Linkage: Whenever possible, pedestrian linkages shall be provided to public open spaces and/or the City trail system.
5. Visibility At Street Intersections: Landscaping, berms, walls and fences shall not obstruct pedestrian, bicycle or vehicular traffic visibility at street
intersections or access points to/from streets.
6. Minimum Vegetation Requirements: Minimum vegetation requirements for one category or landscaping purpose are in addition to another.
7. Landscaped Areas: All areas of a site not intended for buildings, permanent water bodies, or paved surfaces for off street parking areas, sidewalks,
or pedestrian trails shall be vegetated.
a. Vegetation shall be of turf or plants. Turf shall be of a species suitable to the area. All vegetation, including turf, must be well established and
healthy at the time of inspection by development services in order to receive a final occupancy permit.
b. Areas around permanent water bodies, including stormwater detention facilities shall not become unkempt and unmaintained areas. Such areas
shall be treated with appropriate landscaping to enhance their presence. In addition, measures such as the use of jets to move the water shall be
implemented to aid in preventing the buildup of algae on the water surface.
c. A three inch (3") thickness of mulch material shall be installed around all plants. The implementation of mulch shall be limited to planting beds and
the area immediately around base of trees and shrubs as allowed below. Organic mulch materials such as fibrous wood are preferred over
inorganic mulches. Large expanses of mulched areas without plants are not acceptable. The mulching of plants shall adhere to the following
guidelines:
(1) Deciduous trees shall have a ring of mulch up to a distance of twenty four inches (24") beyond the trunk.
(2) Evergreen trees shall have a ring of mulch up to a distance of twelve inches (12") beyond the widest spreading branches of the plant.
(3) Shrubs shall have a ring of mulch up to a distance of eight inches (8") beyond the widest spreading branches of the plant.
(4) Areas with ground covers and/or planting beds shall be mulched until such time that the plants have grown together to completely cover any
bare soil.
(5) When possible, plants within lawn areas should be grouped and mulched as one bed for ease of mowing.
8. Mulch Materials: More extensive use of mulch materials for design intent may be allowed with the specific approval of the city council or board of
adjustment as applicable. All use of organic or inorganic mulch materials shall be shown and identified on the landscape plan.
B. Vegetation: The use and incorporation of plant materials shall adhere to the following guidelines, standards, and design principles:
1. Vegetation should be located to simulate nature with groupings and massing rather than linear or symmetrical lines unless such lines are for
intentional design intent.
2. Plant size at maturity should dictate spacing, however, spacing may be altered for design intent provided care is given not to overcrowd plants.
3. All plants shall be commercially grown and shall meet all requirements set forth by the current edition of the "American Standards For Nursery Stock"
(ANSI).
4. As much as possible, plant materials that are native or adaptable to local climactic and moisture conditions should be implemented.
5. For visual interest and to limit the spread of disease or insects, multiple plant species and genus shall be used. Unless otherwise specifically allowed
by the appropriate approval body for design intent, each type of vegetation (deciduous overstory, deciduous understory, evergreen, shrubs, etc.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 670/687
required shall be comprised of a minimum of three (3) varieties to limit the spread of disease or insects and prevent the total loss of a vegetation type
within a site.
6. At least thirty five percent (35%) of trees required on site (sum of open space, buffer, parking lot trees required) shall be evergreen species to ensure
year round visual interest and aid in the effectiveness of screening.
7. Trees shall not be planted in any space with less than five feet (5') clearance in any direction with the exception of trees planted in tree wells in
paved areas and specifically designed for such purpose.
8. Trees shall not be planted within six feet (6') to the back of curb of any vehicle travel lane or four feet (4') to any paved area, including sidewalks and
trails.
9. No plants other than ground covers or perennials with a maximum height of fifteen inches (15") shall be planted within five feet (5') of fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be shown on the landscape plan.
10. No plants other than ground covers or perennials with a maximum height of fifteen inches (15") shall be planted within five feet (5') of fire
department connections. Fire department connections shall be shown on the landscape plan.
11. Trees that will overhang pedestrian areas shall be pruned to provide a minimum clear height of eight feet (8').
12. Trees that will overhang vehicle travel areas shall be pruned to provide a minimum clear height of fourteen feet (14').
13. The following minimum plant sizes and dimensions are required at the time of planting:
a. Deciduous overstory trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches (2") measured six inches (6") above the root collar and shall have a
minimum five feet (5') of clear trunk. Clump varieties (2 or more stems) are allowed and each stem shall measure a minimum diameter of two
inches (2").
b. Deciduous understory trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of one and one-half inches (11/2") measured at six inches (6") above the root
collar and shall have a minimum three and one-half foot (31/2') clear trunk. Clump varieties (2 or more stems) are allowed and each stem shall
measure a minimum diameter of one inch (1").
c. Deciduous shrubs that reach a mature height greater than five feet (5') shall be installed at a minimum of three feet (3') in height.
d. Deciduous shrubs that reach a mature height between three (3) and five feet (5') shall be installed at a minimum of two feet (2') in height.
e. Deciduous shrubs that reach a mature height of less than three feet (3') shall be installed at a minimum height of fifteen inches (15").
f. Evergreen trees shall be installed at a minimum height of six feet (6').
g. Evergreen shrubs shall be installed at a minimum height of two feet (2').
h. Evergreen ground covers (mat evergreens) shall measure a minimum spread of fifteen inches (15").
i. Climbing vines and ornamental grasses shall have been grown in a quart container for a minimum of one year.
j. Ground covers and perennials shall be a minimum of a four inch (4") container, #SP4, round or square.
k. Annuals may be as "plug" or "pack".
C. Berms: Berms shall adhere to the following guidelines, standards, and design principles:
1. Berms shall be designed in an undulating manner so as to give the appearance of being naturally formed unless nonundulating forms are for
intentional design intent and approved by the appropriate reviewing body.
2. Berms shall not have a negative impact on stormwater management for a development or the surrounding area. The requirement for stormwater
management does not negate the requirement for berms.
3. Berms required for screening purposes shall be an average of three feet (3') in height and may be required to be higher if berm height and
associated landscaping is deemed to not be sufficient to adequately provide required screening.
4. Berms shall have a slope no greater than three to one (3:1).
5. Berms shall be planted with permanent ground cover (turf or other plants) to stabilize the slope and prevent erosion. Rocking of berms as a ground
cover material is prohibited; however rock boulders (8 inches or greater in size) may be implemented within the side slopes to aid in stabilizing the
soil, obtain additional berm height, and/or for visual interest.
D. Fences: See subsection E, "Buffers" of this section and see also section 9-14-11, "Fences And Walls" of this title, in the accessory structures chapter.
E. Buffers: Landscape buffers are intended to visually screen and mitigate the impacts of development on adjacent properties including headlight glare,
noise, and unsightly views.
1. General Buffer Provisions:
a. No off street parking area, drive aisle, or building may encroach into any buffer area with the exception of a drive aisle connection from a street to
an off street parking area. Said connection shall be the shortest path possible and shall impact the least amount of buffer area possible.
b. Required front, rear and side yard setbacks for single-family detached residential lots shall be measured from the interior or private side of a buffer
boundary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 671/687
c. Required front, rear and side yard setbacks for all development except single-family detached residential shall be measured from the ultimate right
of way line of adjoining roads or property boundary if no road; however, buildings and other structures may not be located within a buffer area.
d. All buffer components shall be located outside of the comprehensive plan ultimate right of way.
e. Of the required number of trees within a buffer, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) shall be evergreen.
f. The design of the buffer shall simulate natural tree stands with groupings and masses rather than linear or symmetric lines, unless the overall
landscape design is of a more formal nature and deemed appropriate by staff during the development review process.
g. Vegetation should be thoughtfully placed to create the maximum amount of screening from the maximum number of viewpoints. Care should be
taken to ensure that through views under tree canopies are appropriately mitigated.
h. Whenever practical, existing worthwhile trees and shrubs should be preserved and incorporated into the design of the buffer. Existing vegetation
appropriate for preservation can be included to meet the total number of required trees and shrubs, if it is determined during the development
review process that the existing trees will provide the necessary screening and buffering.
i. Earth berming may be required within buffers to achieve appropriate screening.
j. Care should be taken to avoid placing utilities in buffers and in not overlapping buffer areas with public utility easements.
2. Conditions For Requiring A Buffer: The following conditions shall require a buffer between abutting districts and uses:
a. Any single-family attached residential development greater than four (4) dwelling units per building, multi-family residential and all commercial,
office and industrial uses or any undeveloped residential high density district (RH), residential medium density district (RM), manufactured housing
district (MH) and all commercial and industrial districts which abut any residential estate district (RE), residential single-family district (RS), singlefamily
residential district (R-1) or single-family detached uses shall be buffered as required in this section.
b. Any multi-family residential and all commercial, office and industrial uses or any undeveloped residential high density district (RH), all commercial,
office and industrial districts which abut any residential medium density district (RM), manufactured housing district (MH), or single-family attached
uses shall be buffered as required in this section.
c. Any commercial, office or industrial use and all commercial, office and industrial districts which abut any residential district or residential use shall
be buffered as required in this section.
d. All industrial districts which abut any commercial district shall be buffered as required in this section.
e. Any property that is zoned Valley Junction light industrial district (VJLI) that abuts a residential property shall be buffered as follows:
(1) A ten foot (10') buffer park with a six foot (6') fence shall be required between residential and light industrial properties.
(2) Said buffer park shall be landscaped at one-third (1/3) of the landscaping requirements of a thirty foot (30') buffer park.
f. Any lot in any single-family detached residential district having both its front and rear lines abutting a public street or a private street (a double
frontage lot) or a corner lot which is adjacent to a double frontage lot shall be buffered from the thoroughfare along its rear yard for a double
frontage lot and its corner yard for a corner lot adjacent to a double frontage lot by one of the buffer methods set forth in this section and shall be
required to include a berm within the buffer.
g. Any lot in any residential district which abuts the interstate right of way or railroad right of way shall be buffered as required in this section.
3. Methods Of Providing Buffers: Buffers adjacent to single-family detached residential lots shall be established as easements unless otherwise
established within a platted outlot. Buffer easements shall be recorded with the county at the time of establishment, prior to, or concurrent with the
recordation of a final plat or the final approval and issuance of the building permit on site plans and special use permits. Buffers required under the
provisions of this section or elsewhere in this title shall be accomplished by any one of the following methods:
a. Sixty Foot Buffer: A landscaped and bermed area of not less than sixty feet (60') in width comprised of landscape plantings.
The equivalent of one overstory or upright evergreen tree and three (3) shrubs shall be required per thirty five (35) linear feet of the sixty foot (60')
buffer.
b. Thirty Foot Buffer: A landscaped and bermed area of not less than thirty feet (30') in width comprised of landscape plantings.
The equivalent of one overstory tree or upright evergreen tree, two (2) understory trees and six (6) shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35)
linear feet of the buffer park.
4. Platted And/Or Zoned Prior To Adoption Date: On lots that have been platted and/or zoned prior to the adoption date hereof that can present
evidence that the above buffer provisions would render the property unbuildable, the city council may grant a waiver of the buffer requirements and
permit a screen wall or fence of not less than six feet (6') in height.
5. Burden Of Provision Of A Buffer: The burden of provision and selection of the buffer shall be as follows:
a. Where two (2) different districts or uses, requiring a buffer between them, are both in an existing improved condition, the above requirement is not
retroactive. Should a buffer be desired, it shall be by mutual agreement between property owners or as otherwise provided by law. However, in the
event any or all of the improved property is abandoned, destroyed, demolished, etc., for the purpose of renewal, redevelopment, etc., that portion
of such property being renewed, redeveloped, etc., shall be considered vacant land subject to the requirements herein.
b. Where districts or uses require a buffer between them, the burden of the buffer shall be assumed by the developer of the more intense land use
and shall be installed when said property develops. The developer of the less intense land use may choose to provide a buffer in order to provide
more effective screening to the more intense land use but shall not be required to provide a buffer. In the event a landowner adjacent to an already
developed property changes the land use designation or zoning of their land to a less intensive use and therefore causes a buffer to be required
where none would have been required before then the required buffer shall be shifted away from the owner of the already developed property and
shall be placed upon the landowner whose actions are causing the need for a buffer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 672/687
6. Buffer Waiver: Where the line between two (2) districts or uses requiring a buffer follows a public street right of way, stream or other similar barrier,
the requirement for a buffer may be waived by the city council so long as the width of the barrier is at least equivalent to the width of buffer required
and providing such waiver does not permit the exposure of undesirable characteristics of the land use to the public view.
7. Single-Family Residential Subdivisions: For single-family residential subdivisions, the plans for a landscape buffer shall be submitted for review and
approval at the same time as the preliminary plat. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
8. Site Plan Review: For any type of development that requires a site plan review, the buffer plans shall be submitted as a part of the site plan
submittal. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
9. Fences: Fences may be allowed within buffers only if said buffer is located between two (2) dissimilar land uses and is not located alongside a public
or private street. Fences shall be reviewed for aesthetic quality and for sturdiness of materials as described in section 9-14-11 of this title and must
comply with all other code requirements.
F. Streetscape And Building Wall Plantings:
1. A landscaped edge or streetscape should be provided along all streets upon which the public is permitted to travel regardless of whether they are
public or private. There are no minimum landscaping requirements for streetscapes, however, landscaping placed along streetscapes shall be
allowed to count towards required open space landscaping unless said landscaping is part of a required buffer.
2. Streetscapes are intended to be ornamental in nature bringing needed green to the City, shade and visual softening of pavement expanses.
3. Streetscapes should attempt to have a recognizable pattern that establishes a sense of place for a particular neighborhood or development.
4. Blank building walls uninterrupted by architectural features should be visually broken by vegetation.
G. Screening: The implementation of landscaping, berms, decorative walls and fences shall be used to screen undesirable views such as headlight glare,
mechanical equipment, outdoor storage, loading areas, off street parking areas, etc.
1. Off street parking areas: See subsection H of this section.
2. Outdoor storage: See chapter 10, "Performance Standards", of this title.
3. Mechanical units: See chapter 10, "Performance Standards", of this title.
4. Trash enclosures: See chapter 10, "Performance Standards", of this title.
5. Satellite dishes: See chapter 10, "Performance Standards", of this title.
6. Additional screening measures may be required at the discretion of the Director of Development Services to mitigate impacts and views not
otherwise covered by this section.
H. Off Street Parking Areas: Vegetation in off street parking areas not only provides needed visual relief from large expanses of parking but also provides
shade reducing the heat glare from parking areas thus improving pedestrian comfort. Views of off street parking areas from public rights-of-way shall
be screened to a height of at least three feet (3'). Screening shall be as near to one hundred percent (100%) opacity as possible with careful attention
paid to eliminate "through views" under tree canopies. In addition to the general landscaping regulations above, the following off street parking area
landscaping requirements shall also apply:
1. The use of multiple small parking lots shall be encouraged rather than one large parking lot.
2. Multiple landscaped islands shall be used and combined with vegetation to effectively break up large expanses of parking. Location of islands should
be carefully considered to provide shade to as much of the parking area as possible.
3. The location of islands shall allow for the easy and free movement of all emergency vehicles.
4. Landscaped islands shall be placed, at a minimum, every eighteen (18) stalls within a row of parking. Landscaped islands shall be, at a minimum,
nine feet (9') wide and thirty four feet (34') in length for dual parking rows or a minimum of nine feet (9') wide and seventeen feet (17') in width for
single rows.
5. Landscaped pods (tree diamonds) within a row of parking shall be evenly spaced between landscape islands, however, shall be spaced no farther
than nine (9) parking stalls from another landscaped pod or landscaped island. Landscaped pods shall measure no less than six feet (6') to back of
curb in each direction.
6. Linear islands running the length of a parking row shall be required for every six (6) rows of parking. Said islands provide visual breaks and may be
used as pedestrian pathways for safe pedestrian movement through the parking area or as part of stormwater management measures. Linear
islands shall measure a minimum of ten feet (10') from back of curb to back of curb.
7. The minimum vegetation required in off street parking areas shall be as follows:
a. Two (2) trees in each nine foot by thirty four foot (9' x 34') island.
b. One tree in each nine foot by seventeen foot (9' x 17') island.
c. One tree in each landscape pod.
d. Additional shrubs, ground covers, grasses, and flowers may be provided in landscaped islands or pods but are not required.
e. Vegetation required in off street parking areas shall be in addition to open space landscaping required, however, open space landscaping may be
placed within off street parking areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 673/687
f. Trees and shrubs provided in landscaped islands and pods beyond the number required for off street parking landscaping shall be counted towards
fulfilling the site's open space landscaping requirements.
I. Open Space: On each lot there shall be a minimum percentage of open space unencumbered by buildings, off street parking areas, and other vehicle
use areas as required in chapter 7, "Setback And Bulk Density Regulations", of this title. Open space areas may include landscaped areas, buffers,
pedestrian sidewalks/trails, athletic fields, water features, open air plazas, pedestrian courtyards, etc. A minimum of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs
shall be required per three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space; however, in no case shall less than two (2) trees and six (6) shrubs be
provided. Of the required trees, fifty percent (50%) of the trees must be of an overstory or evergreen variety unless otherwise done for design intent
and specifically approved by the appropriate reviewing body. Additional landscaped beds, ground covers, and ornamental grasses may be provided but
are not required. Open space landscaping shall be in addition to any landscaping required for off street parking areas, buffer areas, or screening.
J. Waiver Of Requirements: A waiver or reduction in any of the requirements outlined in this chapter may be granted by the board of adjustment through
the variance process. The city council may, following review and recommendation from the plan and zoning commission, choose to defer installation of
required landscaping with cause provided the applicant has demonstrated how said landscaping may be installed on site in the future. (Ord. 1839, 9-
21-2009)
9-19-9: PLANT SUBSTITUTIONS:
A. Approval; Categories: Plants may be varied from the requirements described above in the following way; however, no more than fifty percent (50%) of
one required plant type may be substituted for another without specific city council approval. For example, no more than fifty percent (50%) of required
understory trees could be substituted for with shrubs. The following substitution categories are exclusive (i.e., 20 shrubs cannot be substituted for 1
overstory tree):
1. Two (2) deciduous understory trees equal one deciduous overstory tree or evergreen.
2. Ten (10) shrubs equal one understory tree. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-10: WARRANTY AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Warranty And Replacement:
1. In a single-family detached residential subdivision, the developer shall have responsibility for the replacement of any vegetative material for a period
of one year or until such time that site maintenance is turned over to an owners' association or the adjacent property owner in conjunction with the
issuance of a final occupancy permit if no property owners' association.
2. Replacement is required for any living plant material that was shown on an approved landscape plan that is removed, dies, or disfigured, including if
removed by the city as part of any city work within a city right of way or public utility easement. Replacement shall be the responsibility of the owners'
association, however, in the absence of covenants specifically and explicitly placing replacement responsibility on an owners' association
replacement shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
B. Maintenance:
1. Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owners' association, however, in the absence of covenants specifically and explicitly placing
maintenance responsibility on a specified association, entity or individual, maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
2. Landscaping areas shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and shall be free of trash, litter, debris, dead plants, or weeds.
3. All maintenance or pruning shall be done in accordance with the most current standards of the National Arborists Association, American National
Standards Institute, American Association of Nurserymen, or American Society of Landscape Architects.
4. The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove vegetation on public property including rights of way. The city may also perform
such maintenance on private property if necessary to protect sanitary sewers or other public improvements, to prevent the spread of insects or
disease, or to improve site visibility at intersections of two (2) vehicles and/or pedestrian pathways. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
Chapter 20
MEDICAL CANNABIDIOL
9-20-1: PURPOSE:
In adopting this chapter, it is recognized that medical cannabidiol facilities could have certain objectionable side effects which render these facilities
inharmonious with residential and uses related to minor children. This chapter seeks to ensure that residential and child-oriented uses, and medical
cannabidiol facilities will be located in separate and compatible locations.
It is a subject of legitimate concern for the City to use its zoning power to protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City
and to establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for medical cannabidiol facilities. (Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
9-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the definitions provided in Iowa Code (2018) section 124E (Medical Cannabidiol Act) and Iowa Administrative Code chapter
154 (Medical Cannabidiol Program) are adopted and shall govern the meaning of language in this chapter unless such term is specially defined elsewhere
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 674/687
within this Code. In addition, the following definitions are adopted for this chapter:
CHILDCARE CENTER: A facility that provides childcare or preschool services as defined by Iowa Code (2005) section 237A.I(4), which is adopted by
reference.
PRESCHOOL: A facility as defined by Iowa Code (2005) section 237A.I(14) which is adopted by reference.
RELIGIOUS FACILITY: Any building or site whose primary use is public religious worship.
SCHOOL: A public or private elementary, middle, junior or senior high school. (Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
9-20-3: LOCATION OF PREMISES:
A. Medical Cannabidiol Manufacturer: A medical cannabidiol manufacturer must be located where the applicable zoning ordinance allows such land use.
In addition, a licensed or permitted premises must be in compliance with applicable Fire and Building Codes. No person, whether as principal or agent,
clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, shall place, maintain, own or operate any
medical cannabidiol manufacturer in the following locations:
1. In any single family or multi-family residential zoned area;
2. Within one thousand feet (1,000') from any single family or multi-family residentially zoned or used property, or any property designated on the City's
Comprehensive Plan as residentially oriented;
3. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon which is located a child care center, preschool, or school.
4. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon which is located a religious facility which conducts services and/or programs.
B. Medical Cannabidiol Dispensary: A medical cannabidiol dispensary must be located where the applicable zoning ordinance allows such land use. In
addition, a licensed or permitted premises must be in compliance with applicable Fire and Building Codes. No person, whether as principal or agent,
clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, shall place, maintain, own or operate any
medical cannabidiol dispensary in the following locations:
1. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon which is located a school;
2. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other medical cannabidiol dispensary.
C. Measurement Of Distance:
1. The distance between any two (2) medical cannabidiol dispensaries shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures,
from the closest exterior structural wall of each business.
2. The distance between any medical cannabidiol facilities and any use requiring separation, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest property line of the medical cannabidiol facility to the closest property line of the use requiring the separation.
(Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
9-20-4: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
Any medical cannabidiol production, manufacturing or dispensary operation shall be in an enclosed, locked facility and implement security provisions to
address the following and in accordance with Iowa Code (2018) section 124E (Medical Cannabidiol Act) and Iowa Administrative Code chapter 154
(Medical Cannabidiol Program).
A. Protection against unauthorized entrance.
B. Personnel identification system and facility access control.
C. Protection against theft of raw product, medical products, waste material or cash. (Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
9-20-5: SIGNAGE:
Any medical cannabidiol production, manufacturing or dispensary operation shall comply with advertising and marketing provisions in accordance with the
Iowa Code (2018) section 124E (Medical Cannabidiol Act) and Iowa Administrative Code chapter 154 (Medical Cannabidiol Program) and comply with the
regulations contained in the City's sign ordinance (chapter 18 of this title). (Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
Title 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 675/687
10-1-1: JURISDICTION:
This title is adopted by the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, governing the subdivision of all lands within the corporate limits of the city, and within two (2)
miles adjacent thereto. (1985 Code §6-6.01)
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word shall is mandatory, and the word may is permissive.
ACTIVE RECREATION AREA: That part of a park which can be utilized for the placement of intensive recreational activities and facilities including athletic
fields; tennis, basketball, or general purpose courts; playground equipment; wading pools; ice skating rink; etc. An active recreation area shall have
sufficient level areas uninterrupted by streams and drainage ditches to permit its development with optimum slopes ranging from two percent (2%)
minimum to five percent (5%) maximum.
APARTMENT: A dwelling unit located within a building which serves as a home or place of residence for three (3) or more families living independently,
wherein units may be rented, leased or owner occupied and a majority of the units gain access through a common hallway.
ARCHITECT: A registered architect authorized to practice architecture as defined by the laws of the state of Iowa.
ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT: A dwelling unit which is most commonly horizontally attached to another dwelling unit within a "townhouse" style
residential building wherein each unit has direct access to their unit from the exterior of the building rather than through a common hallway.
AUDITOR'S PLAT: A plat prepared at the request of the county auditor to clarify property descriptions for the purposes of assessment and taxation.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, highways, parks, railroad or similar fixed land division and/or the exterior
boundaries of the subdivision. In the case of a planned unit development, a group of building lots for attached dwellings, said lots completely surrounded
by a combination of public rights of way and/or common ground controlled by a homeowners' association or other legal entity.
BUILDER: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity, or agent of same acquiring a building permit from the city
in order to erect or repair a residential structure or structures or any portion of the same.
BUILDING LINE:
A. Building lines are synonymous with setback lines and outline the buildable area of a lot which remains after the required yard areas have been
provided for.
B. Building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use of any character and on commercial and industrial lots when required by
ordinance. Such building lines shall not be less than required by the zoning ordinance1. Where the subdivided area is not under zoning control, the
commission shall require building lines in accordance with the needs of each addition.
CITY: The city of West Des Moines and all lands within its corporate boundaries.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of West Des Moines.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines, Iowa2.
COMMON GROUND: That portion of the property associated with, belonging to, or under the operational control of a homeowners' association, or other
legal entity, as part of a planned unit or cluster development, and ownership of which is not exclusive to any one owner, but held in distributive shares or
interests by members of the association.
DEDICATION: The payment of a fee to be used exclusively by the city for park site acquisition and/or development.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT: A dwelling unit which is not attached to any other unit and is intended for the occupancy of one family.
DEVELOPER: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity, or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide
land or develop a parcel of land for the construction of a residential building or buildings.
DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of real estate wherein a developer proposes to subdivide or develop land for the construction of a residential building or
buildings.
DISTRICT: A section or sections of land area depicted on the official zoning map3 within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises
or the height of buildings and area of sites are uniform.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner of the use, for special purpose, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or
persons, and within the limits of which the owner of the fee shall not erect any permanent structures but shall have the right to make any other use of the
land subject to such easement which is not inconsistent with the right of the grantee. Public utilities shall have the right to trim or remove trees which
interfere with the use of such easements.
ENGINEER: A registered engineer authorized to practice civil engineering as defined by the laws of the state of Iowa.
EROSION: All of the processes by which soil or rock material is loosened and/or removed by natural forces.
EROSION CONTROL: Methods implemented to reduce, control or eliminate the process of erosion.
EROSION CONTROL PLAN: Plan submitted with preliminary plat that addresses the erosion controls to be implemented where there is the potential for
erosion on a site. Should include existing and proposed grades, existing vegetation and temporary and permanent erosion control measures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 676/687
FAIR MARKET VALUE: A current fair market value of land within the proposed development at the time of and immediately prior to the developer initiating
subdivision or site plan improvements and shall include all of the land within the proposed development prior to additional internal improvements but zoned
to permit residential development with access to public streets and public utilities.
FRONTAGE: The lot width measured on a horizontal plane at the building setback line, which line shall be drawn at a distance not less than the minimum
front yard setback for the zone district or planned unit development of which the parcel or lot is a part. In the case of curvilinear lots or lots located along a
cul-de-sac, the frontage measurement shall be taken along a tangent striking at the center of the lot on the building setback line. Said tangent when struck
shall also be used for building setback purposes. No lot shall have less than forty feet (40') abutting a public street, except as allowed within the R-5 multifamily
residential district.
GREENWAYS OR GREENBELTS: Strips of open space usually in conjunction with streams and drainageways which principally serve as both a public
access to the drainage system and as passive recreation areas. These strips can offer intermittent recreational areas, as well as serving as scenic
connections and trails for pedestrian and bicycle riders between major park facilities.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development.
MAINTENANCE BOND: A surety bond on terms approved by the city attorney, or cash deposit made out to the city in an amount equal to the full cost of
the improvements which are required by this title, said cost being estimated by the city engineer and city council, and said surety bond or cash deposit
being legally sufficient to secure to the city that said improvements shall be kept in good repair from the time of acceptance by the city of said
improvements for such period of time as is specified by this title.
MASTER PARKS PLAN: An official plan for the development of the city's parks and open space, consisting of maps, drawings and other documentation to
fix and describe boundaries of neighborhood park districts and the proposed size, character, location and utilization of land for active and passive
recreation. The master parks plan shall be adopted by the park board with the concurrence of the city council and shall be compatible and in accordance
with the general intent of the comprehensive plan for the city.
MASTER PLAN: A sketch layout of a general rights of way and alignments of streets, utility easements and dedicated areas for public use for a land area
intended to be subdivided in conjunction with a preliminary plat. A master plan shall serve only as a guide for development and shall not be binding on the
city for subsequent plat review and approvals.
NEIGHBORHOOD MINIPARK: A specialized neighborhood recreational area to serve a concentrated or limited population designed for a specific age
group such as preschool or elementary.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK: A public park established as the center of recreational activities for a neighborhood park district. Neighborhood parks are
designed to serve all age groups and include passive recreational areas and active recreational facilities such as children's playground apparatus, athletic
fields, court game facilities, wading pools, ice skating rinks, picnicking areas and shelter facilities.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK DISTRICT: A geographical area of the city designated by the park board with the concurrence of the city council and depicted on
an approved master parks plan for planning and implementation of the neighborhood park system.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK SYSTEM: A network of active and passive recreation areas including neighborhood parks, neighborhood miniparks and
greenbelts which are designed and located to serve a surrounding neighborhood.
PUD (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT): Any development in which the proposed land uses, transportation elements, building densities, arrangements
and types are set out in a unified plan. A planned unit development may consist of mixed residential, commercial, office and public land uses.
PARK BOARD: The park board of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa4.
PARK DEVELOPMENT: Park site acquisition and/or physical improvement of the neighborhood park system.
PARK LAND: The terms "park land" and "park system" shall include all classifications of parks as identified and included within the master parks plan.
PASSIVE RECREATION AREA: Part of a park system that is not intended for intense recreational use but has been reserved as open space for visual and
psychological relief from the urbanized environment and may act as a greenway or greenbelt providing a park strip along drainageways and a passive
connecting system between active recreation areas.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond on forms approved by the city attorney or cash deposit made out to the city in an amount equal to the full cost of
the improvements which are required by that ordinance; said cost being estimated by the city engineer and council, and said surety bond or cash deposit
being legally sufficient to secure to the city that said improvements will be constructed in accordance with this title.
PLAT, FINAL: A map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan or the subdivision is presented and which he submits for final approval and intends to
record in final form.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A map or plan showing all the facts needed to enable the commission and city council to determine whether the proposed layout of
the land is satisfactory from the standpoint of public interest and conforms to state statutes and city ordinances.
PUBLIC PATHWAYS: Pathways restricted to pedestrians and nonmotor vehicles for the purpose of separating automobile traffic from pedestrian and
nonmotorized traffic and linking together public land use.
RETAINING WALL: Any structure designed to stabilize soils on varying elevations to ensure long term soil stability.
STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a
matter of right, for the purposes of vehicular traffic and others, and whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or however otherwise designated.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing
or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a "subdivision" as defined herein and includes any agent of the subdivider.
SUBDIVISION: The term "subdivision" or "subdivided" as used in this title shall mean a subdivision of land, a plat of a subdivision, a planned unit
development, a master plan or a site plan for residential development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 677/687
SURVEYOR: A registered land surveyor authorized to practice "surveying" as defined by the registration act of the state of Iowa. (1985 Code §6-6.02;
amd. 5-22-1991; Ord. 1131, 5-22-1995)
10-1-3: FEES:
Each application request for any purpose, including appeals, shall be accompanied by the fee specified by city council resolution before it is accepted for
filing and processing. (Ord. 1396, 3-6-2000)
10-1-4: DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION:
A. Defined: For purposes of this section the term "development application" shall mean any presentation or filing with the city for residential development
purposes of any subdivision of land over which the city has subdivision review and approval authority, or the filing or presentation of any site plan, PUD,
PUD specific plan, permitted conditional use plan or development, subdivision master plan or area development plan, over which the city has approval
authority or a declaration of horizontal property (condominium) regime pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499B.
B. Dedicate Land For Park And Recreational Purposes: All persons making a development application shall dedicate to the city, within the land covered by
the development application, land for park and recreational purposes sufficient to meet the requirements of this section.
1. In each tract of land covered by a development application, there shall be reserved and dedicated to public use two and thirty nine hundredths (2.39)
acres of land for park purposes and three and seventy six hundredths (3.76) acres of land for greenway use for each one thousand (1,000) people,
based upon the projected population of the completed development application as calculated in accord with this section. For purposes of this
chapter, property subject to a horizontal property condominium regime under Iowa Code chapter 499B shall be treated as single-family detached.
Such dedication shall be prorated to the amount indicated by the projected population to the nearest one thousand (1,000) square feet of land to be
dedicated, but in any event, no dedication of either park or greenway space shall contain a total for combined park and greenway usage less than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land to be dedicated.
2. For purposes of this section, population in the completed area covered by the development application will be determined by multiplying the number
of housing units projected in the area covered by the development application for each use category times the anticipated average per unit as given
below. The quantity calculated for each residential type shall be added together and the sum shall be the projected population for purposes of the
development application. For the purposes of this chapter the following population estimates per residential type will be used:
a. Single-family detached: 2.90 people.
b. Single-family attached: 1.63 people.
c. Multi-family unit: 1.73 people.
3. The city may require that all land dedicated under this section be configured or located to optimize aggregations of land and thus may require that
the dedicated land be adjacent to the land affected by other development applications or to otherwise maximize usefulness of the land in accord with
the city's master parks and trails plan. The city may place similar requirements upon dedications under this section in order to assure useful
aggregations of land for greenways.
4. For purposes of this section land dedicated for greenway purposes includes natural resource areas, watershed areas, floodplain, wooded ravines or
hillsides, multipurpose trails, corridors or other open spaces.
5. This section shall not apply to any development application which does not include residential development, provided, however, that to the extent
any development includes residential uses within any development application then park land and greenway dedication shall be required to the
extent determined in accord with subsections B1 and B2 of this section.
6. For purposes of this section the water area of ponds, streams, retention basins, detention basins and other bodies of water, or the land area of buffer
park easements and site plan open space requirements, shall not be included in determining any area dedicated for park or greenway purposes.
7. The dedication of any land for park or greenway purposes shall include dedication of a corridor or point of connection for public pedestrian access,
the areas of which shall be included in determining compliance with this section.
8. Approval of a development application shall be conditioned upon the construction of (or providing sufficient surety for the construction of) the
following improvements in accord with city design standards of:
a. Streets abutting any dedicated land.
b. Utility services (including hookups) to any dedicated land including storm and sanitary sewers, drainage structures, water lines, gas lines, electric
lines, communications lines and such other utilities as are (or will be upon completion) available to adjacent tracts.
c. Sidewalks (abutting any public street) and trail connections as appropriate.
d. Site grading and seeding.
e. Streetlights.
9. If land dedication under this section requires an amendment to the master parks and trails plan the need for such an amendment will be reported to
the park and recreation advisory board which shall make a recommendation to the city council on the development application.
10. The required land dedication under this section shall be reduced when the person making the development application provides public access by
easement to recreational facilities, playgrounds, unobstructed open spaces, ball fields, soccer fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, volleyball
courts, picnic shelters, recreational trails and other similar nonduplicated recreational facilities which have been (or will be) constructed and
maintained by the applicant and are not shown on the master parks and trails plan. There shall not be any credit for swimming pools, clubhouses and
other recreational facilities not provided in neighborhood parks, greenways or miniparks under the master parks and trails plan. In order to determine
the credit the city shall ascertain the fair market value of the land required to be dedicated under this section and from such value subtract the cost of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 678/687
the recreational facilities constructed by the applicant and provided under this section. The person making the development application shall then
only be required to dedicate land equal in value to the remainder.
11. Property subject to public easements for multipurpose trails shown on, or proposed by the city to be shown on, the master parks and trails plan
shall be included in the calculation of park land dedicated under this section. Such multipurpose trails shall be built by the applicant to city standards
and maintained by the city. Easements for multipurpose trails will include an easement for access of sufficient width for trail maintenance and
reconstruction. The city shall restore any land disturbed by maintenance or reconstruction, provided however, the owner of the fee shall be
responsible for all trimming, planting and maintenance of vegetation including the responsibility to keep the trail unobstructed, and passage
unimpeded by vegetation.
12. The dedication of land for trail or greenway space required under this section may include easements to the public of land used or included in the
setbacks required in single- or multi-family developments. The easements shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') away from any building, other
structure or parking lot on the site.
C. Alternative To Dedication: As an alternative to dedication under subsection B of this section, any person filing a development application may provide
jointly with other persons for the dedication of land in an amount at least equal to the amount required under subsection B of this section, at a location
which is not part of the land for which approval is sought, provided such alternative is within the same neighborhood park district (as such districts are
established by resolution of the city council) as the land for which a development application has been made, that the alternative jointly provided will
provide for a park with a total land area of at least five (5) acres, contiguous connective greenway space consistent with the master parks and trails
plan and that such alternative dedication of land is or has actually been dedicated to the city and has been accepted by the city for use in accord with
the master parks and trails plan.
D. Dedication Requirement Less Than Ten Thousand Square Feet: Where application of the formula set forth in subsection B of this section results in a
dedication requirement of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet the person making or filing the development application may elect to dedicate
ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land or fulfill their obligation by participating in an option provided by subsection C of this section, but such
alternative participation shall be based upon the actual calculation under subsection B of this section and not upon the equivalent of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of land.
E. Alternate Plan: Subsections B and C of this section notwithstanding, any entity required to comply with this section may present an alternate plan which
meets the purposes of this section as a means of complying herewith. It will be the burden of the entity presenting such plan to establish that such plan
meets the purposes of this section. Any such plan shall be first reviewed by the park and recreation advisory board which shall make a
recommendation to be presented to the plan and zoning commission (where plan and zoning commission recommendation is otherwise required) or
where the plan and zoning commission does not review then to the official or board responsible for review. If the plan and zoning commission or other
official or board recommendation is not required, such plan and the recommendation of the park and recreation advisory board shall be submitted to
the city council which shall approve or reject such plan by resolution. Any alternate proposal must directly and proportionately benefit the development.
This subsection, however, does not authorize the payment of impact fees to the city in lieu of the land dedication requirements.
F. Single-Family Residential Units: This section shall not apply to any development application containing three (3) or fewer single-family residential units.
A person making or filing a development application shall not divide land into separate plats in order to seek a waiver under this provision. Where a
development application is made for multiple contiguous tracts within any two (2) years the city may treat all the development applications as one for
purposes of this section.
G. Horizontal Property Regime: No declaration of a condominium regime and under Iowa Code chapter 499B, nor any conversion of an apartment to a
condominium under Iowa Code section 499B.3 shall be completed before the person or entity filing the declaration shall have complied with the land
dedication requirements of this chapter. In regard to property converted from apartments to condominiums, if such property was originally constructed
before January 1, 1985, or between November 22, 1999 and March 5, 2004, such property shall meet the requirements of this section in the same
manner as newly constructed condominiums prior to completion of conversion to a horizontal property regime, all other conversions shall be deemed to
have met the requirements of this section.
H. Severability: If any subsection or provision of this section is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of
any other provisions of this section which can be given effect without the invalid portion or portions and to this end each subsection and provision of
this section is severable.
I. Appeal Procedure:
1. Notice Of Appeal; Fee: Any person making or filing a development application or any person, entity, or developer affected by any decision made by
any department acting under this chapter, may appeal to the city council by filing notice of appeal with the city clerk and a filing fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) payable to the city of West Des Moines to be credited to the general fund of the city. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10)
days from the decision of the department acting under this chapter and shall set out in detail the reasons and grounds for the appeal. The city clerk
shall forthwith transmit to the city council all papers constituting the record upon which the action appeal is taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the appeal.
2. Public Hearings: The city council shall upon the filing of an appeal fix a reasonable time for a hearing, giving public notice thereof as well as due
notice to the parties in interest. All interested persons may offer oral or written testimony at the public hearing on the appeal. A vote of three (3)
members of the city council may affirm, modify, or reverse any decision of any department acting under this chapter.
3. Park And Recreation Advisory Board Review: Prior to the public hearing on appeal before the city council, the park board shall review the decision of
any department acting under this chapter and shall make a recommendation to the city council for consideration at the public hearing.
4. Appeal To The District Court: Any person, entity, or developer aggrieved by any appeal decision of the city council may within thirty (30) days from
the date of the city council rendering a decision, appeal therefrom to the district court of Polk County, Iowa, in accordance with the rules of civil
procedure, division XIV, entitled "certiorari". (Ord. 1595, 8-30-2004)
10-1-5: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 679/687
Whenever the tract proposed to be subdivided is of such unusual topography, size or conditions shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual
that the strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in substantial hardships or injustices, the council, upon
recommendation of the commission, may vary or modify such requirements wherever provided within this title so that the subdivider is allowed to develop
his property in a reasonable manner; but so, at the same time, the public welfare and interest of the city and surrounding area is protected and the general
intent and spirit of these regulations is preserved. In such cases the use of planned unit development zoning for such site shall be considered and may be
required by the council.
With regard to auditor's plats the commission and council shall have the right to waive provisions governing preliminary approval and public improvements
outlined herein providing there is on file in the commission office a copy of the request of the county auditor ordering such plat and a letter from the auditor
stating that the plat as submitted meets the requirements for which he has ordered the plat. (1985 Code §6-6.09)
10-1-6: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
Any provisions of these regulations may be changed and amended from time to time by the council; provided, however, that such changes and
amendments shall not become effective until after study and report by the commission and until after a public hearing has been held, public notice of which
shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. (1985 Code §6-6.11)
10-1-7: ENFORCEMENT:
The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by:
A. Recording: No plat or any subdivision shall be recorded in the county recorder's office or have any validity until it has been approved in the manner
prescribed herein.
B. City Funds Or Improvements: The council shall not permit any public improvements over which it has control to be made from city funds or any city
money expended for improvements or maintenance on any public utility or street in any area that has been subdivided after the date of adoption of
these regulations unless such subdivision, public utility or public street has been approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein and
accepted by the council as a public utility or public street. (1985 Code §6-6.10)
Chapter 2
PLATS AND PROCEDURES
10-2-1: PROCEDURE:
In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by the Commission and the Council, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat and final plat in
accordance with the following order and procedure:
A. Presubmission Conference:
1. Whenever the owner(s) of any tract of land located within the platting jurisdiction of the City is desirous of subdividing the same, said individual(s)
shall submit to the West Des Moines Planning Department a request for a preapplication conference. The purpose of said conference shall be to
acquaint the City staff with the proposed subdivision and to acquaint the owner(s) or developer(s) with procedures and/or any special problems
which might relate to the subdivision and adjoining property.
2. Whenever a parcel of land submitted for subdivision is contained within a larger tract held by the owner(s) that is also capable of further division, or
when a tract of land is submitted which contains vacant or developable land adjoining within two hundred feet (200'), said individual(s) wishing to
subdivide shall supply a master plan showing how the aforementioned properties could logically be developed in accordance with normal practices of
street design and lot layout, and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the City.
B. Preliminary Plat Filed: The subdivider shall prepare and file with the secretary to the Commission, ten (10) copies of a preliminary plat conforming in
detail to the requirements set forth in this Title.
C. Referrals: The Commission secretary shall forthwith refer six (6) copies to assigned City personnel. In case of a subdivision outside the corporate limits
of the City, the Commission shall refer two (2) copies of the preliminary plat to the County Board of Supervisors and keep the County Engineer advised
of the status of the plat and action taken thereon.
D. Review And Comment: The Planning Director, the City Engineer and other City staff personnel shall carefully examine the preliminary plat as to its
compliance with the laws and the ordinances of the City, the existing street system in relation to the master plan, good engineering practices and upon
completing their investigation, submit their findings and recommendations to the Commission.
E. Commission Review And Report:
1. After reviewing City staff reports, the Commission shall study the preliminary plat and other material for conformity thereof to these regulations and
other applicable regulations and ordinances of the City. The Commission may confer with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the
nature and extent of such improvements to be made by the subdivider. If changes in the plat are required, the Commission may request City staff to
review the changes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 680/687
2. The Commission, after review of the preliminary plat including any changes made, shall then send the preliminary plat and any changes, along with
its recommendations to the Council for its consideration.
F. Public Hearing: Before approving a preliminary plat, the Commission may at its discretion, hold a public hearing on the proposed plat, notice of which
shall be given by publication in a local newspaper of general distribution, or by sending notices by mail to affected property owners of record within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the proposed preliminary plat. Such notice shall be given within fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. If a public
hearing is held, action on the plat shall be taken at the hearing or the first meeting thereafter; provided, however, the subdivider may agree to an
extension of time not to exceed sixty (60) days. After action by the Commission on the preliminary plat, City staff shall forward the recommendation of
the Commission to the Council as soon as possible. Failure of owners of record to receive notification shall not invalidate the proceedings of this
Chapter.
G. Council Action:
1. Upon submittal of the preliminary plat by the Commission to the Council, and the Council rejects the preliminary plat, the Council may request the
Commission to reevaluate said plat upon the objections made by the Council and ask the Commission to resubmit its recommendations.
2. If the Council denies approval of the preliminary plat as recommended by the Commission, the Council shall indicate reasons for such denial.
3. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Council, which approval shall only constitute an authorization to proceed with preparation of the final
plat:
a. The subdivider may proceed with a preparation of final plat as provided under Section 10-2-3 of this Chapter, together with any detailed
construction, drawings and specifications for the improvements required by this Title, and submit twelve (12) copies of the final plat to the Council
for approval, together with a certificate from the enforcement officer that the final plat is substantially in accordance with the preliminary plat as
approved by the Council, required bonds posted in favor of the City, and other accompanying information required by this Title or other ordinances
of the City; provided further, however, if performance bonds are posted for improvements, the final acceptance of the plat will not constitute final
acceptance by the City of any improvements until the improvements are inspected by the City Engineer who shall submit a statement that all
improvements authorized by the Council have been completed in conformance to ordinance specifications and maintenance bond for such
improvements are posted and approved and the Council accepting such improvements. No public funds need be expended in the subdivision until
such improvements have been completed and accepted by the City; or
b. The Council may authorize the subdivider to initiate construction of all improvements according to the specifications, standards and ordinances of
the City. If the Council authorizes construction of the improvements according to the approved preliminary plat and its specifications, standards,
ordinances and regulations, such approval shall be binding upon the City. If construction of the improvements of any kind are initiated by the
subdivider on the basis of preliminary plat approval without authorization from the Council, the subdivider shall be responsible for any changes in
these improvements required by the Council before final plat approval. (1985 Code § 6-6.03)
c. The approval of the preliminary plat by Council shall be null and void unless the final plat is presented to the Council within one year after date of
approval of the preliminary plat. An extension of one hundred eighty (180) days may be granted by the City Council upon review of a written
request submitted by the subdivider prior to expiration of the original one year period. Said request shall include an explanation of the reason for
the extension request and the payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) filing fee. (Ord. 1131, 5-22-95)
H. Final Plat Submitted: When a final plat is submitted by a subdivider, the Council may accept or disapprove the same. If the Council disapproves the final
plat, such disapproval shall be pointed out and made of record wherein said proposed final plat is objectional.
I. Commission Review: The Council may refer the final plat to the Commission for review and recommendation, particularly if said plat does not conform to
the preliminary plat previously approved by the Commission. If the Commission is requested by the Council to review the final plat, the Commission
shall then consider the final plat, make its recommendations of approval or disapproval, and submit its findings to the Council with appropriate
reasoning attached thereto.
J. Acceptance: The passage of the resolution by the Council accepting the final plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area as shown on
the final plat, subject to the acceptance of improvements, and the subdivider shall cause such plat to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder
of Polk County, Iowa, as provided by chapter 409, Code of Iowa, and amendatory acts thereto before the City shall recognize the plat as being in full
force and effect. No building permits shall be issued by the City's Building Inspection Department until the extent of street improvements is adequate for
construction equipment, and police and fire equipment. (1985 Code §6-6.03)
10-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT; REQUIREMENTS:
The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not intended to serve as a record plat and shall be submitted for review separately and prior to submission of the
final plat. Its purpose is to show on a map all facts needed to enable the Commission and Council to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in
question is satisfactory from the standpoint of public interest and meets all ordinances and regulations of the City. The subdivider or his representatives
may call at the office of the Commission in advance of the preliminary plat in order to discuss the proposed subdivision and in order to obtain information
as to the requirements necessary for approval of the plat.
A. Number Of Copies And Scale: Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted as prescribed for review. The scale of the map shall be one
inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') on small subdivisions and one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') on large subdivisions unless otherwise approved
by the Commission and Council. In addition, there shall be submitted three (3) copies of a reproducible quality photo reduction of the subsection that
will be on paper no larger than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11").
B. Contents Of Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat shall show:
1. Areas dedicated for public use, such as schools, parks, pathways, playgrounds and streets.
2. Boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be labelled and indicated by a heavy line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 681/687
3. Building setback lines for frontage and side streets.
4. Buffer easement and method where required.
5. Contour lines at intervals of not more than five feet (5') when the grade differential over the entire proposed parcel exceeds fifty feet (50'), and
contour lines at intervals of two feet (2') when the contour change over the entire parcel is less than fifty feet (50').
6. Both existing and proposed grades shall be shown.
7. Erosion control measures shall be shown on the preliminary plat or an erosion control plan shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
8. Corner radii.
9. Easements for public utility and rights of way purposes.
10. Existing buildings, railroads, underground utilities, other rights of way and easements.
11. Location and name(s) of adjoining subdivision(s) or undeveloped land adjacent to preliminary plats and owners and persons having ownership
interest in all adjoining properties.
12. Location, names and widths of all existing and proposed roads, alleys, streets and highways adjoining the area being subdivided.
13. Lot areas (approximate) of all nonrectangular lots and the area of smallest rectangular lot.
14. Lot numbers.
15. Vicinity sketch.
16. Name and address of engineer and surveyor.
17. Name and address of recorded owner and/or developer.
18. Name of subdivision, date, compass point, scale and official description and acreage of the property being platted.
19. Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions.
20. Proposed utility service.
a. Source of water supply.
b. Provision for sewage disposal, drainage and flood control.
21. The zoning district, including both uses, height and area, in which the land to be subdivided falls according to the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
22. A letter of consent from all persons having an interest in the land to be subdivided, that they consent to the subdivision of the land; a statement
that the subdivision will comply and conform to all the requirements of the ordinances and regulations of the City and to platting procedures and
conditions.
23. All established floodway, floodway fringe, and flood plain overlay lines.
C. Accompanying Material: (Preliminary Plats) Soil percolation tests, certification of power supply, certification of ownership and any other information
deemed necessary for preliminary plat review may be required by City staff. (1985 Code §6-6.06; 5-22-91)
10-2-3: FINAL PLAT; REQUIREMENTS:
The final plat shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Number of Copies and Scale: When a preliminary plat is approved, the subdivider shall submit twelve (12) copies of the final plat for review by the
Commission and by the Council. The scale of the map shall be one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') on small subdivisions of under twenty five (25) lots
and one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') on large subdivisions, unless otherwise determined by the Commission or Council. In addition, there
shall be submitted three (3) copies of a reproducible quality photo reduction of the final plat on paper no larger than eight and one-half inches by eleven
inches (81/2" x 11").
B. Contents Of Final Plat: The final plat shall be drawn in India ink on reproducible tracing mylar on eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") sheet with
a border line allowing a three inch (3") binding margin along left hand narrow width and one-half inch (1/2") margin on the remaining narrow width and
two (2) long sides. The following information shall be shown on the plat:
1. Block lines shall be designated by heavy solid lines.
2. Block corners shall be shown rounded by appropriate radius with arch length, central angle and radius shown.
3. Boundary lines shall be designated by a heavy line (#3 or #4 pen) of long dash-two dots, etc., and labelled "plat boundary".
a. Boundary dimensions from angle point to angle point shall be shown for all sides of the closed traverse.
b. Bearings, based on an assumed meridian approximating north, of all boundary lines or internal angles of all angle points on the boundary shall be
shown.
4. Building setback lines for frontage and side streets shall be designated by a fine short dashed line, labelled "building setback line" and dimensioned.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 682/687
5. Center line of all street right of ways shall be designated by a fine line (#0 or #00 pen) of long dash-short dash or dot, etc., and dimensions from
angle point, point of curvature to point of tangency, intersection to intersection, or any combination thereof between intersections with the appropriate
bearings, angles, curve data, right of way widths and distances clearly shown. Curve data shall include arc length, central angle, and radius. All
points of curvature, and points of tangency shall be located and labelled.
6. Certification by a registered engineer and/or land surveyor in accordance with the Iowa State Law.
7. Easements for public utilities, public rights of way, and drainage facilities shall be designated by fine line (#0 or #00 pen) of medium length dashes,
and appropriately labelled with reserved width and type of "easement".
8. Fractional lines and corners of the government township and section surveys shall be appropriately labelled and dimensioned as applicable to the
plat. All plats shall be tied to a known section or fractional corners by distances and bearings and angles.
9. Legal description of the platted area, including the acreage, shall be included on the plat.
10. Lot lines shall be designated by medium fine (#0 or #1 pen) to solid lines.
11. All distances shall be shown in feet to the nearest one-hundredth of one foot (.01'), and in accord with the definition of a foot as adopted by the
United States Bureau of Standards.
12. Lots shall be numbered consecutively, all sides dimensioned. The bearings or corner angles of all lot lines which are not parallel to the block lines
shall be shown and lines intersecting a curved line shall be labelled as radial or not radial as applicable. Dimensions of lots lines which are curved
shall include appropriate curved data: arc length, central angle, and chord, where the radius is not shown elsewhere it shall be shown. The area of all
nonrectangular lots shall be shown to the nearest ten (10) square feet.
13. Permanent control monuments shall be labelled (P.C.M) and located.
14. Scale shall be indicated graphically by a bar graph designated in feet, and shall be shown in the lower right hand corner accompanied by a
northerly directional arrow.
15. Lot designation and lot address, street names, location, and rights of way width for all streets within or abutting the plat shall be shown.
16. Surveyors notes shall include the following as appropriate or applicable to the particular plat.
a. All bearings are based on an assumed meridian for computation purposes.
b. Block corner radii are twenty five feet (25') unless otherwise noted.
c. Dashed lines shown at the rear or sides of certain lots are "easements" reserved for the installation and maintenance of public utilities and
drainage facilities.
17. Subdivisions shall be designated, by name or as otherwise prescribed, in bold letters inside the margin at the top of each sheet included in the plat.
18. Whenever more than one sheet is used to accurately portray the lands subdivided, each sheet shall display both the number of the sheet and the
total number of sheets included in the plat, as well as clearly labelled match lines indicating where the other sheets adjoin. An index sheet shall be
provided to show the relationship between the sheets.
19. All interior excepted parcels shall be clearly indicated and labelled, "not a part of this plat".
20. The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all subdivision boundaries shall be a ratio of one to ten thousand (1:10,000) and shall be a
ratio of one to five thousand (1:5,000) for any individual lot. The subdividers land surveyor shall certify on the plat that the error of closure is within
the allowable limits as specified above.
21. Zoning of all parcels, including the name of the "PUD" Planned Unit Development if applicable, included within the plat shall be noted on the final
plat.
C. Accompanying Material: The following material shall accompany the submission of the final plat:
1. A deed to the City properly executed for all streets intended as public streets and for any other property intended for public use. A declaration of
value and groundwater hazard statement shall each be submitted. A release of any mortgage or encumbrances effecting the property intended for
public use.
2. Any protective covenants or restrictions to be imposed upon the plat shall be submitted for approval.
3. Plans and profiles of all streets and alleys at a fifty foot (50') horizontal scale and five foot (5') vertical scale. Profiles shall show location, size and
grade of all conduits, sewers, pipelines, etc., to be placed under the streets and alleys. Profiles shall be drawn with north oriented to the top or left
side of the drawing.
4. The following certificates shall be submitted:
a. By the owner and his spouse, if any, and any other persons having an ownership interest that the subdivision is with the free consent and is in
accordance with the desire of the owners. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the owner and spouse before some officer
authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds.
b. Maintenance bond, if any, shall be for a period of four (4) years for concrete paving and two (2) years for sanitary sewer, water main, and storm
sewer.
c. Certified statement from the county treasurer that the land subdivided is free from taxes.
d. Certified statement from the county clerk of the district court that the land subdivided is free from all judgments, attachments, mechanics' or other
liens as appears by the record in his office.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 683/687
e. Certified statement from the County Recorder that the title in fee is in the owner of the land subdivided, and that it is free from encumbrances other
than those secured by an encumbrance bond.
5. Drainage plans for the positive removal of storm water.
6. That proper inspection and approval of all improvements have been made by the City Engineer or his duly authorized agent and the costs expended
for such inspection services and tests conducted and furnished by the City has been reimbursed to said City; or posting a cash bond or a certified
check with the City for improvements as required under this Title.
7. A complete abstract of title and an opinion from an attorney at law showing that the fee title is in the proprietors and that the land platted is free from
encumbrances or an encumbrance bond filed.
8. The subdivider shall file with the City Clerk a form of resolution outlining all required details that are to be considered a part of the Council action.
Said forms of resolution shall describe the property included in the area being platted; shall state that the plat has been submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission and that they have acted thereon as provided by law; that the owner has complied with all conditions as set forth in this
Chapter or as required by chapter 409, Code of Iowa, that all the lands shown on the plat or as described in the resolution within the platted area
which are dedicated for the perpetual use of the public are acceptable by the City; that any acceptance or approval of the plat is contingent upon the
filing of covenants and conditions, if any, pertaining to the plat, and that the plat is approved and the Mayor and City Clerk are directed to certify the
resolution affixed to the plat.
The passage of the resolution approving the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the final plan. The subdivider shall
be responsible to cause the plat to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Polk County, Iowa, as provided in chapter 409, Code of Iowa,
including any covenants and conditions, if any, relating to the platting approved by the City, and shall file satisfactory evidence of the recording in the
office of the Building Official before the City shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect.
D. Recording Plat: There shall be three (3) copies stamped as approved by the Council.
1. A reproducible Mylar tracing shall be retained for file by the City Engineer.
2. One copy shall be filed with the County Recorder.
3. One copy will accompany resolution by the Council approving and accepting the plat shall be filed with the County Auditor. This copy must be
accompanied by a certificate by the owner and spouse, if any, that the subdivision is with the free consent and is in accordance with the desire of the
owners. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the owner and spouse before some officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of
deeds. (1985 Code §6-6.07; amd. 5-22-1991)
10-2-4: PLATS OF SURVEY:
The following regulations shall apply to any plats of survey which create new parcels within the jurisdiction of the City:
A. Recording: No plats of survey for any land within the jurisdiction of the City shall be recorded in the County Recorder's office or have any validity until
the City Council has adopted a resolution approving and releasing the plat of survey for recordation.
B. Application And Processing: Any person, firm or entity, proposing the division or subdivision by means of a plat of survey of any land into two (2) or
more parts or the creation of a new lot or parcel within the jurisdiction of the City, including any area outside of the City's boundaries pursuant to section
354.9 of the Code of Iowa, shall submit an application to the Community Development Department, on the prescribed forms, for review for compliance
with City Code requirements. The City staff shall review the proposal and formulate a recommendation to the City Council, which shall be presented to
the City Council in a written report.
C. Approval Or Denial: The City Council may at their full discretion, approve, deny or modify, wholly or partly, any application for approval of a plat of
survey. The City Council may impose such conditions and limitations as it deems necessary to assure that the general purpose and intent of this Title
and all other ordinances or policies enacted or followed by the City Council will be observed, and that the public interest, health, safety, convenience
and welfare will be served. (Ord. 1400, 3-20-2000)
Chapter 3
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
10-3-1: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS:
The standards and details of design for subdivisions shall be in accordance with the "Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards Manual", as amended by
West Des Moines, which is on file in the office of the city clerk.
A. Natural Features And Character Of Ground:
1. Public Utilities And Improvements: Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to
health or peril from fire, flood or other menace, and shall not be subdivided until showing can be made that those public utilities and improvements
will be provided as required by this title and/or other applicable ordinances of the city, and proper provision has been made for drainage, water,
sewage, transportation facilities and other improvements; to the greatest extent possible, attention shall be directed to the prevention of pollution of
air, water, including streams, ponds and the subsurface water aquifer(s).
2. Unsuitable Land Conditions: Land which the city finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep
slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which will reasonably be harmful to the health,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 684/687
safety and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision, and surrounding areas, or both, shall not be subdivided or
developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the subdivider and approved by the council, upon recommendation of the commission to
solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. (Ord. 1131, 5-22-1995)
B. Blocks: Blocks shall conform to the following requirements:
Length: No block shall be longer than one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320'), except as otherwise approved by the commission and council.
(In residential estate [RE] zoned area, maximum block length shall be 2,006 feet.) (Ord. 1859, 2-22-2010)
C. Buffers: Abutting zoning districts or existing conditions of conflicting use characteristics shall be buffered from one another as specified by section 9-19-
8, "Landscape Provisions", of this code. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
D. Lots: Lots shall conform to the following requirements:
1. The dimensions, shape and orientation of the lots shall be determined with regard to solar orientation, topography, land features and circulation.
2. Corner lots shall be not less than twenty feet (20') greater in width than the minimum required lot width for the zoning district so as to permit
adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets (not required in EU-1).
3. Double frontage lots other than corner lots shall be prohibited except where such lots back on a municipal arterial or collector street or highway or
except in the case of large commercial or industrial lots. Such double frontage lots shall be buffered from the rear street frontage by the methods
outlined in subsection C of this section. Ingress-egress shall be limited to the frontage street and is strictly prohibited on the rear street. A plat
covenant shall be provided covering this restriction (not required in EU-1).
4. Flag shaped lots shall be discouraged.
5. Each lot shall be provided by means of a public street with satisfactory access to an existing, paved public street.
6. Each lot shall be provided with not less than forty feet (40') of access frontage to a paved public street. (The EU-1 zoned areas, not less than 50 feet
of access frontage.)
7. All lots shall conform to the lot dimensions and area as set forth for the applicable zoning district in title 9, "Zoning", of this code.
8. For the purpose of complying with minimum health standards, the following shall be observed with reference to all new construction, and with
reference to all zoning categories as presently established within the city:
a. All lots, except those of ten (10) acres or above shall be provided with access and connections to public water mains.
b. Any lot or lots which cannot be reasonably served by a public sanitary sewer system shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred twenty five
feet (125'), and an area of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet or the minimum permitted by the zoning ordinance.
E. Monuments: Section 355.6 of the code of Iowa, 1993, is hereby adopted by reference, and shall be considered in full force and effect as if contained
herein.
F. Streets And Rights Of Way: Streets and rights of way shall conform to the following:
1. Alleys: Alleys may be required in business areas and industrial districts for adequate access to block interiors and for off street loading and parking
purposes. Except where justified by unusual conditions, alleys will not be approved in residential districts. Dead end alleys shall be provided with a
means of turning around at the dead end thereof in a manner acceptable to the city.
2. Circulation: The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within the subdivisions as well as convenient access to adjoining streets,
thoroughfares or unsubdivided land as may be required by the commission. In a case where a street will eventually be extended beyond the plat, but
is temporarily dead ended, an interim turnaround may be required, in a manner acceptable to the city, or the subdivider may be required to extend
the street into unplatted land or through adjoining grounds in order to reach a convenient access to the existing streets or thoroughfares.
3. Comprehensive Plan: All proposed plats and subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan as amended and to the requirements of the
comprehensive park and recreation plan, as amended, if applicable.
4. Continuation Of Existing Streets: Proposed streets shall provide for continuation or completion of any existing streets (constructed or recorded) in
adjoining property at equal or greater width, and in similar alignment, unless variations are recommended by the commission, and approved by the
council.
5. Dedication: A deed to the city shall be given for all streets before the same will be accepted for city maintenance. Acceptance of the deed to any
street shall not constitute acceptance and maintenance of improvements thereto until such time as certification shall be made to the council in accord
with section 10-3-2, "Improvements", of this chapter.
6. Half Streets: Dedication of half streets will be discouraged. Where there exists a dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to the tract to be
subdivided, the other half shall be platted if deemed necessary by the commission and council.
7. Land Not Platted: Where the subdivider of a plat to be submitted abuts any part of a tract of land owned, under purchase option or other agreements
for deed by the subdivider, the city may require topography and a concept plan of the entire tract of land under ownership, purchase option, or other
agreements for deed by the subdivider.
8. Arterials And Major Collectors: When a new subdivision, except where justified by limiting conditions, involves frontage on an arterial or major
collector, the street layout shall provide motor access to such frontage by one of the following means:
a. A parallel street supplying frontage for lots backing onto the arterial or major collector.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 685/687
b. A series of cul-de-sacs or short loops entered from and planned at right angles to such a parallel street, with their terminal lots backing onto the
arterial or collector.
c. An access drive separated by a planting strip from the highway to which a motor access from the drive is provided at points suitably spaced.
d. A service drive or alley at the rear of the lots. Where any one of the above mentioned arrangements is used, plat restriction or other means should
prevent any private residential driveways from having direct access to the arterial or major collector.
9. Physical And Natural Features: In general, streets shall be platted with appropriate regard for topography, creeks, wooded areas and other natural
features which would lend themselves to attractive treatment.
10. Railroads: If a railroad is involved, the subdivision plat should:
a. Be so arranged as to permit, where necessary, future grade separations at highway crossings of the railroad.
b. Border the railroad with a parallel street at a sufficient distance from it to permit normal lot depth based on existing zoning plus sixty feet (60') if
required by the council after receipt of a recommendation by the planning and zoning commission.
c. Provide culs-de-sac at right angles to the railroad so as to permit lots to back thereunto.
d. Whenever any street within a proposed plat involves an at grade railroad crossing as part of the needs or actions associated with said subdivision,
the subdivider shall be required to obtain all permits or licenses necessary with said crossing, and pay all costs associated with the construction of
the crossing.
11. Street Intersections: Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible.
Where streets do not directly intersect across from each other, a minimum offset of one hundred twenty five feet (125') may be required.
No driveway shall be permitted to access to a public street within twenty five feet (25') of the end of radius at a street intersection, unless, this
distance shall be waived by the city engineer after his review and analysis. (Ord. 1131, 5-22-1995)
12. Street Names: All newly platted public streets, and any named private streets, shall be named in accordance with the city of West Des Moines
roadway naming and addressing guidelines. Refer to section 7-1-8, "Street Names", of this code. (Ord. 1999, 8-19-2013)
13. Street Right Of Way Widths: Street rights of way shall be provided at a width as shown in the comprehensive plan, as amended and/or at a width
necessary to accommodate all anticipated pavement and utilities within the right of way based upon the functional use classification of the intended
street. (Ord. 1131, 5-22-1995)
10-3-2: IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and/or construction of all improvements required by the city, and shall warrant the design, material
and workmanship of such improvements, installation and/or construction for a period of four (4) years from and after completion for concrete pavement,
and four (4) years from and after completion for sanitary sewer, water main, and storm sewer. Such warranty shall be by bond or other acceptable
collateral; and shall be subject to review by the city attorney (waterworks legal counsel for water mains); shall specifically assure the expedient repair or
replacement of defective improvements under warranty; and shall indemnify the city (waterworks for water mains), from any and all costs or losses
resulting from, contributed to, or arising out of such defective improvements.
Before the council approves the final plat, all of the foregoing improvements, except water mains, shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution
of the city council. Water mains shall be constructed in a manner prescribed by the West Des Moines waterworks and the mains shall be accepted by
formal resolution of the waterworks board of trustees. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance by the city council, the city engineer shall report
that the improvements to be accepted by the city meet all city specifications and ordinances or other requirements and agreements between the subdivider
and the city. The waterworks general manager shall prepare a similar report with respect to water mains, which report shall be the basis for passage of an
acceptance resolution by the waterworks board of trustees.
This requirement may be waived if the subdivider will post a cash bond or certified check with the city (or waterworks for water mains) guaranteeing that
said improvements will be constructed within a period of one year from final acceptance of the plat; however, if a certified check or cash bond is posted,
final acceptance of the plat will not constitute final acceptance by the city (or waterworks for water mains) of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed and is inspected by appropriate city or waterworks personnel certifying the
improvements have been completed in conformance with specifications, standards, and ordinances. No public funds will be expended (except in traffic
signage) in the subdivision until such improvements have been completed and accepted by the city (waterworks for water mains).
The amount of the bond or certified check shall not be less than the estimated cost of the improvements, including all inspection services and tests
conducted by the city (or waterworks for water mains) and the amount of the estimate of the bond or certified check must be approved by the city engineer
(waterworks general manager for water mains).
The council may waive the requirements of this chapter for the construction and installation of some or all of the improvements in cases of resubdivisions
where only the size, shape and arrangement of the lots is being changed; provided, however, such waiver shall be limited to existing improvements in
good repair as determined by the city engineer. Improvements not existing or in poor repair shall meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1131, 5-22-
1995)
A. Sidewalks And Crosswalks:
1. Sidewalks:
a. The intent and purpose of this section is to establish the regulations regarding the installation of public sidewalks and pathways in the city to
ensure the orderly and harmonious development of a citywide sidewalk system in existing and new developments in such a manner as to provide
a comprehensive sidewalk system that will safeguard the public's health, safety and general welfare.
b. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, all dwellings, nonresidential buildings and uses, whether occupied or unoccupied, shall have,
after adoption of this ordinance, a permanent sidewalk built for the entire width and/or length of the lot or lots upon which the dwelling,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 686/687
nonresidential building or use is located, and the sidewalk(s) shall be built for the entire width and/or length of all sides of any lot or lots which abut
a public street.
c. At such time that eighty percent (80%) of a plat or subdivision is developed, the property owner(s) of any undeveloped parcels, upon written
notification by the city, shall install the required sidewalk(s) on their property within one hundred twenty (120) days of the notification by the city.
After expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) day period, the city may take any legal action necessary to proceed with the installation of the
sidewalk(s) and assess the cost of the installation and any legal expenses, as allowed by law, as a lien against the property.
d. In the event that no grade has been set or there is no curb and gutter on the street upon which the sidewalk(s) is to be placed, the council may
defer the sidewalk requirement on application of the affected property owner(s) and upon the affected property owner(s) signing an agreement to
install such a sidewalk(s) within one hundred twenty (120) days after the property owner(s) has been notified that a curb and gutter has been
installed and/or that the grade has been set. The agreement shall be verified and placed on record in the office of the county recorder of the
applicable county, and shall be a covenant running with the land, and shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, and successors of the property
owner.
e. At the discretion of the city council, the installation of any required sidewalk(s) may be deferred or waived when an off street bike/pedestrian trail
has been identified on the comprehensive plan or on the trails master plan adjacent to the subject property. In the event that the sidewalk
installation is deferred or waived, the property owner shall provide assurances, acceptable to the city, for the cost equivalent to the cost of installing
the public sidewalk(s), that can be combined with other funding sources available to the city, for the installation of the off street bike/pedestrian
trail.
f. When the strict application of standards or requirements established by this section would cause substantial hardship or impose unreasonable
restrictions regarding the installation of a sidewalk(s) because of natural or physical conditions or limitations not created by the property owner, the
council may grant such deferrals and/or waivers from these standards or requirements as may be necessary pursuant to the following procedure.
At such time when the conditions or limitations are eliminated, the property owner(s) will be required to install such sidewalk(s) within one hundred
twenty (120) days after written notification by the city.
The applicant under this subsection shall prepare an application on the appropriate prescribed form supplied by the community development
department for the review of the plan and zoning commission and/or the city council. The applicant may request a waiver or deferral of the
sidewalk installation requirement, which on any new development will be forwarded to the commission for its review and recommendation to the
city council, and all requests will be presented to the city council, who shall either approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove of the
request based upon criteria adopted by the city council.
The council shall establish criteria and specific design standards to assist in considering applications for deferrals and/or waivers. All such criteria
and specific design standards shall be established in such a way as to ensure the orderly and harmonious development of a citywide sidewalk
system in such a manner as will safeguard the public's health, safety and general welfare.
If the council rejects the request, the council will advise the applicant of any changes which are desired or that should have consideration before
approval will be given. The applicant shall then submit the revised original for certification by the city council. The city council, in approving or
disapproving any requests and in making requests for alterations or amendments to the request as presented, shall be governed by the general
policies as set out by this ordinance and by the criteria and specific design standards established by the council.
g. Any waiver or deferral that is granted by the city council shall be recorded by the city as a matter of public record at the office of the county
recorder of the applicable county.
h. The enforcement of this section shall be by special assessment pursuant to division IV of the Iowa Code chapter 384. (Ord. 1178, 4-22-1996)
2. Crosswalks: Where any block in a subdivision shall exceed nine hundred feet (900') in length, the subdivider may be required, if such is deemed
necessary by the commission and council, to provide an interior pedestrian walkway of not more than twelve feet (12') in width, near the center and
entirely across the block in its short dimension, for the purpose of access to schools, commercial areas, churches, parks, and other public facilities.
B. Sewer: Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall provide each lot in the subdivision with connection to the sewer.
Further, where the existing sewer may be reasonably extended through the subdivision so as to provide for continuous future development, such
provisions shall be made.
Prior to issuance of a building permit by the building official, the owner of any lot not served by sanitary sewer shall cause to be filed, with his permit
application, copies of the soil percolation tests for the private sanitary disposal system and the approval required of said system by the Polk County
health department. The building official shall retain the Polk County approval and forward the soil percolation results to the city engineer's office for his
files.
C. Utility Cables: All utility cables, except for electrical lines of nominal voltage in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) volts, shall be required to be installed
underground in residential, commercial, and office park subdivisions as herein specified.
1. Residential Subdivisions: Utility cables shall, as a general rule, be placed at the rear or side of respective lots within an area of perpetual easements
reserved for this purpose. Where, in the determination of the council, certain conditions of soil, topography, or other circumstances exist to make the
aforementioned easement locations unreasonable or impractical, utility cables may be installed at the front of the lot in an area dedicated for
perpetual easement or in the public right of way, provided said installation does not interfere with any other existing or proposed utilities.
2. Commercial, Office And Apartment Subdivisions: Utility cables shall be placed underground in such a manner as to maintain ease of service and
accessibility to all lots and structures, but shall not be restricted to easements abutting property lines. Where said utility cables are located or
proposed to be located in public rights of way, they shall be so placed so as not to interfere with other existing or proposed utilities.
3. Waiver Of Underground Provision: Where it is determined that this provision requiring the installation of underground utilities would not be practical
because of unusual conditions and/or the installation would cause unnecessary hardship upon a developer and/or individual property owners, the
council may, after receiving a recommendation from staff, waive this provision.
4. Additional Easement: In RE areas, the subdivider may be required to provide an additional twenty foot (20') utility easement outside the public right
of way line, if in the determination of the city engineer such is necessary to protect the roadway, especially ditch sections of rural type construction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=568 687/687
D. Water Mains: Public water shall be required on all subdivisions, and in all zoning classifications, except for lots in excess of ten (10) acres. Public water
shall not be required for any lots already platted and of record as of April 17, 1978, provided said lots shall meet the minimum space requirements for
the zoning district of which said lots are a part. (Ord. 1131, 5-22-1995)