6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 1/151
PREFACE
This city code of the city of American Falls, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 602, passed January 19, 2011.
Ordinances of the city adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this city code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the city office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION AND OFFICIAL AND CONTINUOUS USE OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF AMERICAN FALLS,
IDAHO.
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF AMERICAN FALLS, that:
Section 1. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance the Municipal Code of the City of American Falls, prepared by Sterling Codifiers and
hereby approved and accepted shall be the Official Code of all Ordinances of a general and permanent character of the City. (Adopting Ord., 4-6-1960)
Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplemental
service whereby each newly adopted Ordinance of a general nature, amending, altering, adding to or deleting provisions of the Municipal Code is identified
by the proper catchline, and, following preparation by Sterling Codifiers, is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such insertion
shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of adoption by the Council; however, each new provision shall become effective upon its passage
and publication pursuant to Idaho law. (Ord. 481, 3-15-1995)
Section 3. At least one (1) official copy of said official Municipal Code of the City of American Falls shall at all times be on file and available for
inspection in the office of the Clerk.
This Ordinance passed by roll call vote of the City Council this sixth day of April, 1960, and approved by the Mayor on this sixth day of April, 1960.
/s/ A. J. Watts
Mayor
/s/ David H. West
City Clerk
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
This compilation and codification of the general ordinances of the city of American Falls is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official
municipal code of the city of American Falls. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the
same under its appropriate title heading, its chapter heading, and its section heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the
section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal document. (1960 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code of the city of American Falls, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all
administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of a general and permanent effect of the city. (1960 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 2/151
in each copy of the municipal code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each copy of the municipal code
within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1960 Code)
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used, in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons, any
single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties, or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included. Provided, that these rules of construction shall not
be applied to any section of the municipal code which contains an express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content
may be repugnant thereto. (1960 Code)
1-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission within the provisions of these ordinances. It does not require
any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT, NEGLIGENTLY: These terms import a want of such attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act
or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
OFFICER: Shall include officers and boards in charge of departments and members of such boards. The word "city", "clerk", "treasurer", or other such
titles shall mean city, city clerk, city treasurer, or other city officer as the use may be applicable.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Includes any person, firm, association or corporation or any organization of any kind.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which
any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
STREETS: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done oromitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The words "written" and "in writing" may include printing.
Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license or permit or authority from a board or officer, shall be construed as giving such
board or officer power to license or permit or authorize such thing to be done. (1960 Code)
1-1-6: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of the municipal code the following rules shall be observed:
(A) Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any
person.
(B) Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section of the municipal code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person
actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said
person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. (1960 Code)
1-1-7: PENALTIES:
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of the official municipal code the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act, or the omission to do any act, constitutes a breach of any section or provision of the municipal code and there shall be no
fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of the general penalty clause shall apply, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1960 Code)
1-1-8: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of the official municipal code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 3/151
liable for any fine or penaltyprovided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1960 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in force
or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (1960 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect of such provisions only. (1960 Code)
1-2-3: PENDING SUITS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If anypenalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this section or section 1-2-2 of this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any
person, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of adoption of this code.
Nothing contained in this section or section 1-2-2 of this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any
person, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of adoption of this code. (1960 Code)
Chapter 3
PENALTY
1-3-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any one offense
and such person may be confined in the municipal jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, either or both such fine and imprisonment may be
imposed. (Ord. 522, 5-20-1998)
1-3-2: DEFAULT:
(Rep. by Ord. 522, 5-20-1998)
1-3-3: DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED:
(Rep. by Ord. 246, 4-5-1967)
1-3-4: LABOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 522, 5-20-1998)
1-3-5: LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 4/151
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any license previously issued to him by the municipality may be revoked by the court
or by the municipal governing body. (1960 Code)
1-3-6: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code, where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemedcommitted upon
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1960 Code)
Chapter 4
CORPORATE SEAL
1-4-1: CORPORATE SEAL; DESIGN:
The corporate seal of the city of American Falls, Idaho, shall be circular in form with inner and outer circles of rope design. The outer circle shall be one
and one-half inches (11/2") in diameter and the inner circle shall be one inch (1") in diameter. It shall bear upon the upper portion of space between the two
(2) circles the words "City of American Falls", in Gothic style type, and upon the lower portion of the space between the two (2) circles the words "Power
County, Idaho" in Gothic style type. Upon the space within the inner circle and on the upper portion thereof shall be the words "A Municipal" in Gothic style
type and upon the lower portion of the space within the inner circle shall be the word "Corporation" in Gothic style type. Upon and across the center of the
space within the inner circle shall be the word "Seal" in Roman style type.
A facsimile of the above described seal follows:
(1960 Code)
1-4-2: ADOPTION OF SEAL:
The seal described hereinabove in this chapter is hereby adopted as the corporate seal of the city of American Falls, Power County, Idaho. (1960 Code)
1-4-3: CITY CLERK CUSTODIAN OF SEAL:
The clerk of the city of American Falls shall be the custodian of the corporate seal and shall affix said seal imprint upon all official city documents, records,
licenses, warrants and/or checks. (1960 Code)
Chapter 5
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
1-5-1: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 5/151
The Power County Press of American Falls, Idaho, be and is hereby designated the official newspaper of the city. (Ord. 256, 9-6-1967)
Chapter 6
DEPOSITORY
1-6-1: DESIGNATION OF DEPOSITORY:
Any federally insured (FDIC) depository is designated "designated depositories" of the city. (Ord. 418, 8-20-1986)
Chapter 7
MAYOR
1-7-1: DUTIES:
The mayor, the superintending and administrative officer of the municipality, shall devote so much of his time to the duties of his office as an efficient and
faithful discharge thereof may require. He shall preside at all meetings of the council and shall have a vote when the council is equally divided, and call
special meetings of the council when necessary. He shall appoint all officers and employees of the municipality, subject to the approval of the council, and
have such other powers as the council may prescribe. He shall from time to time provide for the council such information and recommend such measures
as he may deem beneficial to the municipality. He shall examine the grounds of all complaints against any officer of the municipality to determine existence
of a violation or neglect of duty and report to the council the evidence thereof, if deemed sufficient for the removal of said officer. He shall require that
every officer, on the expiration of his term of office or resignation or removal, deliver to his successor all assets belonging to such office. He shall perform
all other duties required and necessary for the efficient operation of the business of the municipality1. (1960 Code)
1-7-2: CONTRACT:
The mayor is authorized and empowered to sign his name officially for and in behalf of the municipality on all contracts, documents and papers to which
the municipality is a party, and to require that the conditions in any instrument are faithfully performed. He may borrow money on the credit of the
municipality when so authorized by the council. (1960 Code)
1-7-3: REWARD:
The mayor, whenever he deems it expedient, is hereby empowered to offer a reward not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the arrest and
conviction of any person charged with violating any of the provisions of this code. (1960 Code)
1-7-4: PARDONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 418, 8-20-1986)
1-7-5: VETO POWER:
The mayor shall have power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by the council, provided, that any ordinance vetoed by the mayor may be passed over
his veto by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the council, and should the mayor neglect or refuse to sign any ordinance, the same shall become
law without his signature after the next regular meeting of the council. (1960 Code)
1-7-6: ACCOUNTS OF OFFICERS:
The mayor shall have the power to require any officer of the municipality to exhibit his accounts or other papers and make reports to the council in writing
on any subject or matter pertaining to the office. (1960 Code)
1-7-7: POLICE POWER:
The mayor shall have jurisdiction over all places within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the municipality for the enforcement of any health or
quarantine ordinance and regulation and shall have jurisdiction in all matters, excepting taxation, within one mile of the corporate limits of the municipality.
(Ord. 311, 2-20-1974)
1-7-8: MAY REQUIRE AID:
The mayor is hereby authorized to call on every male inhabitant of the municipality over the age of eighteen (18) and under the age of fifty (50) years to aid
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 6/151
in enforcing the law. (1960 Code)
1-7-9: OTHER POWERS:
The mayor shall have all other powers provided by state statute or by specific provisions of this code. (1960 Code)
1-7-10: ELECTION OF MAYOR, MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED:
Pursuant to the authority granted in Idaho Code section 50-612,in the event there are more than two (2) candidates for election for the office of mayor of
the city, it shall be a requirement that the successful candidate for mayor be elected by a majority vote of all votes cast for that office.
In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast for the office of mayor in any particular election, a runoff election shall be scheduled within
thirty (30) days of the date of the general election between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast. (Ord. 434, 9-6-1989)
Chapter 8
THE COUNCIL
1-8-1: DUTIES:
Members of the council, the legislative and policy making branch of the municipality, shall devote so much of their time to the duties of their office as an
efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. They shall attend all meetings of the council unless lawfully excused therefrom by the mayor or by a
majority of the remaining members, and perform all duties which by the nature of their office they should reasonably perform, such as the passing of
ordinances, resolutions and the investigation and study of work done for the municipality according to the committees upon which they may severally be
appointed by the mayor1. (1960 Code)
1-8-2: AT LARGE ELECTION:
There shall be six (6) councilmen elected at large from within the municipality, three (3) of whom shall be elected every two (2) years for terms of four (4)
years each, or until their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. 418, 8-20-1986)
1-8-3: VACANCY; HOW FILLED:
In the event an office of councilman shall become vacant, through death, removal of residence, or for any other cause, the mayor shall appoint, with the
approval of the council, a resident of the municipality to fill the unexpired portion of the term to serve until the next general election, at which time the
unexpired term shall be filled by regular election. (1960 Code; amd. Ord. 418, 8-20-1986)
1-8-4: HOW TO CONDUCT COUNCIL MEETING:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the conduct of council meetings, the bookentitled, "How To Conduct A
Municipal Council Meeting" prepared by the Idaho municipal league, three (3) copies of which shall be on file in the office of the clerk, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. (1960 Code)
1-8-5: ELECT PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL:
At the time of taking office the council shall elect one of its members as president of the council who shall preside at all meetings of the council and
perform all other duties of the mayor in the absence of the mayor; and, in the absence of the president the council shall elect one of their members to
occupy his place temporarily, who shall be styled acting president of the council, and the president and acting president, when occupying the place of
mayor, shall have the same privileges as other members of the council and all actions of the president and acting president, while so acting, shall be
binding upon the council and upon the municipality as if performed by the mayor. (1960 Code)
1-8-6: TIME AND PLACE OF MEETING:
Meetings shall be held on the first Wednesday of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. at such place as shall from time to time be designated by
resolution of the city council. Notice of change of meeting place of the city council shall be made by one publication in the Power County Press at least six
(6) days prior to the first meeting to be held at the changed location. (Ord. 500, 9-18-1996)
Footnote 1: See section 1-17-1 of this title for salary of council members.
Chapter 9
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 7/151
1-9-1: APPOINTMENTS:
The mayor shall appoint, subject to approval of the council, a clerk, attorney, police chief, fire chief, and treasurer. The mayor may appoint, subject to
approval by the council, such other officers as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the business of the municipality. (Ord. 416, 2-19-
1986)
1-9-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
All appointments shall be made for specified term. (1960 Code)
1-9-3: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Any appointed officer may be removed from office by the same authority and in the same manner as he was originally appointed. (1960 Code)
1-9-4: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
Certain officers shall give bonds in favor of the municipality with two (2) or more sureties, or surety bonds in such amounts and with such companies as
may be set by resolution of the council. Bonds so furnished in accordance with provisions of this chapter shall be furnished at the expense of the
municipality. (Ord. 418, 8-20-1986)
Chapter 10
CITY CLERK-TREASURER
1-10-1: POSITION:
There shall be a city clerk-treasurer, appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council. Any references to the city clerk or the city treasurer
in this code shall be construed to mean the city clerk-treasurer. (Ord. 461, 9-16-1992)
1-10-2: DUTIES:
In addition to the duties and responsibilities provided by the law of the state, the city clerk-treasurer shall perform such duties and responsibilities as set
forth in the job description set up for the position or such additional duties and responsibilities as assigned by the mayor and council of the city. (Ord. 461,
9-16-1992)
Chapter 11
TREASURER
(Rep. by Ord. 461, 9-16-1992)
Chapter 12
ATTORNEY
1-12-1: APPOINTMENT:
The attorney shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the council. He shall hold office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner
removed by the mayor with the concurrence of the council. (1960 Code)
1-12-2: SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the municipality may be a party, or in which it may be
interested, or which may be brought against, or by, any officer of the municipality on behalf of the municipality, or in the capacity of such person as an
officer of the municipality. (1960 Code)
1-12-3: JUDGMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the municipality and of all
similar interlocutory orders. (1960 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 8/151
1-12-4: ADVICE:
The attorney shall be the legal advisor of the municipality, and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the municipality, whenever requested to
do so by any municipal official. Upon request by the mayor or by the council, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (1960 Code)
1-12-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings. (1960 Code)
1-12-6: ORDINANCES AND DOCUMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease or other documents or instruments, to which the municipality
may be a party; and upon request of the council to draft ordinances covering any subjects within the power of the municipality. (1960 Code)
Chapter 13
CHIEF OF POLICE
1-13-1: APPOINTMENT:
The chief of police shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the council. He shall hold office for the duration of his appointment unless
sooner removed by the mayor with a concurrence of the council. (1960 Code)
1-13-2: RANK:
The chief of police shall be the head of the department and have supervision over all the officers and members thereof. The chief of police may, with the
approval of the mayor, appoint such special police as may be required from time to time, however, such appointment may not be for a period of longer than
ten (10) days and special police shall not be reappointed following the specified ten (10) days without the consent of the governing body. (1960 Code)
1-13-3: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The chief of police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or by the
mayor. He shall be responsible for the performance of the police department and of its functions and all persons who are members of the police
department shall serve subject to his orders.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see to the enforcement of all provisions of this code of all applicable statutes and to preserve order and prevent
infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof. He shall have authority to call upon any citizen or bystander to assist him in the execution of his duty. He
shall serve all processes issued to him and enforce all orders and judgments of the court. (1960 Code)
1-13-4: STOLEN PROPERTY:
The chief of police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered within the municipality. (1960 Code)
Chapter 14
CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT
1-14-1: APPOINTMENT:
The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the council. He shall hold office for the duration of his
appointment unless sooner removed by the mayor with the concurrence of the council. (1960 Code)
1-14-2: RANK:
The chief of the fire department, commonly referred to as the fire chief, shall be the head of the department and have supervision over all officers and
members thereof. The fire chief may, with the approval of the mayor, appoint such other fire department officers as may be deemed necessary, including a
first assistant chief and a second assistant chief. (1960 Code)
1-14-3: DUTIES:
The fire chief shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or by the mayor.
He shall be responsible for the performance of the fire department and of its functions and all persons who are members of the fire department shall serve
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 9/151
subject to his orders. He shall be responsible for the control and custody of all fire department property and equipment. He shall have the authority of a
police officer while actively engaged in fighting a fire, or going to or from a fire. (1960 Code)
Chapter 15
CITY ENGINEER
1-15-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the council, a city engineer who shall hold his office for the duration of his appointment or until such time as
he shall be removed by the mayor with the concurrence of the council. (1960 Code)
1-15-2: PUBLIC WORKS APPROVAL:
The engineer shall approve all public works, plans and specifications. Construction work where the expenditure will be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or
more must be approved by the engineer, except that the engineer's direct supervision and approval must be obtained on all work where the public health
or safety is involved. (1960 Code)
1-15-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Any person appointed engineer shall be a competent engineer and surveyor and shall be duly licensed as such by the state of Idaho. (1960 Code)
Chapter 16
CITY WORKS SUPERINTENDENT
(Rep. by Ord. 418, 8-20-1986)
Chapter 17
SALARIES
1-17-1: SALARIES OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
(A) Declaration Of Policy: Since the volume of the business of the city has increased tremendously each year for the past several years and since the
government of the city has become more and more complicated and complex, all creating greater and greater demands upon the time of the elected
officials, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city council to pay such salaries to the elected officials as will encourage them to devote a sufficient
amount of time to their various duties to adequately manage the business and government of the city and to partially compensate such officials for the
contribution of that time. (Ord. 339, 8-17-1977, eff. 1-1-1978)
(B) Salaries:
1. Council Members: Each member of the council shall receive an annual salary of the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
2. Mayor: The mayor shall receive an annual salary in the amount of seven thousand eight hundred dollars ($7,800.00). (Ord. 534, 3-3-1999)
1-17-2: SALARIES OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
The salaries of all appointed officers and employees of the city shall be as established and approved by recorded action of the council. (1960 Code)
Chapter 18
WARDS
(Rep. by Ord. 418, 8-20-1986)
Chapter 19
CODE OF CONDUCT; OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-19-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The public judges its government by the way public officials, officers and employees conduct themselves in the position to which they are elected or
appointed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 10/151
The people must require that every public official, officer and employee will conduct himself in a manner that will preserve public confidence in and respect
for the government served.
Such confidence can best be promoted if every public official, officer and employee will uniformly treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and
equality under the law; and, reveal both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and public interest. (Ord. 325, 11-5-1975)
1-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this code are defined as follows:
FINANCIAL INTEREST: Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit (other than the duly authorized salary or
compensation for his services to the city) to the official or employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the official or employee.
OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE: Any person appointed to, or employed or retained by, any public office or public body of the city whether paid or unpaid and
whether part time or full time.
OFFICIAL: Any councilman or mayor.
PERSON: Any person, firm, association, group, partnership or corporation, or any combination thereof.
PERSONAL INTEREST: Any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or from close business or political association whether or not any
financial interest is involved.
PUBLIC BODY: Any council, agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or office of the city. (Ord. 325,11-5-1975)
1-19-3: FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT:
(A) Impartiality: No official, officer or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage, information or favor
beyond that which is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
(B) Use Of Public Property: No official, officer or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property,
vehicle, equipment, labor or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself, or any other person. This rule shall not be
deemed to prohibit an official, officer or employee from requesting, using or permitting the use of such publicly owned or publicly supplied property,
vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service which it is the general practice to make available to the public at large or which is provided as a matter of
stated public policy for the use of officials, officers and employees in the conduct of official business. (Ord. 325, 11-5-1975)
1-19-4: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
(A) Financial Or Personal Interest: No official, officer or employee, either on his own behalf or on behalf of any other person, shall have any financial or
personal interest in any business or transaction with any public body unless he shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such
interest.
(B) Disclosure And Disqualification: Whenever the performance of his official duties shall require any official, officer or employee to deliberate and vote on
any matter involving his financial or personal interest, he shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest and disqualify himself from
participating in the deliberation as well as in the voting.
(C) Incompatible Employment: No official, officer or employee shall engage in private employment with, or render services for, any private person who has
business transactions with any public body unless he shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services.
(D) Gift And Favors: No official, officer or employee shall accept any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan or promise, that would not be
offered or given to him if he were not an official, officer or employee. This prohibition against gifts or favors in this section shall not apply to an
occasional unsolicited gift, insignificant in value.
(E) Confidential Information: No official, officer or employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction, disclose any
confidential informationconcerning any other official, officer or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the city.
Whether or not it shall involve disclosure, no official, officer or employee shall use or permit the use of any such confidential information to advance the
financial or personal interest of himself or any other person.
(F) Nepotism: No elected official shall appoint or vote for appointment of any person related to him by affinity or consanguinity to the second degree, to any
clerkship, office, position, employment or duty, when the salary, wages, pay or compensation is to be paid out of public funds as provided in section 59-
701, Idaho Code. (Ord. 325, 11-5-1975)
1-19-5: ENFORCEMENT:
In the event the conduct of any appointed officer or employee appears to be in conflict with this chapter the appointing authority shall provide what
sanction seems appropriate including censure, suspension or removal and make public disclosure of the circumstances and action taken. Such action
must be in accordance with duly adopted rules, regulations and contracts concerning public employment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 11/151
In the event the conduct of an elected official appears to be in conflict with this chapter, the council, by a majority vote, shall select a committee of three (3)
citizens representing the public to investigate, make public by full disclosure the circumstances of the violation, if any, and the action taken. (Ord. 325, 11-
5-1975)
Chapter 20
CITY ELECTIONS
1-20-1: ELECTION POLL HOURS:
The polls for all general and special city elections shall be opened from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and remain open until all registered electors of that
precinct have voted or until eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., whichever comes first. (Ord. 435, 9-6-1989)
Title 2
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: CREATION OF COMMISSION:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the planning and zoning commission of the city of American Falls, Idaho, which shall consist of from
six (6) to twelve (12) members to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. At least three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the
commission shall be bona fide residents of the city of American Falls, Idaho; one-fourth (1/4) of the members may be residents outside the city limits but
within the area of "city impact" as the same shall from time to time be negotiated by the city of American Falls and Power County, Idaho, and not more
than two (2) may be councilmen or officials of the city. At the initial meeting of said commission the members thereof shall draw lots in such a fashion as to
determine terms of office providing for one-third (1/3) of the members to serve for two (2) years, one-third (1/3) to serve for four (4) years and one-third (1/3)
to serve for six (6) years. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for six (6) years or until a successor is appointed. Any commissioner may be discharged
from office at any time at the pleasure of the mayor and confirmation of the council. (Ord. 333, 12-1-1976)
2-1-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS; MEETINGS:
The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. It shall
hold such meetings, meet at such places and have such hearings from time to time as the commission or a majority thereof may determine. At the first
meeting of the commission after this chapter takes effect, the commission shall elect one of their number chairman, and thereafter at the first meeting in
June of each year the commission shall meet and organize by electing a member to serve as chairman for one year. (Ord. 313, 6-19-1974)
2-1-3: RECOMMENDATION OF PLANS:
The commission shall recommend the boundaries of the various districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced. It shall make a preliminary report and
hold public hearings thereon before submitting any final report to the governing body. The commission shall recommend and make suggestions to the
council for theadoption of coordinated plans for the physical development of the city, for the formation of zoning districts; make suggestions concerning the
laying out, widening, extending and locating of streets, roads and highways for the relief of traffic; make suggestions concerning density of populations and
development of land within said city; make suggestions concerning the future growth, development and beautification of the said city in respect to its public
buildings, streets, parks, grounds and lands consistent with the future growth and development of the city in order to promote the public health, morals,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of said city; give suggestions and advice to individual citizens of the said city concerning landscaping and location of
buildings, structures or works to be erected, constructed or altered by or for such individual. The city council shall not hold any public hearing or take action
until it has received the final report and recommendations of the commission. (Ord. 313, 6-19-1974)
2-1-4: EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditures of the commission shall be within the amounts appropriated and set aside by the city council for the purposes of the commission as set
forth in this chapter. Within such limits the commission is authorized to employ such employees and technical advisors as it deems necessary for the
accomplishment of its authorized purposes and work. (Ord. 313, 6-19-1974)
Chapter 2
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
2-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public of the city through the identification,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 12/151
evaluation, designation, and protection of those buildings, sites, areas, structures, and objects which reflect significant elements of the city's, the state's
and the nation's historic, architectural, archaeological, and cultural heritage. (Ord. 423, 4-1-1987)
2-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
CITY: The city of American Falls.
COMMISSION: The historic preservation commission of the city of American Falls, Idaho.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration and rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and
sites significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state, its communities or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this community, the
state, or the nation. (Ord. 423, 4-1-1987)
2-2-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
(A) There is hereby created a historic preservation commission which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor with the
advice and consent of the council.
(B) All members of the commission shall have a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in history or historicpreservation. The council shall
endeavor to appoint at least two (2) members with professional training or experience in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history,
urban planning, archaeology, engineering, law, or other historic preservation related disciplines.
(C) Initial appointments to the commission shall be made as follows: two (2) persons for a one year term; two (2) persons for two (2) year terms; and one
person for a three (3) year term. All subsequent appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms. Commission members may be reappointed to
serve additional terms. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments and the appointee shall serve for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
(D) The members of the commission may be reimbursed by the city for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties. (Ord. 423, 4-1-1987)
2-2-4: ORGANIZATION, OFFICERS, RULES, MEETINGS:
(A) The commission shall have the power to make whatever rules are necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this chapter. Rules of
procedure and bylaws adopted by the commission shall be available for public inspection and shall be subject to the review and approval of the mayor
and council of the city.
(B) The commission shall elect officers from among the commission members. The chairman shall preside at meetings of the commission. The vice
chairman shall, in the absence of the chairman, perform the duties of the chairman. A secretary shall also be selected to maintain all commission
records and keep minutes of all meetings.
(C) All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public, and follow the requirements of Idaho's open meeting laws. The commission shall keep
minutes and other appropriate written records of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions.
(D) The commission may recommend to the council, within the limits of its funding, the employment of or the contracting with other parties for the services
of technical experts or other persons as it deems necessary to carry on its functions. (Ord. 423, 4-1-1987)
2-2-5: POWERS, DUTIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall be advisory to the council and shall be authorized to:
(A) Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
(B) Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests inhistoric properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequests, or
donation.
(C) Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
city.
(D) Recommend the lease, sale, other transfer or disposition of historic properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner
that will preserve the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 13/151
(E) Contract, with the approval of the council, with the state or federal government, or any agency of either, or with any other organization.
(F) Cooperate with the federal, state and local governments in the pursuance of the objects of historic preservation.
(G) Make recommendations in the planning processes undertaken by the county, the city, the state, or the federal government and the agencies of these
entities.
(H) Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purpose of historic preservation in the city.
(I) Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic preservation and historic properties in the city.
(J) Commission members, employees or agents of the commission may enter private property, buildings, or structures in the performance of its official
duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
(K) Review nomination of properties to the National Register of Historic Places for properties within the city's jurisdiction. (Ord. 423, 4-1-1987)
2-2-6: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Upon the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-4612, the city may provide by ordinance special conditions or restrictions for the protection, enhancement
and preservation of historic properties. (Ord. 423, 4-1-1987)
Chapter 3
COMMUNITY YOUTH COUNCIL
2-3-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the community youth council, which shall consist of ten (10) youth members and two (2) adult ex
officio (nonvoting) advisors, one male, and one female, to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Additional qualifications, rules and
regulations shall be established by the adoption of bylaws of the youth council, which must be approved by majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 536, 6-
16-1999)
2-3-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide a forum for the youth of the community, and to address the wants, needs and concerns of area youth; to
advise and make recommendations to other branches of city government as to such wants, needs, and concerns, and to engage in fundraising, including
applications for grants, and, where permissible and proper, administer such grants, in order to help fulfill the purposes stated herein. (Ord. 536, 6-16-1999)
Title 3
DEPARTMENTS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
3-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a police department which shall consist of the chief of police and such other personnel as may be provided by the governing body
of the municipality. (1960 Code)
3-1-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the enforcement of all of the laws of the municipality and all statutes applicable
therein; and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof. (1960 Code)
3-1-3: WITNESS FEE:
Every member of the police department shall appear as witness whenever necessary in a prosecution for a violation of any law or of any state or federal
law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness in any action or suit to which the municipality is a party; any fees paid for such
services shall be turned over to the chief of police, who shall deposit the same with the treasurer. (1960 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 14/151
3-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of the police department may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem advisable; such rules, when approved by the
governing body, shall be binding on such members. Such rules and regulations may cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment
to be worn or carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the department. (1960
Code)
3-1-5: MATRON:
The mayor, with the consent of the council, may appoint a police matron, who shall perform such duties as may be assigned to her by the chief of police or
by the mayor. (1960 Code)
3-1-6: REWARDS:
The chief of police, for meritorious service rendered by any member of the police force in the due discharge of his duty, may permit such member to retain
for his own benefit, so far as he may be permitted by law, any reward or present tendered him therefor, and it shall be cause of removal for any member of
the force to receive any such reward or present without notice thereof to the chief of police and without his permission. (1960 Code)
3-1-7: TRAINING STANDARDS ADOPTED:
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid for police training from the law enforcement planning commission under the provisions of chapter
51, section 19-5118 of the Idaho Code.
Pursuant to section 19-5118, of chapter 51, the governing body of the city, while receiving aid from the law enforcement planning commission pursuant to
said chapter 51, will adhere to the standards for employment and training established by the Idaho peace officer standards and training advisory council.
(Ord. 285, 10-21-1970)
Chapter 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
3-2-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a fire department which shall consist of a fire chief and such other personnel as may be provided for by the governing body of the
municipality. (1960 Code)
3-2-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of members of the fire department to provide for the immediate answering of all fire calls and to fight all fires in the best and most
modern available methods. Members shall see to the care and maintenance of all firefighting equipment and have such equipment in constant workable
condition at all times. (1960 Code)
3-2-3: FIRE PREVENTION:
Every possible action shall be taken by the members of the fire department to eliminate fire hazards and to provide for fire prevention methods and
operations within the municipality. (1960 Code)
3-2-4: VOLUNTEER MEMBERS:
Any volunteer members of the fire department shall conduct themselves in the same manner and under the same rules and regulations as regular
members of the department. They shall respond to all fire calls according to a schedule prescribed by the chief of the fire department and they shall attend
all meetings and drills called by the chief. (1960 Code)
Chapter 3
DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION
3-3-1: CREATING DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION:
There is hereby established a department of sanitation in the city, consisting of a superintendent and such additional personnel as may from time to time
be deemed necessary, all to be appointed by the mayor, and to receive such compensation as may be provided by the mayor and council.
The superintendent of the sanitation department shall work under the general supervision of the mayor and council, or any department of the city
subsequently designated by the mayor and council. (1960 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 15/151
3-3-2: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The duties of the superintendent shall be:
(A) To supervise the operation of the sanitation department.
(B) To enforce this chapter and perform such other duties as may be assigned to him.
(C) To make reports to the mayor and council from time to time as may be required.
(D) To propose such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary to carry out the provisions for the consideration of the mayor and council. (1960
Code)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
4-1-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE:
(A) Code Adoption:
1. The approved editions of the following nationally recognized codes, as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho building code board, are adopted
as the official building codes of the city, except as provided in subsection (B) of this section:
(a) International building code.
(b) International residential code, parts I-IV and IX.
(c) International energy conservation code.
2. The adopted versions of the foregoing codes shall be deemed superseded by successive versions of such codes as they are adopted or approved
by the Idaho building code board effective on the date any such codes are made effective by the Idaho building code board.
(B) Amendments To Adopted Codes: The following amendments shall be applicable to the adopted building codes:
To the international building code:
1. To include the fee schedule of the 1997 edition of the uniform building code.
2. Section 3 Exemptions: Agricultural Buildings; Placement, Fee Schedule:
Basic farm building: $25.00
Basic farm building with electricity or water: $50.00
Basic farm building with electricity and water: $75.00
(C) Exemptions: Agricultural buildings are exempt from the building codes adopted herein but shall remain subject to placement requirements established
by zoning regulations.
(D) Penalty: Penalty provisions shall be set forth in the current adopted building code. (Ord. 563, 4-16-2003)
Chapter 2
PLUMBING CODE
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing minimum standards of design, materials and workmanship for all plumbing hereafter installed,
altered or repaired and to establish methods of procedure within the limits of this municipality that certain plumbing code known as uniform plumbing code,
1982 edition, thereof and such future editions as may, from time to time, be published, and the whole thereof of which not less than three (3) copies have
been and now are filed in the office of the clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set at length herein, and from the date at
which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the installation, alteration, or repairing of plumbing. (Ord. 396, 10-5-1983)
4-2-2: PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 16/151
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or to carry on the work of laying, repairing, altering or connecting any sewer pipe with the public sewer,
without first having the permit to do so from the clerk's office. That application for permit together with the fee of five dollars ($5.00) for permit and an
inspection fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be deposited with the clerk. Such permit shall be on the ground during the whole time the work is in progress
and must be exhibited to any person demanding to see it. No connection shall be made to any public sewer without the connection being inspected and
passed by the water and sewer superintendent or his designee. (Ord. 396, 10-5-1983)
Chapter 3
GAS REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 396, 10-5-1983)
Chapter 4
INDIVIDUAL WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 396, 10-5-1983)
Chapter 5
ELECTRICAL CODE
4-5-1: ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating the construction, maintenance and use of electric wiring and electric apparatus in American Falls,
Idaho, the national electrical code, 1968 edition, sponsored by the National Fire Protection Association under the auspices of the United States of America
standards institute and such future editions as may, from time to time, be published, and the whole thereof, of which not less than three (3) copies have
been and now are filed in the office of the clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from and after
the date of which this chapter takes effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction, maintenance and use of electric wiring and
electric apparatus within the limits of the city. (Ord. 294, 5-19-1971)
4-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to install, construct, or maintain electric wiring or electric apparatus within the city without first obtaining a license from the
clerk and paying a license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each calendar year or fraction of such year if taken after January 1 of such year. (Ord. 249,
5-3-1967)
Title 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LICENSES
5-1-1: APPLICATION:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this code shall be made in writing to the clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid; and
each application shall contain such additional information as may be required by the issuing official. (1960 Code)
5-1-2: PERSON SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging
in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any
part of such business or occupation in the municipality. (1960 Code)
5-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and application therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the clerk. (1960 Code)
5-1-4: SIGNATURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 17/151
Each license or permit issued, in the absence of any provision tothe contrary, shall bear the signatures of the clerk. (Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
5-1-5: INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where laws of the municipality necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such permit or license, the clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of
such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10)
days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. For the protection of health and/or safety, the building inspector may make or cause to be made any
such inspection relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the
chief of police or by some other officer designated by the mayor. (Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
5-1-6: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year of the municipality each calendar year, where no provision to the contrary is made.
The clerk shall mail to all licensees of the municipality a statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual license, at least
three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, that failure to send out such notice, or failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the
licensee from failure to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a license. (Ord. 507, 4-16-
1997)
5-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing, or act, if the premises and building to be used for
the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the municipality. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
performance of any act which would involve a violation of the American Falls development code. (Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
5-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
5-1-9: FRONTAGE CONSENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
5-1-10: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (1960 Code)
5-1-11: INSPECTIONS:
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by this
code, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any code provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the
person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the municipality who
is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any code provision or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the municipality whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee
of the municipality requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the mayor may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the
municipality who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or
take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such
inspection. Provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the
premises, in the name of the municipality, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the
sample. (1960 Code)
5-1-12: REVOCATION:
Any license or permit issued for a limited time may be revoked by the mayor at any time for a violation by the licensee or permittee of the code provisions
relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the premises occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine
imposed. (1960 Code)
5-1-13: POSTING OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 18/151
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the municipality to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the
premises used for such business. (1960 Code)
5-1-14: FEES:
In the absence of specific provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid to the clerk in advance of the time
application therefor is made. When an applicant has not engaged in the business until after the expiration of more than six (6) months of the current
license year, the license fee shall be in the sum of one-half (1/2) of the fee specified for the entire year unless otherwise specified. All license fees shall be
deposited to the general fund. In addition to licenses required for other activities and businesses, licenses shall be required for menageries and carnivals.
Fees for licenses and permits shall be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. (Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
Chapter 2
BILLPOSTING AND HANDBILLS
(Rep. by Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
Chapter 3
MOTELS
(Rep. by Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
Chapter 4
HOTEL
(Rep. by Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
Chapter 5
POOL, BILLIARD HALLS AND CARD ROOMS
(Rep. by Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
Chapter 6
SOLICITORS
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR: Any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, or any type of conveyance, from place to place
or from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for
sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not.
This definition shall also include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad
boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for
future delivery.
PEDDLER: Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, motor vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from
house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm
products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
Anyone who solicits orders, and as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this
chapter, shall be deemed a "peddler" subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster".
TEMPORARY BUSINESS: A business established for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days in any one calendar year and whether or not
utilizing city water and sewer services. Temporary businesses will be allowed in nonresidential areas only and must comply with all zoning requirements.
Temporary businesses will not be allowed on any streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, or other city owned property, except those located in the city park during
American Falls Day and other city approved community functions. Temporary business locations include the use of (whether hired, rented, leased, or
occupied) any building structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public rooms in hotels, motels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or other
places for the exhibition and sale of goods, wares and merchandise.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a
temporary business of selling, and delivering goods, wares and merchandise and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public rooms in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or other places for the exhibition
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 19/151
and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction.
This definition shall not be construed to include any person who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples
only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only.
The term "transient merchant" shall include the terms "itinerant merchant" and "itinerant vendor". (Ord. 506, 4-2-1997; amd. Ord. 535, 5-19-1999)
5-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED AND EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any "peddler", "canvasser or solicitor", "transient merchant", "itinerant merchant" or "temporary business", as the same are herein
defined, to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. Provided, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: (Ord. 506, 4-2-1997)
(A) Any sales under court order.
(B) A bona fide auction sale.
(C) Traveling salesperson, commercial travelers or the like who exclusively or primarily sell to, or solicit orders for future delivery from, local retailers, local
businesses, local governments, local schools or local wholesale firms. (Ord. 450, 3-20-1991)
(D) Insurance salesmen licensed in the state, or any other solicitor exempt by state or federal law. (Ord. 506, 4-2-1997)
(E) The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person engaged in both the delivery or sale of the newspaper.
(F) Contribution solicitation where the person being solicited to contributes personally, knows the identity of the person soliciting the contribution, the name
of the group or organization he represents, and the nature of the services performed or offered by the group or organization.
(G) The occasional ticket sale by local school students to a function of their schools; or fundraising sales by students or local service clubs or groups such
as Kiwanis, Chamber of Commerce, Lions, Elks, Boy or Girl Scouts, etc.
(H) Garage, yard, or similar sales by individuals at their residence or place of business not exceeding twice in one calendar year, which sale shall not
include business inventory. (Ord. 450, 3-20-1991)
(I) Sales of fireworks that are permitted by the laws of the state, and that are in compliance with title 7, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 521, 5-20-1998)
5-6-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the city clerk an application furnished by the city clerk, which shall contain, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following information:
(A) The name and description of the applicant; if applicant is an association, company or corporation, then it shall state its name along with the names and
descriptions of the persons who will be soliciting in the city; and a separate license and license fee is required for each individual soliciting in the city
whether they be independent contractors or employees.
In the case of a temporary business, with one or more employees, which occupies and sells from one, and only one, location, the temporary business
will require a single license issued to the owner or manager doing business as. (Fireworks sale permit must also comply with title 7, chapter 2 of this
code.) (Ord. 506, 4-2-1997)
(B) The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
(C) A complete description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold, and, in case of products of farm or orchard, the name of the producer.
(D) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(E) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(F) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification.
(G) Proposed method of operation.
(H) Social security and driver's license number of applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 20/151
(I) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.
(J) When the applicant proposes to peddle any food or product for human consumption, a certification by the southeast Idaho health district shall be
required prior to issuance of a license.
(K) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or a violation of any municipal laws, the nature of the
offense and the date, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
(L) A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches
by two inches (2" x 2"), showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(M) For purpose of conducting the investigation provided in section 5-6-4 of this chapter, each applicant shall sign a waiver authorizing the city, the chief of
police or any other authorized employee to conduct the investigation; including, but not limited to, a criminal history background check through local,
state or national law enforcement agencies.
(N) No license issued hereunder shall be transferable.
(O) Applicants will report in writing to the city clerk all changes in the information submitted with their application as soon as changes happen or on the
next business day. (Ord. 450, 3-20-1991)
5-6-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
(A) Upon receipt of such application, the city clerk shall refer it to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to determine the validity and
completeness of the information presented on the application. The chief of police shall endorse upon the application the finding of the investigation and
return it to the city clerk within five (5) working days.
(B) The city clerk shall notify the applicant whether his license request is approved and upon payment of the prescribed license fee, shall issue a license.
Such license shall show the name, address, photograph of said licensee, the type of license issued, and the kind of goods to be sold or type of sale to
be solicited thereunder, the amount of the fee paid, the date of issuance and the date of expiration, and the license number and other identifying
description of any vehicle used. The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued.
(C) The city clerk shall notify the applicant if his license request is disapproved and the reasons therefor. A license application may be disapproved by the
city clerk if the applicant previously had any license(s) issued under this chapter revoked, if the application is invalid or incomplete upon finding by the
chief of police after the investigation set forth herein, or for any other reasons set forth in this chapter. The city clerk shall advise the applicant of appeal
procedures if the application is disapproved. (Ord. 600, 7-7-2010)
5-6-5: BOND REQUIREMENT:
If any "peddler", "solicitor", "canvasser", "transient merchant" or "itinerant merchant", as defined herein, plans to do business, or does business in a
manner that monies are received from their customers prior to delivery of the goods or service being obtained, then a license will not be issued to such
person unless and until said person provides to the city clerk a surety bond running to the city, or a cashier's check made payable to the city in the amount
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each person seeking a license. Each person, whether acting as an independent contractor, or employee who comes
within the definitions hereof shall be obligated to provide a separate bond to the city. (Ord. 450, 3-20-1991)
5-6-6: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee for any "peddler", "solicitor", "canvasser", "transient merchant", "itinerant merchant" or "temporary business" as defined in this chapter shall
be paid to the city clerk upon issuance of the license in an amount to be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. All
licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year or part calendar year thereafter.
Extensions of license for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser, or transient merchant or itinerant merchant will be provided at an additional fee, as established
by resolution, for each additional month thereafter in any calendar year up through a total of twelve (12) months. No extensions of license for a temporary
business will be allowed. (Ord. 506, 4-2-1997)
5-6-7: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
The license issued to the licensee hereunder by the city clerk shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place if the licensee is using a vehicle or a building in his
business, and otherwise must be kept by the person and exhibited at any time upon request. (Ord. 450, 3-20-1991)
5-6-8: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
No licensee hereunder shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 21/151
(A) Make physical contact with the person being solicited unless that person's permission is obtained.
(B) Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation.
(C) Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation.
(D) Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or buy anything from that
solicitor.
(E) Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an endorsement or recommendation for the solicitation.
(F) Enter upon any premises when the same is posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitation Allowed" or other words to that effect.
(G) Knowingly make any false statement on an application for a license hereunder.
(H) Engage in any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the course of carrying on the business.
(I) Engage in any act constituting a criminal offense under municipal or state law in the course of carrying on the business. (Ord. 600, 7-7-2010)
5-6-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE(S):
The city clerk or the chief of police shall have the power to revoke any and all license(s) granted in accordance with this chapter for any of the causes cited
in section 5-6-8 of this chapter or for any other violation of this chapter and said revocation may be appealed to the city council pursuant to section 5-6-10
of this chapter. (Ord. 600, 7-7-2010)
5-6-10: APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF LICENSE OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any person aggrieved from the refusal of the city clerk to issue a license under this chapter or aggrieved from revocation of a license granted in
accordance with this chapter, shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed within five (5) days from the date of refusal or
revocation and must be in writing setting forth the reasons such license should have not been refused or revoked. The city council shall hear the appeal
within fourteen (14) days after the filing thereof, and shall render its decision after the hearing. The decision of the majority of the city council shall be final
as to the issuance of the license or revocation. (Ord. 600, 7-7-2010)
5-6-11: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to enforce this chapter. The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all violations of this chapter. (Ord.
450, 3-20-1991)
5-6-12: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day violation continues shall be a separate offense, punishable as hereinabove described. (Ord. 450, 3-20-1991)
Chapter 7
LIQUOR AND BEER
5-7-1: ADOPTION OF LAWS:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of governing the licensing, sale and use of alcoholic beverages within the city, the laws of the state of Idaho being
particularly title 23, Idaho Code, as presently in effect or as may hereafter be amended by the legislature and as contained in that certain volume "Idaho
Liquor And Beer Laws", revised through the acts of the 1969 legislature, published by the authority of the department of law enforcement, liquor law
division, as the same may be revised by the legislature or by the governing body of the city. The same are hereby adopted and incorporated as an
ordinance of the city as fully as though set at length herein. (Ord. 286, 12-16-1970)
5-7-2: COPIES TO BE KEPT ON FILE:
Three (3) copies of the Idaho liquor and beer laws, together with all amendments thereto, all duly certified by the city clerk, shall be kept on file in the office
of the city clerk for use and examination of and by the public. (Ord. 286, 12-16-1970)
5-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 22/151
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense beer and/or liquor without first obtaining a proper license.
Effective January 1, 2002, all liquor and beer licenses shall be granted by the mayor and council with only a partial year's license to be granted in 2002,
effective for the period January 1, 2002, through August 1, 2002, with the fees prorated accordingly. All licenses shall cover a period from August 1 to July
31 beginning August 1, 2002. A full year's license fee shall be collected any time a license is issued. The city council shall grant or deny the application
within thirty (30) days of the time it is filed with the city clerk. Prior to any revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing according to
section 23-10-16, Idaho Code. Whenever the mayor and city council deny an application, they shall specify in writing:
(A) The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
(B) The reason for the denial; and
(C) The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof.
In all cases where the city council is considering applications for licenses, transfers, or renewals thereof, a transcribable verbatim record of the
proceedings shall be made. If the applicant for a license, transfer or renewal is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be kept
for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on the matter. Upon written request and within the time period provided for retention of
the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his expense. The city council shall also provide for the keeping of the minutes of the
proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 556, 11-21-2001)
5-7-4: APPLICATION:
Application for a retail beer license shall be made under oath to the clerk and the application shall show that the applicant possesses all of the
qualifications required by this chapter.
No license shall be granted hereunder until there has been an investigation by the police department of all applicants hereunder. After investigation, the
applications will be forwarded to the city council with a recommendation from the chief of police. If the chief of police recommends that an application be
denied, he shall state in writing:
(A) The statutes or ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
(B) The reason for the denial; and
(C) The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 400, 2-15-1984)
5-7-5: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who:
(A) Is not a bona fide owner of such business, or is not a citizen of the United States, or has not been a bona fide resident of the state of Idaho for a period
of one year prior to the date of application; provided, that if the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens, and at least one thereof, or
the actual manager therefor, shall have been such resident; and if the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall be qualified to do business in
the state of Idaho, and themanager of such business place shall be such citizen and shall have been such resident.
(B) Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer or employee or spouse of which has, been convicted of the violation of any laws of the state of Idaho
or of the United States, regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor, or has within two (2) years forfeited or
suffered the forfeiture of a bond for his appearance to answer charges of any such violation.
(C) Has, or any partner or active manager or officer of which has, been convicted of any felony within five (5) years or has paid any fine or completed any
sentence of confinement therefor within five (5) years.
A retail licensee must continue throughout the license period to have all of the foregoing qualifications and none of the foregoing disqualifications, and
for failure therein upon proof thereof to an issuer of a license, such issuer shall revoke the license issued, and in writing sent by the United States
registered mail notify each of the other issuers of a retailer's license to such licensee, stating sufficient facts for identification of the licensee and the
grounds and date of revocation. (Ord. 230, 2-4-1965)
5-7-6: FEES:
The city council shall establish, by motion and majority vote of the council, recorded in the minutes, license fees for the sale of beer and for the retail sale
of liquor by the drink. There shall be two (2) categories of license fees for the sale of beer; one category shall pertain to the sale of beer for consumption
off the premises, and the other category shall pertain to the sale of beer for consumption on the premises where such beer is sold. (Ord. 411, 6-19-1985)
(A) The licensing period shall be as established in section 5-7-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 411, 6-19-1985; amd. Ord. 556, 11-21-2001)
(B) The council shall not establish such fees more frequently than annually.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 23/151
(C) Upon establishing such fees, in the manner prescribed above, such fees shall be effective from and after January 1 following establishment of such
fees and for each successive one year period until modified by the council. (Ord. 411, 6-19-1985)
5-7-7: HOURS OF SALE:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (1960 Code; amd. 10-1972)
(B) Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by Idaho Code section 23-927, the city hereby elects to allow sales of liquor by the drink on Sundays
effective from and after June 1, 1990.
Pursuant to said Idaho Code provision, the city also elects to extend the hours for the sale of alcoholic liquor until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. of each day
for which alcoholic liquor is allowed to be served. (Ord. 442, 5-23-1990, eff. 6-1-1990)
Chapter 8
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
MAINTAIN AND OPERATE: Applies to a period in excess of two (2) weeks.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any lot or parcel used for the purpose of renting or leasing two (2) or more manufactured home or recreational vehicle
spaces, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a manufactured home park. (Ord. 508, 4-16-1997)
5-8-2: PERMIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 508, 4-16-1997)
5-8-3: LICENSE:
Any person who maintains or operates a manufactured home park must first obtain a license from the clerk, which license must be approved by the
council, and which will be effective for the balance of the calendar year.
Licenses expire on June 30 of each year and must be renewed on or before July 1 of each successive year.
The annual fee for manufactured home park licenses shall be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. (Ord. 508, 4-16-
1997)
5-8-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for a license shall be filed with and issued by the council through the office of the clerk. Applications shall be in writing signed by the applicant
and shall contain the following:
(A) The name and address of the applicant.
(B) The location and legal description of the manufactured home park.
(C) Such further information as may be requested by the council to enable it to determine if the proposed location will comply with legal requirements,
including a sketch or plot plan designating numbered manufactured home spaces.
The council shall investigate the location and if it is found to be in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable chapters or
statutes, application may be approved. (Ord. 508, 4-16-1997)
5-8-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Manufactured home parks existing as of March 17, 1993, shall conform to the following requirements; manufactured home parks developed following this
date must comply with provisions of the American Falls development code.
(A) The park shall be located on a well drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 24/151
(B) Manufactured home spaces shall be provided consisting of a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each space, which shall
be at least twenty five feet (25') wide and clearly defined. Manufactured homes shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at least fifteen
feet (15') clearance between the manufactured homes.
(C) All manufactured home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than twenty feet (20') in width which shall have unobstructed access to a public
thoroughfare.
The type, location and number of entrances and exits to or from a manufactured home park and public thoroughfare shall be determined by the city
council with the safety of pedestrian and vehicle traffic being the principal determining factor. Off street parking shall be required for each manufactured
home space.
(D) The sanitary and housekeeping conditions provided for and maintained shall at all times be subject to inspection by the Idaho state board of health as
well as by the building administrator of the municipality, and these conditions shall conform in all respects to the sanitary laws of both the state and the
city. (Ord. 508, 4-16-1997)
5-8-6: WATER SUPPLY:
Each manufactured home space shall be provided with an individual water supply connected to a manufactured home park main water supply line, which
shall be connected to the city water mains at one common control valve. Location of the connection and control valve shall be determined by the city. (Ord.
508, 4-16-1997)
5-8-7: SEWAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL:
Each manufactured home space shall be provided with an individual sewage disposal line and shall be connected to one or more sewage collecting lines
on the manufactured home park which shall be connected to the city sewage system at a point or points as determined by the city. All waste from showers,
bathtubs, toilets and laundries shall be discharged into the sewage system in compliance with applicable regulations. (Ord. 508, 4-16-1997)
5-8-8: GARBAGE RECEPTACLES AND DISPOSAL:
Garbage containers shall be provided by the city or its designee in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall
be kept in a sanitary condition at all times.
Every owner and occupant of the manufactured home park shall deposit or cause to be deposited all rubbish and garbage that is of such nature that it is
perishable, or may decompose or may be scattered by wind or otherwise, which is accumulated on such premises, into the garbage cans that are
provided.
Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans shall not overflow. (Ord. 508,
4-16-1997)
5-8-9: FIRE PROTECTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 508, 4-16-1997)
5-8-10: REGISTER OF OCCUPANTS:
It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of all manufactured home owners that are occupants located within the park. The
register shall contain the following information:
(A) Name and address of each occupant in each manufactured home.
(B) The date of arrival and departure of each manufactured home and the number or other identification of the space or spaces occupied. The park shall
keep the register available for inspection, at all times, by law enforcement officers, publichealth officials and other officials whose duties necessitate
acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register records shall not be destroyed for a period of three (3) years following the date of
registration. (Ord. 508, 4-16-1997)
5-8-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The council may revoke any license to maintain and operate a manufactured home park when the person covered has been found guilty of violating any
provisions of this chapter. After such revocation a license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to the revocation have been remedied and the
manufactured home park is maintained and operated in full compliance with this chapter or any other chapter pertaining thereto. (Ord. 508, 4-16-1997)
5-8-12: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) therefor. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 508, 4-16-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 25/151
Chapter 9
HOME OCCUPATION REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
5-9-1: REGISTRATION:
Persons engaging in "home occupations", as defined in the American Falls development code, section 11-16-2, and appendix B, section 11-17-2 of this
code, shall be required to register with the city clerk by completing an application for license or registration for home occupation. (Ord. 487, 7-19-1995)
5-9-2: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Each application for license or registration shall state the applicant's name, business name, address, telephone number and description of the business.
The application shall also contain a checklist identifying whether the business will: a) store hazardous materials or supplies; b) require a heavier use of
water, sewer or sanitation services than an ordinary residence; c) discharge or potentially discharge harmful substances into the city sewer system; d)
create a "nuisance", as defined by Idaho Code; e) provide daycare for seven (7) or more children. Home occupations shall be required to obtain a license
if any responses on the checklist are affirmative. Other applicants shall not be required to obtain a license, but only to register with the city clerk. (Ord. 487,
7-19-1995)
5-9-3: PROCEDURE FOR LICENSING:
In addition to the general licensing requirements set forth in chapter 1 of this title, home occupation applications will be reviewed by the building
administrator, who shall then make a recommendation to the city council. The city council will then review the application, the recommendation of the
building administrator, and consider imposing other conditions that may be necessary for the protection of property values and the quality of life in
neighborhoods of single- and multiple-family dwellings. Upon approval by the city council, the license shall be issued by the city clerk. (Ord. 487, 7-19-
1995)
5-9-4: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CHILD DAYCARE:
A home occupation that provides daycare for six (6) or fewer children must register but is not required to obtain a license. A home occupation providing
daycare for more than six (6) and no more than twelve (12) children must obtain a home occupation license and must hold a current daycare license
issued by the state, a copy of which must be submitted with the application. Those persons providing daycare for more than twelve (12) children must
meet the previous requirements and must also obtain a special use permit through the American Falls planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 487, 7-19-
1995)
5-9-5: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
Home occupation licenses expire on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 1 of each successive year. Any violation of the
ordinances of the city shall be grounds for refusal to renew the license. (Ord. 487, 7-19-1995)
5-9-6: ANNUAL FEE:
The annual fee for home occupation license shall be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. (Ord. 487, 7-19-1995)
Chapter 10
(Rep. by Ord. 286, 12-16-1970)
Chapter 11
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES
(Rep. by Ord. 507, 4-16-1997)
Chapter 12
SALE OF WINE
5-12-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to authorize issuance of retail licenses for the sale of wine within the city of American
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 26/151
Falls, Idaho, and to permit the retail sale of wine therein pursuant to the terms and conditions of chapter 156, session laws of 1971 of the state of Idaho.
(Ord. 295, 6-2-1971)
5-12-2: SALES PERMITTED:
From and after July 1, 1971, retail sales of wine containing not more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume shall be permitted and are hereby
authorized in American Falls, Idaho. (Ord. 295, 6-2-1971)
5-12-3: LICENSE FEE:
(A) Before any person shall engage in the retail sale of wine as defined in chapter 156, session laws of 1971 of the state of Idaho, as subsequently
amended, such person shall apply to the city council for a retail wine license. No retail wine license shall be issued to an applicant who does not
possess the qualifications set forth in chapter 156, session laws of 1971, subsequently amended.
(B) The city council shall establish, by motion and majority vote of the council recorded in the minutes, a license fee for the retail sale of wine.
1. The licensing period shall be a period of one year, or fraction thereof, beginning January 1 of each year and ending December 31 of the following
year. However, for the year 1985 only, the clerk is directed to issue licenses from July 1, 1985 through December 31, 1985 to facilitate phasing into
the new period.
2. The council shall establish such fees not more frequently than annually.
3. Upon establishing such fees, in the manner prescribed above, such fees shall be effective from and after January 1 followingthe establishment of
such fees and for each successive one year period thereafter until modified by the council.
(C) All licenses shall be granted by the mayor and council for a period of one year beginning January 1 and ending December 31. A full year's license fee
shall be collected any time a license is issued. The city council shall grant or deny the application within thirty (30) days of the time it is filed with the city
clerk. Prior to any revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing according to section 23-1016, Idaho Code. Whenever the mayor
and city council denies an application, they shall specify in writing:
1. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reason for the denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 411, 6-19-1985)
(D) In all cases where the city council is considering applications for licenses, transfers, or renewals thereof, a transcribable verbatim record of the
proceeding shall be made. If the application for a license, transfer or renewal is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be
kept for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on the matter. Upon written request and within the time period provided for
retention of the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his expense. The city council shall also provide for the keeping of the minutes of
the proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided by law.
(E) No license shall be granted hereunder until there has been an investigation by the police department of all applicants hereunder. After investigation,
the applications will be forwarded to the city council with a recommendation from the chief of police. If the chief of police recommends that an
application be denied, he shall state in writing:
1. The statutes or ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reason for the denial; and
3. The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 400, 2-15-1984)
5-12-4: REVOCATION; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The retail wine license of any person who violates any of the laws of the state or the United States, or of the city, relating to the sale of alcoholic
beverages, beer or wine, shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city council. (Ord.295, 6-2-1971)
Chapter 13
CABLE TELEVISION
5-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: An agreement between the city and cable service provider adopted by resolution of the city council.
GRANTEE: The grantee shall be a cable company that the city has elected to enter into a franchise agreement with to allow the placement of the cable
system within the city limits of the city of American Falls.
GRANTOR: The grantor shall be designated as the city of American Falls. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 27/151
5-13-2: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
(A) There is hereby granted to the grantee, the nonexclusive right and authority to construct, install, erect, string, stretch, maintain and operate a cable
communications system in the city, over, under, across and along streets, alleys, bridges and public rights of way and easements within the city.
(B) This franchise shall not be construed as any limitation upon the right of the city, through its proper officers, to grant to other persons franchises, rights,
privileges, or authority to install, construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system within public streets and rights of ways, provided that
the terms of such franchise, right,privilege or authority are no more favorable than those contained herein, and further provided that such additional
grants shall not operate to modify, revoke or terminate any rights granted to the grantee herein. The city reserves the right to amend or repeal this
franchise for cause, after providing notice and opportunity for hearing. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-3: RULES GOVERNING ERECTION AND CONSTRUCTION OF SYSTEM:
(A) Any construction, erection, stretching, or stringing of antenna wires or cable or the stretching of wires from poles shall be done in accordance with the
standard specifications of the national electrical safety code in regard to the use of public utilities poles by the grantee, and inspection shall be made
according to said standards by the city; the grantee must notify the city of the exact route of all cable, wire and pole lines prior to any construction.
(B) The city shall have the final right to approve or disapprove of the route and method of construction, erection, and stringing of antenna poles, wires and
cables. No poles that are not now placed shall be erected or placed without written permission of the city. All poles and antenna structures must first be
approved as to shape and size by the city.
(C) Whenever the city shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of grantee in any of the streets of the city, it shall be the obligation of
grantee, upon notice of such requirement, to remove and relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements
of the city. Such relocation, removal or reinstallation by grantee shall be at the sole cost of grantee.
(D) Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact
with grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of grantee. (Ord. 574, 12-15-
2004)
5-13-4: GRANTEE'S RESPONSIBILITY:
(A) The grantee shall replace all of the objects, such as, but not limited to, soil, grass, shrubs, flowers, or other things as nearly as possible in the same
condition as prior to its construction.
(B) It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the grantee and the city that the grantee shall save the city harmless from all loss sustained by
the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim, demand or expense whatsoever resulting from negligence on the part of the grantee in
theconstruction, operation, existence or maintenance of its television antenna service within the above described area. The city shall notify the
grantee's representative within ten (10) days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the city on
account of any negligence as aforesaid on the part of the grantee. Failure upon the city's part to notify the grantee of claims or demands filed against
the city does not relieve the grantee from liability on any such claims.
(C) The grantee shall repair and replace all damaged city property occasioned by its construction, erection, maintenance and operation of the aforesaid
television antenna service. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-5: SAFETY REGULATION COMPLIANCE:
The grantee shall comply with and conform to all safety regulations promulgated by the city and those safety regulations required by the national electrical
safety code. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-6: TERM OF GRANT:
The right, authority and grant herein and hereby made to the grantee shall expire pursuant to the terms of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 574, 12-15-
2004)
5-13-7: SPECIFIC PURPOSE OF GRANT:
It is understood and agreed that this special privilege is granted by the city solely for the purpose of construction, erecting, stringing and maintaining the
necessary connections and junctions to supply cable television service to the above described area. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-8: FURNISH SET OF MAPS:
The grantee shall furnish the city with a complete set of maps and details of the distribution system of the grantee. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 28/151
5-13-9: FRANCHISE FEE:
(A) The grantee shall pay to the city a fee in the amount specified in the franchise agreement.
(B) The grantee shall keep an accurate record of its gross receipts during the period preceding the aforesaid payments and submit said record to the city
along with its payment.
(C) The grantee shall at all times keep its books and records open for inspection, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of franchise fee payments, upon
reasonable notice, to the duly authorized officials or agents of the city. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-10: INSURANCE:
The grantee shall post with the city clerk for approval by the mayor and city council, a certificate showing adequate coverage of not less than five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate for personal property and individual personal injuries or
death which may be occasioned by the construction, erection and existence of the aforementioned antenna poles, wires and cable. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-11: SALE AND ASSIGNMENT OF GRANT:
The franchise hereby granted shall not be assigned or transferred without the consent of the city evidenced by resolution duly passed and approved,
provided that the consent of the city shall not be required for assignments or transfers between parent and subsidiary companies or between commonly
controlled companies. Violation of this section shall terminate the rights, privileges and franchise granted by this chapter. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-12: PUBLICATION COSTS:
The grantee shall assume the cost of publication of this chapter as such publication is required by law, plus one additional publication. Bill for publication
costs shall be presented to the grantee by the city clerk upon the grantee's filing of written acceptance and said bill shall be paid at that time. (Ord. 574,
12-15-2004)
5-13-13: RESIDENT SERVICEPERSON:
The grantee shall make a good faith effort to provide a qualified serviceperson who shall reside within Power County, Idaho, to be available for
maintenance of the cable plant for the service area. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-14: INTERPRETATION:
In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and any other ordinance, resolution or code, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. In the event that any provision of this chapter is in violation of state or federal law or regulation, such provision shall be null andvoid, but the
remainder shall remain in effect. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-15: SEVERABILITY:
If any term, covenant, condition or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is to any extent invalid or
unenforceable, the remaining terms, covenants, conditions and provisions of this title, or the application of such term, covenant, condition or provision to
persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected thereby, and each term, covenant, condition
and provision of this title shall be valid and enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-16: FORCE MAJEURE:
In the event the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations or requirements of the franchise granted under this chapter is prevented
or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no
penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided the grantee has notified the city in writing thirty (30) days of its discovery of the
occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond the grantee's reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to,
acts of God, civil emergencies, labor disputes, inability to secure required easements or other rights of access, and power or communication failures. (Ord.
574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-17: NONWAIVER:
Neither the city by renewing this franchise, nor the grantee by accepting said renewal, waives any rights which either may have under federal, state or
local law. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
5-13-18: SAVING CLAUSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 29/151
Ordinances 478 and 513, amended by this chapter, shall remain in force to authorize the enforcement of the terms of ordinances 478 and 513 prior to the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 574, 12-15-2004)
Chapter 14
GAS TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
5-14-1: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
There is hereby granted to Intermountain Gas Company, a corporation, its successors and assigns (hereinafter collectively referred to as "grantee") a thirty
(30) year extension to the right and authority to construct, install, maintain and operate a gas transmission and distribution system, including mains, pipes,
conduits, services and other necessary structures and appliances appertaining in, under, upon, over, across and along the streets, alleys, bridges and
public places within the present and future corporate limits of the city of American Falls, Idaho (hereinafter referred to as "city") for the furnishing,
transmission, distribution and sale of gas, whether artificial, natural, mixed or otherwise, for heating, domestic, industrial and other purposes and for
transmitting gas into, through and beyond said city. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-2: USE OF STREETS AND RULES GOVERNING SAME:
Grantee shall secure a permit for any opening it shall make in the streets, alleys and public places in the city and shall be subject to all applicable
ordinances, but no fee shall be required of grantee for any such permit. The location or relocation of all facilities shall be made under the supervision and
with the approval of such representatives as the governing body of the city may designate for such purpose, but not so asunreasonably to interfere with
the proper operation of grantee's facilities and service. Whenever the city shall pave or repave any street or shall change the grade or line of any street or
public place or shall construct or reconstruct any conduit, water main, sewer or water connection or other city public works or city utility, it shall be the duty
of the grantee when so ordered by the city to change its mains, services and other property in the streets or public places at its own expense so as to
conform to the established grade or line of such street or public place and so as not to interfere with the conduits, sewers and other mains of the city as
constructed or reconstructed; however, the grantee shall not be required to relocate pipes, mains and appurtenances when the street, alley or public
ground in which they are located is vacated for the convenience of abutting property owners and not as an incident to the public improvement, unless the
reasonable cost of such relocation and the loss and expenses resulting therefrom is first paid to grantee. Whenever the city grants a permit for an
excavation in a street, alley or other public ground and the work contemplated by the permit may expose gas pipes, mains and appurtenances of the
grantee, the city shall promptly furnish a copy of the permit to grantee. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-3: GRANTEE SUBJECT TO ALL POWERS OF CITY RULES GOVERNING REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION OF
STREETS:
The exercise of privileges herein granted shall be subject at all times to all of the powers of the city and all regulatory ordinances adopted pursuant thereto.
The grantee shall not unnecessarily or unreasonably obstruct the use of or damage any street or alley, and shall, within a reasonable time and as early as
practicable upon completion of any construction or repair work, restore all city streets and alleys to the same order and condition as they were before the
excavation was made insofar as reasonably possible. The grantee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one year all portions of
streets and alleys disturbed by it or its agents. The grantee shall be responsible for any obstruction in any street, alley or other public place caused by it in
the operation and maintenance of its properties occurring at any times and shall promptly remove such obstruction. Any such obstruction which, after
proper notice to grantee demanding removal, is not promptly removed by the grantee may be taken care of by the city and the costs thereof shall be
charged against grantee and may be enforced as a lien upon any of its properties or assets. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-4: TERM OF FRANCHISE AND GRANT:
The right, authority and grant herein and hereby made to said grantee, its successor and assigns, is granted for, and limited in time to, a period of thirty
(30) years from January 25, 1986, through and including January 25, 2016. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-5: CITY RIGHT TO INSPECTION OF GRANTEE'S PLANS, ACCOUNTS AND BOOKS; GRANTEE TO FURNISH CERTAIN
MAPS:
The city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of the grantee's plans, contracts and engineering, accounting, finance, statistical, customer and
service records relating to the property and operations of grantee within the city. The grantee shall furnish the city with a complete set of maps, including
plans and profile of the distribution system of the grantee and any future extensions. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-6: PAYMENT TO CITY AND FILING OF ANNUAL WRITTEN REPORT WITH THE CITY:
As consideration for this franchise and grant, said grantee, its successors and assigns, during the franchise period, shall pay to the city three percent (3%)
of the gross annual receipts received from all sales of gas within the corporate limits of the city through use, operation or possession of this franchise and
grant.
Such annual payments shall be in lieu of any and all other fees, charges, licenses or taxes (other than ad valorem taxes) which the city may impose for the
rights and privileges herein granted or for the privilege of doing business within the city.
The grantee shall file by March 31 of each year with the city a report for the preceding calendar year, verified by the affidavit of the general manager,
auditor, treasurer, or assistant treasurer of said grantee, which report shall contain a statement in such form and detail as shall from time to time be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 30/151
prescribed by the city, of all the gross receipts arising from all sales of gas by said grantee within the city for the calendar year preceding such report, and
at the same time the grantee shall pay to the city the stipulated percentage of the gross annual receipts due for the year for which said report is made and
filed. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-7: GRANTEE LIABILITY; INDEMNIFICATION:
It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the grantee and the city that the grantee shall save the city harmless from all loss sustained by the
city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever, resulting from negligence on the part of the grantee in the construction,
operation or maintenance of its gas system in the city. The city shall notify the grantee's representative in the city within ten (10) days after the presentation
of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the city on account of any negligence as aforesaid on the part of the grantee. (Ord. 414,
11-6-1985)
5-14-8: INSURANCE:
Upon acceptance of this franchise by grantee and before granteeshall have any rights hereunder, grantee shall file with the city clerk a certificate
evidencing the insurance of the grantee against property damage in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) and bodily injury
with limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) total for each occurrence. (Ord.
414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-9: SAFETY REGULATION COMPLIANCE:
Grantee shall comply with and conform to all safety regulations promulgated by the city or any regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof. (Ord. 414, 11-6-
1985)
5-14-10: AGREEMENT NOT TO COMPETE; RESERVE TO CITY POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN:
In consideration of grantee's undertaking hereunder as evidenced by its acceptance hereof the city agrees not to engage in the business of distributing
and selling gas during the life of this franchise or any extension thereof in competition with the grantee, its successor and assigns; but nothing herein
contained shall be construed or deemed to prevent the city from exercising at any time any power of eminent domain granted to it under the laws of the
state of Idaho. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-11: SURRENDER OF FRANCHISE:
In the event natural gas at any time shall cease to be available to grantee for the distribution and sale hereunder, grantee reserves the right to surrender
this franchise and in the event of such surrender prior to any expiration or termination of this franchise, or in any of such events, grantee reserves the right
to salvage all of its plant, works and facilities, and will restore city's streets and alleys damaged by such salvage operation. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-12: WRITTEN ACCEPTANCE:
The grantee shall, within thirty (30) days after the passage and publication of the ordinance codified herein, file with the city clerk its acceptance of this
franchise in writing signed by its proper officers and attested by its corporate seal. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-13: SALE, ASSIGNMENT OR LEASE OF FRANCHISE:
No sale, assignment or lease of this franchise shall be effective until it is approved by the city; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed as to require consent or to prevent the grantee of this franchise and grant from including itin a mortgage or trust deed executed for the purpose
of obtaining money for corporate objects. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-14: RIGHT TO ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS TO CITY:
In the event the grantee shall pay any other city any greater stipulated percentage than hereinbefore provided, then in such event, the city shall have the
right of requiring grantee to pay for the same period of time such higher percentage so paid to such other city. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-15: PUBLICATION COSTS:
The grantee shall assume the cost of publication of this franchise as such publication is required by law. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
5-14-16: FORFEITURE:
Any violation by the grantee, its vendee, lessee or successors of the provisions of this chapter, franchise and grant or any material portions thereof or the
failure promptly to perform any of the provisions thereof shall be cause for the forfeiture of this franchise and grant and all rights hereunder by the city after
sixty (60) days' written notice to the grantee and the continuance of such violation, failure or default; however, this provision shall not prevent the grantee
from submitting such question of forfeiture to proper court determination. (Ord. 414, 11-6-1985)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 31/151
5-14-17: SEPARABILITY:
If any part or parts of this chapter shall be adjudged by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of any other part or
parts hereof which can be given effect without the part or parts adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid. The city declares that it would have passed the
remaining parts of this chapter if it had been known that such other part or parts thereof would be declared unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 414, 11-6-
1985)
Chapter 15
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
5-15-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
(A) Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults
to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(B) Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented to the city council, and on findings
incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976);
FW/BPS. Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. GlenTheater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S.Ct. 1382
(2000); and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to: Cleburne, TX; Newport News, VA; Garden Grove, CA; Adams County, CO;
Seattle, WA; Phoenix, AZ; Indianapolis, IN; Minneapolis, MN; Las Vegas, NV; and Cleveland, OH; the city council finds:
1. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the
establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for some of the activities that
occur on their premises.
2. Information received from the city of Pocatello, Idaho, has revealed that employees of some sexually oriented businesses currently in operation in
the city of Pocatello are unable to observe the activities of their customers at all times, thereby increasing the likelihood of ancillary unlawful and
unhealthy activities on their premises. In one establishment, the investigation revealed holes cut into the partition separating private booths to allow
for anonymous genital contact. The doors to these private booths lock from the inside which reinforces the ability to become involved in anonymous
illicit sexual activity.
3. Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets, engage in higher incidence of certain
types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
4. Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
5. In some cities in the area, it has been found that private booths in sexually oriented businesses where there is reason to believe that sexual activity
including, but not necessarily limited to, masturbation, is taking place within private booths in one of those establishments.
6. Offering and providing such space encourages such activities which create unhealthy conditions.
7. Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
8. At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses including, but not limited to, syphilis,
gonorrhea, chlamydia, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, non A, non B amebiasis, salmonella
infections and shigella infections.
9. Since 1981 to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) in the United States (600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985; and 733,374 through December 31, 1999).
10. As of June 2000, there have been four hundred eighty eight (488) reported cases of AIDS and three hundred fifty three (353) more reported cases
of HIV infection in the state of Idaho.
11. Since 1981 to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test in the state of
Idaho.
12. The number of cases of genital chlamydia in the United States reported annually has risen, with five hundred twenty six thousand six hundred fifty
three (526,653) cases reported as of 1997, making chlamydia the most reported of all notifiable infectious diseases in the United States.
13. While the number of cases of syphilis and gonorrhea has declined, the number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually
remains at a high level, with over three hundred twenty five thousand (325,000) cases being reported in 1997, which indicates that the annual
decreases in reported cases of gonorrhea may be leveling off.
14. The surgeon general of the United States, in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn.
15. According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis, chlamydia, and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 32/151
16. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy and, in part,
because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and
maintain those facilities.
17. Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult"
oriented films.
18. In adjacent cities, it has been found that there are potentially unhealthy and unsanitary conditions, as well as the presence of semen in an adult film
viewing booth in an existing sexually oriented business.
19. The findings noted in subsections (B)1 through (B)18 of this section raise substantial governmental concerns.
20. Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
21. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the
sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of
the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
22. Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in sexually oriented businesses.
23. Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce
the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
24. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented
businesses, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
25. It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who
may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
26. The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime lends to the rational assumption that the applicant
may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
27. The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of five (5) years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct
which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
28. The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin operated or slug operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanical
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are regularly maintained to show films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, DVDs, CD-ROMs, slides, computer generated images, or other photographic reproductions to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial
portion of its stock in trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenue or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business
or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the
following:
(A) Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(B) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic
use or abuse of themselves or others.
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
(A) Persons who appear seminude; or
(B) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(C) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 33/151
(A) Offers accommodations to the public for anyform of consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; and either:
1. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
2. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than eight (8) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: The dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the
phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas", the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities.
EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY AND EMPLOYMENT: Descriptive of and pertaining to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented
business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or
other status. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to
the premises.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The chief of police, or the sworn officers in his or her charge as he or she may designate, or such other person as may be
designated by the city council.
ESCORT: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a
fee, tip, or other considerations.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or otherconsideration.
ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT: Includes any of the following:
(A) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(B) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
(C) The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
(D) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on
the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued, authorizing employment in a sexually
oriented business.
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than fully opaque
covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO BE OPERATED: To function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. "Operator" means any person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of the business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an
owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person appears seminude and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, or
photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. "Seminude model studio" shall not include a proprietary school licensed by
the state of Idaho or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains
and operates educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in
a structure:
(A) That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for viewing;
and
(B) Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll in the class; and
(C) Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any one time.
SEMINUDE OR SEMINUDE CONDITION: The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the
showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion
of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 34/151
exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The definition of
sexual encounter establishment or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, seminude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Include the following:
(A) The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
(B) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
(A) Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance
by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with achild; engaging in organized criminal
activity relating to a sexually oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; crimes against nature; any other sexual offense prohibited by
Idaho Code not otherwise specified herein; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the
criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
(B) For which:
1. Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
2. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
3. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twenty four (24) month period.
(C) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
(A) The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus or female breasts;
(B) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
(C) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT: A sexually oriented business increasing floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty five percent (25%),
as the floor areas exist on the effective date hereof.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL: Includes any of the following:
(A) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(B) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(C) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership control. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-3: CLASSIFICATION:
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(A) Adult arcades;
(B) Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 35/151
(C) Adult cabarets;
(D) Adult motels;
(E) Adult motion picture theaters;
(F) Adult theaters;
(G) Escort agencies;
(H) Seminude model studios; and
(I) Sexual encounter centers. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
(A) It is unlawful for:
1. Any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.
2. Any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter.
3. For any person to obtain employment with a sexuallyoriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license
pursuant to this chapter.
(B) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter.
(C) An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file with the enforcement officer a
completed application made on a form prescribed and provided by the city clerk. An application shall be considered complete if it includes the
information required in this section. The applicant shall be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application shall be notarized. The
application shall include the information called for in subsections (C)1 through (C)6 of this section, as follows:
1. The full true name of the applicant and any other names used in the preceding five (5) years by the applicant.
2. The current business address of the sexually oriented business.
3. A set of fingerprints suitable for conducting necessary background checks pursuant to this chapter and the applicant's social security number to be
used for the same purpose.
4. If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name, business location, legal description, business mailing address, and phone
number of the proposed sexually oriented business will be required.
5. Written proof of age, in the form of either: a) a copy of a birth certificate and current photo; b) current driver's license with picture; or c) other picture
identification document issued by a governmental agency.
6. The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented business, whether any
such license or permit has been denied, revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason or reasons therefor.
7. If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service
of process. The information provided pursuant to subsections (C)1 through (C)7 of this section shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the enforcement officer within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information
originally submitted false or incomplete.
(D) The application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing theconfiguration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6").
(E) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, such as a corporation, each officer, director, general partner or other person
who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant
must be qualified under section 5-15-5 of this chapter, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(F) A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business license. A
person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter,
where applicable.
(G) The information provided by an applicant in connection with the application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the enforcement
officer on a confidential basis, and may be disclosed only: 1) to other governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 36/151
function; or 2) as may otherwise be required by law or court order. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CAUSES FOR DENIAL:
(A) Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, the enforcement
officer shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the enforcement officer to deny
or grant the license. Within twenty (20) days after the receipt of a completed application, the enforcement officer shall either issue a license or issue a
written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the
following is found to be true:
1. An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
2. An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a
sexually oriented business.
3. An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 5-15-4 of this chapter for issuance of the license.
4. An applicant for a business entity for which the applicant had, at the time of an offense leading to a criminal conviction described herein, a
management responsibility or a controlling interest, has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 5-15-2 of this chapter.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.
5. The license application fee required by this section has not been paid.
6. An applicant has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
7. The proposed sexually oriented business is located in a zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses are allowed to
operate under the city zoning ordinances or is not in compliance with the location restrictions established for sexually oriented businesses in the
appropriate zoning district(s).
(B) An applicant ineligible for a license due to subsection (A)4 of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period
specified by the applicable subsection has elapsed.
(C) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of licenses issued to that applicant,
the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business
employee license shall contain a photograph of the licensee. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near
the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the
employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing and shall produce such license for
inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-6: FEES:
(A) The nonrefundable initial license fee and annual renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license
shall be set by the city council at an amount determined to be sufficient to pay the cost of administering this program, subject to subsection (B) of this
section.
(B) In no event shall the fees exceed two hundred fiftydollars ($250.00) for the initial license and one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for the renewal
fee for a sexually oriented business license. In no event shall the fees exceed seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the initial license and fifty dollars
($50.00) for the renewal fee for a sexually oriented business employee license. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-7: INSPECTION:
(A) An applicant, operator, or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers, and any other federal, state, county or city agency in the performance of any
function connected with the enforcement of this chapter, normally and regularly conducted by such agencies, to inspect those portions of the premises
of a sexually oriented business where patrons or customers are permitted to occupy for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, at any
time the business is occupied or open for business.
(B) The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-8: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
(A) Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 5-15-4 of this
chapter. Application for renewal shall be made not more than ninety (90) and at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date; and when made less
than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
(B) When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the
city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90)
days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-9: SUSPENSION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 37/151
The city shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a license for thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(A) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; and/or
(B) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 567,9-3-2003)
5-15-10: REVOCATION:
(A) The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of suspension in section 5-
15-9 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
(B) The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the enforcement officer determines:
1. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
2. A licensee knew or should have known or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
3. A licensee knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
4. A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; and/or
5. A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed
premises. This subsection will not apply to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either: a) in exchange for
money; or b) in a public place or within public view.
(C) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(D) When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 5-15-11 of this chapter, the enforcement officer revokes a license, the revocation
shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation becomes
effective; provided, that, if the conditions of subsection 5-15-11(B) of this chapter are met, a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that section.
If, subsequent revocation, the enforcement officer finds that the basis for the revocation found in subsections (B)1 and (B)4 of this section has been
corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
(Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-11: HEARING, LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, APPEAL:
(A) If the enforcement officer determines that facts exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter, the enforcement officer shall
notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by personal
delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the enforcement officer. Within seven (7)
working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide the mayor and city council in writing a response that shall include a statement of
reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. Within five (5) days of the receipt of the respondent's written
response, the mayor shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding.
Within twenty (20) working days of the receipt of the respondent's written response, the mayor and city council shall conduct a hearing at which the
respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. If a response is not
received by the mayor and city council in the time stated or, if after the hearing the city council finds that grounds as specified in this resolution exist for
denial, suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five (5) days after the mayor sends, by certified mail,
written notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the
right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
If the city council finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then, within five (5) days after the hearing, the mayor
shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action and shall
contemporaneously therewith issue the license.
(B) When a decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a license has
been denied or whose license has been suspended, or revoked, shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the
filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the city shall
immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually
oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee, and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the
aggrieved party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-12: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-13: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 38/151
(A) A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than core
or highway commercial, as defined and described in the zoning code.
(B) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within five hundred feet (500') of:
1. A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
2. A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary
schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools,
continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; "school" includes school grounds, but does not include facilities
used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
(C) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one hundred fifty feet (150') of:
1. A boundary of a residential district as defined in the city zoning code;
2. A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground,
nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public
land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities;
3. The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the city zoning code; or
4. A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state of Idaho. No business licensed to sell alcohol shall
be permitted to operate a sexually oriented business on the licensed premisesdesignated for the sale of alcohol.
(D) A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually oriented business within two hundred feet (200') of another sexually oriented business.
(E) A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or increases the floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or
portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
(F) For the purpose of subsection (B) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection (B) of this section. Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be
irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
(G) For purposes of subsection (C) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is
located.
(H) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on November 1, 2003, that is in violation of subsections (A) through (F) of this section shall be
deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue unless terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a
period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered; except that the use may be
changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within two hundred feet (200') of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use
and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming.
(I) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in subsection (B) of this section within two hundred feet (200') of the sexually oriented
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application is made for a license after the
applicant's previous license hasexpired or been revoked. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-14: EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS:
(A) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing
room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead light fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in
which patrons are not permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to
a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6"). The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that
was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 39/151
4. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all
times that any patron is present inside the premises.
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises has two (2) or more managers' stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for anypurpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
6. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (A)5 of this section remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (A)1 of this
section.
7. No viewing booth may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access
at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
9. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
10. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing booths.
11. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths.
12. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
13. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
14. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily
cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty eight inches (48") of the floor.
(B) A person having a duty under subsection (A) of this section commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-15: ESCORT AGENCIES:
(A) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(B) A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord.
567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-16: PUBLIC NUDITY:
(A) It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or engages in
specified sexual activities.
(B) It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a seminude condition unless the
person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be at least six feet (6') from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet (2') from the
floor.
(C) It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude in a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or
customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to an employee, while said employee is seminude in a sexually oriented
business.
(D) It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude, to knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. (Ord. 567,
9-3-2003)
5-15-17: CHILDREN PROHIBITED IN SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A licensed employee or operator commits a misdemeanor if that person knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises
of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-18: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-19: EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 40/151
It is a defense to prosecution under section 5-15-16 of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(A) By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of Idaho; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(B) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
(C) In a structure:
1. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
2. Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll in the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude model is in a classroom at any one time. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-20: INJUNCTION:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 5-15-12 of this chapter is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to three
hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or six (6) months' incarceration. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. (Ord.
567, 9-3-2003)
5-15-21: LICENSE APPLICATION:
(A) All owners of sexually oriented businesses existing on the date of publication of this chapter and their employees shall have thirty (30) days from the
date of publication of this chapter to file their licensing applications with the planning and zoning department of the city. Owners and employees of
sexually oriented businesses in existence on the date of publication of this chapter shall, upon application, be issued temporary licenses and permitted
to continue operation of and employment by said sexually oriented businesses while their license applications are pending final decision by the
enforcement officer in accordance with subsection 5-15-5(A) of this chapter.
(B) All owners and employees of new sexually oriented businesses that are not in existence on the date of publication of this chapter shall not conduct
business without a license issued by the enforcement officer. (Ord. 567, 9-3-2003)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-1-1: AID IN ESCAPE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person to escape from lawful confinement or to assist any person to escape from the custody of any
peace officer. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-2: AID TO AN OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet, counsel, advise or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the acts
mentioned in this chapter or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense hereby defined. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-3: ARSON:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "arson" which is hereby defined as to maliciously and deliberately set fire to or burn or cause to be burned, or
aid, counsel, or procure the burning of any dwelling or other valuable property, either of himself or others. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-4: ASSAULT OR BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "assault" or "battery" which is hereby defined as any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the
person of another. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-5: ASSISTING IN LOTTERY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 41/151
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist either by printing, writing, advertising, publishing or otherwise, in setting up, managing or drawing any
lottery or scheme, or in selling or disposing of any ticket, change or share therein or for any person to let or permit to be used any building or premises for
any of said purposes. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-6: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to use barbed wire
as a guard to any parking lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-7: BEER; PROCURING OR SELLING TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to procure, sell, or give away any beer to any person under the age of twenty (20) years or for any person under the age
of twenty (20) years to purchase, attempt to purchase or otherwise procure, consume or have in his possession any beer. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-8: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to torture or beat cruelly, starve or otherwise ill treat any animal in his care or charge, whether belonging to himself or
any other person. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-9: DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any public thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to persons or
property. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-10: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any illegal or improper diversion or to use insulting, indecent or immoral language, or to be guilty of any
indecent, insulting, or immoral conduct or behavior. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-11: DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE LITERATURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, pass, give or deliver to another any obscene, lewd or indecent book, pamphlet, picture, card, print, paper,
writing, mold, cast or figure or to have same in his possession. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-12: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, wilfully, maliciously, intentionally or unnecessarily, to disturb the peace and quiet of another, or of any neighborhood or
family or religious congregation or other assembly by loud or unusual noises or indecent behavior or by offensive or unbecoming conduct, or for any
person to threaten, quarrel, fight or provoke an assault or battery, or curse or swear or utter any obscene or vulgar or indecent language in the presence of
another or hearing of children, in a loud and boisterous manner. (Ord. 528, 8-19-1998)
6-1-13: DRUNKENNESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found drunk, intoxicated or under the influence of intoxicating liquor uponany public thoroughfare or other public
place. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-14: ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities; and it
shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a
motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-15: ESCAPES:
It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-16: EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALKS OR IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or upon the floor of any public building or room used for public assemblies.
(Ord. 42, 1966)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 42/151
6-1-17: FALSE PRETENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any public place and call for
refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he received the
food, goods, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-18: FALSE REPRESENTATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to represent falsely himself to be an officer of the municipality or attempt to impersonate any such officer or without
authority perform any official act therein on behalf of an officer. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-19: FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES:
It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place
where admission fees are charged, provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police
officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or amusement. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-20: FURNISHING WEAPONS AND OTHER ARTICLES TO PRISONERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take into jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to any prisoner therein confined, or in the
custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating liquors, drug or other article without the consent of the officer in charge. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-21: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deal, play or conduct, either as owner, employee or lessee, whether or not for hire, any game played with cards, dice
or any other device for money, checks, credit or other representative of value. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-22: GENERAL OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is prohibited or required by state law, insofar as such laws
are applicable to municipal government. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-23: GIVING ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any male citizen over the age of eighteen (18) years to refuse or neglect to render assistance to any police officer when called upon
for such assistance or aid in the suppression of riot or other unlawful assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an offense. (Ord. 42,
1966)
6-1-24: HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or assist in the keeping of a house of ill fame or prostitution or knowingly to reside therein or knowingly to rent,
lease or permit any person to occupy any house or room owned, leased or controlled by him for this purpose. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-25: HYPNOTISTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice hypnotism or for any person to be a subject for such hypnotist; provided, that this shall not apply to
hypnotism as used in the treatment of patients by an accredited doctor of medicine or doctor of dentistry nor shall it prohibit the teaching of hypnotism in
any state accredited educational institution which maintains an academic standard of the college level. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-26: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress or condition in any public place or in any such place to
make any indecent exposure of his or her person or private parts thereof or the private parts of another or to conduct himself in a lewd or lascivious
manner or to appear in any such place in a dress not belonging to his sex. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-27: KEEPING OF JUNK RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or materials which may be classified as junk adjacent to or in close proximity to any
schoolhouse, church, public parks, public grounds, business buildings or residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the storage of the
same. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 43/151
6-1-28: LEWD COHABITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any man or woman not being married to each other, to live and cohabit together as man and wife, or lewdly and notoriously to
associate together. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-29: LOTTERY:
(Rep. by Ord. 439, 1-8-1990)
6-1-30: LOUDSPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS:
It shall be unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loudspeaker or
sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle, unless such
person in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from the chief of police to operate any such vehicle so equipped. (Ord.
42, 1966)
6-1-31: LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to pavement to be permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicle shall
first plank such streets. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-32: MALICIOUS INJURY TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to injure, deface, mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in any manner interfere with or molest or
secrete or destroy any real orpersonal property belonging to or under the control of any person. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-33: MINORS IN POOL HALLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any minor under the age of twenty one (21) years to frequent or loiter in a pool or billiard hall where beer or
intoxicating liquor are sold. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-34: MUFFLERS; UNNECESSARY NOISE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall not at all times be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and it shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to use a
cutout, bypass or similar muffler elimination appliance. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-35: NUISANCES DEFINED:
Anything which is injurious to the health or morals, or indecent or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is declared a nuisance and as such shall be abated. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-36: OBSCENE CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or stool in any place open to the public view, or to be guilty of any lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct or to
sing any lewd or obscene song, ballad or other words in any public place or any other place where other persons are present or indecently to exhibit any
animal. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-37: PETIT LARCENY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "petit larceny" which is hereby defined as a larceny when the property taken is of a value of less than sixty
dollars ($60.00). (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-38: PLAYING BALL ON STREETS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball or throw any ball to and fro upon any public thoroughfare in the municipality. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-39: PROSTITUTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or advertise in any manner her vocation as a prostitute or for any person to advertise the profession of a
prostitute or solicit for a prostitute. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 44/151
6-1-40: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere wilfully with, resist, delay, obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any officer of the municipality in the exercise
of his official duties. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-41: RIOT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer, when two (2) or more persons are
assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing any unlawful act. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-42: SALE OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or indirectly, to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years any cigarettes, tobacco,
or any compounds of tobacco used in filling up or making up of a cigarette or to give or sell any cigarette papers to minors. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-43: SWINDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, who by color, or aid of any trick or sleight of hand performance, or by fraud or by fraudulent scheme, cards, dice or
device, to win for himself or for another any money or property or a representative of either. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-44: TRESPASSING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take down any fence or to let down any bars or to open any gate in or on the property of another without the consent
of the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-45: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to assemble together for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing an unlawful
act and not to disperse upon the command of an officer so to do. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-46: VAGRANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person without visible means of support and the physical ability to work, not to seek employment or labor, or to refuse to work
when employment is offered him; for any person to seek alms as a business; for any person to roam about from place to place without any lawful
business; for any idle or dissolute person or associate of known thieves to wander about the streets at a late and unusual hour of the night, or to lodge in
any other place than is kept for lodging purposes without the permission of the owner of the property or the person in possession thereof; or for any person
to consort habitually with common prostitutes, habitual drunkards or any user of narcotics. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-47: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-48: WINDOWSILLS TO BE KEPT CLEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on any
sidewalk, any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on the sidewalk in front of such building, unless said article be securely fastened or
protected by screens. (Ord. 42, 1966)
6-1-49: ANIMALS AND VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON GOLF COURSES; IN PARKS:
From and after the effective date hereof, all domestic animals and all vehicles of every kind and description, save and except those specifically authorized,
shall be prohibited from being upon the golf course and all parks within the city.
Any person operating or driving any unauthorized vehicle or domestic animal, or knowingly permitting an unauthorized vehicle or domestic animal to be
upon the golf course or any park in the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon being found guilty thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 298, 4-17-1972)
6-1-50: GLASS BEVERAGE CONTAINERS PROHIBITED IN CITY PARKS:
Glass beverage containers are prohibited in all city parks. Any person using, possessing or disposing of any glass beverage containers within the confines
of any city park shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon being found guilty thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars
($300.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail of not to exceed thirty(30) days, or both. (Ord. 385, 8-18-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 45/151
6-1-51: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC AREAS:
(A) Consumption Of Alcohol: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Consume beer, wine, or alcoholic liquor upon the public streets or in public areas in the city.
2. Break open, or allow to be broken open, any container of beer, wine, or alcoholic liquor while the same is being transported or is in an automobile or
other vehicle upon the public streets or in public areas of the city.
3. Possess an open container of beer, wine, or alcoholic liquor upon the public streets or in public areas of the city.
(B) Exceptions: Exceptions to the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in the public areas of the city shall be as follows:
1. In the Willow Bay recreation area of the city.
2. On the golf course or on designated cart path areas while engaged in golf related activities.
3. In or around the golf clubhouse during clubhouse hours.
4. In central city park north and south shelters and Vard Meadows shelter and immediate surrounding areas with a permit issued by the city clerk.
5. For special community events with a permit issued by the city clerk. (Ord. 495, 4-17-1996)
6-1-52: TOXIC INHALANTS:
(A) Use Of Toxic Inhalants Prohibited: No person shall breathe, inhale, drink or possess with the intent to breathe, inhale, or drink any compound, liquid,
chemical, or other substance containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methylethyl ketone, trichloroathane,
isopropanol methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, pentachlorophenol, petroleum ether, benzene, ethylene dichloride, or
any other substance for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness, paralysis, euphoria, exhilaration, or in
any manner changing, distorting, or disturbing the auditory, visual, or nervous processes.
(B) Sale Prohibited: No person shall sell or offer to sell to any person any container of substance containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic
vapors or fumes, if he knows the product is purchased for use in violation of subsection (A) ofthis section or his failure to know is a wanton, flagrant, or
reckless disregard for the consequences.
(C) Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use or inhalation of anesthesia when administered or prescribed for medical or dental
purposes. (Ord. 496, 4-17-1996)
6-1-53: CURFEW IN CITY PARKS:
(A) Curfew Established: All city parks except the Willow Bay recreation area will be closed for public use from eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. until six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Vehicles will be allowed to drive through the parks on designated roadways and pedestrian traffic may pass through the parks, but there will
be no stopping or standing in the park areas.
(B) No Overnight Camping: No overnight camping will be allowed in the city parks. The Willow Bay recreation area will be the only exception to this rule.
All overnight campers will be directed to the Willow Bay recreation area or one of the local camping areas.
(C) Parks Designated: City parks will be those areas designated by the city as park areas. These will include, but not be limited to, the Vard Meadows
park, Stebbins park, Central City park, Willow Bay recreation area, and Magnuson field.
(D) Exceptions: Exceptions for special events may be done with a permit issued by the city clerk. (Ord. 497, 4-17-1996)
6-1-54: PUBLIC DISTURBANCE NOISES:
It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, sound that is a public disturbance
noise. The following sounds are determined to be public disturbance noises:
(A) The frequent, repetitive, or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or as specifically
permitted or required by law.
(B) The creation of frequent, repetitive, or continuous sounds in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, off highway vehicle, or internal combustion engine within a residential district, so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace,
comfort, and repose of owners or possessors of real property. This also includes the use of motor vehicles without mufflers. The use of engine brakes
on commercial semitractor trucks, commonly known as "jake brakes" or "pac brakes" is also prohibited within the city.
(C) The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds which emanate from any building, structure, apartment, or condominium, which unreasonably
interfere with the peace, comfort, and repose of owners or possessors of real property,such as sounds from audio equipment, musical instrument, band
sessions, or social gatherings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 46/151
(D) Sound from motor vehicle sound systems, such as tape players, radios, and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater
than fifty feet (50') from the vehicle itself.
(E) Sound from audio equipment, such as tape players, radios, or compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than fifty feet
(50') from the source, and if not operated upon the property of the operator.
(F) Frequent and continuous barking or howling of dogs on any premises or property owned or controlled by any person in the city, particularly between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or at any time and place so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace,
comfort, and repose of owners or possessors of real property.
(G) The foregoing provisions shall not apply to regularly scheduled and city approved events at parks, streets, parking lots, or halls, such as public address
systems for baseball games or park concerts, or street dances. (Ord. 523, 6-15-1998)
Chapter 2
DOGS
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
DOG: Means and includes either male or female.
KENNEL: Means and includes any compound or enclosure which contains in excess of three (3) dogs, all such dogs to have attained an age of three (3)
months or more.
OWNER: Means and includes any person owning, harboring or keeping, or in charge of a dog or dogs within the corporate limits of the city.
RESIDENTIAL AREA: Means and includes any area residence zone class A or residence zone class B within the American Falls city limits.
UNLICENSED DOG: Means and includes any dog not bearing a license for the current year. (Ord. 261, 6-5-1968; amd. Ord. 484, 5-17-1995)
6-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog within the municipality without paying a license fee therefor as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 261, 6-5-1968)
6-2-3: LICENSE AND LICENSE FEE:
(A) The owner or person keeping, harboring or having in charge any dog within the municipality shall, before January 1 of each year, make application to
the clerk and pay a license fee for each dog. All fees to be assessed under this chapter shall be established and may be modified from time to time
byresolution of the council. (Ord. 503, 12-18-1996)
(B) Upon payment of said fee it shall be the duty of the clerk to issue a license to said person bearing the same number as the number to be worn on the
collar of the dog as hereinafter provided. The said license shall give the date of issue, the date of expiration, the amount paid, the name and address of
the person to whom issued and the name and sex of the dog. The clerk shall furnish with each license a metal tag which shall be stamped with the
number to correspond with the number of the license and the year for which issued. In case a dog is brought within the corporate limits within the
license year herein designated, the owner or person having such a dog in charge shall pay the same amount as herein specified and said clerk shall
thereupon issue a license as in other cases. It shall be unlawful for anyone to make a false statement in said application for said license.
Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person visiting in the city for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days and
owning or possessing a dog currently licensed and bearing the license issued by another licensing authority. (Ord. 360, 12-6-1978)
6-2-4: TAG TO BE PLACED ON COLLAR:
The metal tag as described hereinbefore shall be attached to the collar of the dog, which the owner or person in charge of the dog shall provide, and which
shall be placed and kept upon the neck of the dog so licensed. If the metal tag is lost, a duplicate tag shall be obtained by making application to the clerk
who shall issue such duplicate tag upon payment by the applicant of a one dollar ($1.00) fee. (Ord. 360, 12-6-1978)
6-2-5: RECORD OF LICENSE:
The clerk shall keep a suitable record of the licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter and shall record all of the facts required to be stated in the
license. (Ord. 261, 6-5-1968)
6-2-6: IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSAL OF UNLICENSED DOGS:
All dogs not licensed and collared as herein provided are declared to be a nuisance, and it is the duty of all policemen or the animal control officer or other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 47/151
designated agent of the city to take up and impound any dog not licensed and collared as in this chapter required. Every dog so seized shall be retained in
the pound for the space of seventy two (72) hours. At any time during said period of seventy two (72) hours, the owner or keeper of said dog may redeem
the same by procuring a license as in this chapter provided, and pay, in addition, a fee to the city. At the expiration of seventy two (72) hoursafter
impounding any dog, the animal control officer is authorized to sell any such dog to any person not the owner or keeper thereof for the best price
obtainable and the sum received shall be paid by him into the treasury. In case any such dog be not redeemed or sold as herein provided, the animal
control officer shall dispose of said dog in any humane and lawful manner and dispose of the carcass in any lawful manner. (Ord. 503, 12-18-1996)
6-2-7: COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL KENNEL LICENSES:
(A) It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess upon the premises of any one household more than three (3) dogs unless the owner or person
in charge thereof shall have obtained a kennel license.
(B) Application for a kennel license shall be made to the clerk and must be accompanied by the written consent to such kennel by at least seventy five
percent (75%) of all the persons in possession of premises within three hundred feet (300') of the boundary lines of the premises upon which said
kennel is to be maintained. The city building administrator shall circulate the proposal and obtain such written consents. Under no circumstances shall
a kennel license be issued within any residential area. The application shall also be accompanied by a deposit of a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
for three (3) dogs and an additional two dollars ($2.00) for each dog over three (3), which deposit shall be returned to the applicant if the license is not
finally issued. The applicant shall state the name and address of the owner, where the kennel is to be kept and the number of dogs. (Ord. 484, 5-17-
1995)
(C) Noncommercial kennel licenses shall not be transferable, and shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued. Whenever additions are made
to the number of dogs for which a kennel license has been issued, the licensee shall within three (3) days report to the clerk and pay the required
license fee; provided, however, that whenever puppies are born, such puppies shall not be counted as additions until three (3) months old.
(D) For every kennel maintained for dogs registered under the rules and regulations of the American Kennel Club it shall not be necessary to license
individual dogs, but the owner of such kennel shall pay an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00); provided, however, that all dogs covered by such
kennel license shall be maintained and kept within the kennel or under leash at all times.
(E) The issuance of a noncommercial kennel license shall not obviate the necessity of obtaining an individual dog license, nor shall any of the provisions
hereof be deemed to vary or alter any of the zoning regulations of the city. (Ord. 261, 6-5-1968)
6-2-8: RABIES:
The animal control officer, policeman, or other designated agent of the city shall have the authority to order the owner of any dog showing symptoms of
rabies or any dog which has bitten any person, so as to cause an abrasion of skin, to confine such dog to a suitable kennel under the care of a veterinarian
for quarantine for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, and if such dog shall be determined free of rabies the same shall be returned to the owner upon
payment of all costs by the owner for keeping said dog impounded, together with professional fees. No other fee shall be charged. If such fee is not paid,
the dog will be subject to disposal as provided hereinafter.
Any dog afflicted with rabies shall be disposed of immediately, either by the owner or by the animal control officer. (Ord. 503, 12-18-1996)
6-2-9: UNLAWFUL FOR DOGS TO RUN AT LARGE:
(A) Disturbing The Peace Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor within the limits of the city any dog which by barking,
howling, or yelping disturbs the quiet of any neighborhood or person.
(B) Leash Required: It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dog to allow said dog to be on any public street, alley, sidewalk, or any public way or
public place within the city, unless said dog is on a leash not exceeding ten feet (10') in length or is confined in a vehicle; provided, however, the mayor
may, upon application of any person, authorize dog shows, exhibitions and dog training courses within the city and allowing the dogs participating
therein to be controlled only by competent attendants.
(C) Consent Of Owner: It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dog to allow said dog to run upon any property in the city without the consent of
the owner or tenant in possession of said property. (Ord. 261, 6-5-1968)
(D) Penalty: The owner of any animal found to be running at large on any public rights of way or public grounds within the city shall be assessed a fee to
be collected by the animal control officer or city clerk or other designated city official. Said fee shall be independent of, and in addition to, any fine which
might be assessed by any court having jurisdiction due to misdemeanor prosecution for any animal running at large violation. (Ord. 503, 12-18-1996)
6-2-10: DUTY OF POLICEMEN AND ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
It shall be the duty of all policemen and the animal controlofficer or the designated agent of the city to seize and impound any dog found to be running at
large in violation of this chapter. The owner of every licensed dog so seized shall be notified by the police department, in writing, of the seizure within forty
eight (48) hours thereafter. Notice shall be deemed sufficient when it identifies the dog by license number, states the date and place of seizure, is placed in
a sealed envelope addressed to the owner of the dog at his residence as appears on the application for the current license, and is deposited in the United
States mail with postage prepaid. Every licensed dog so seized shall be retained in the pound for seven (7) days after notice is mailed to the owner of the
dog. Any time while said dog is so impounded, the owner or keeper of said dog may redeem the same by paying the required fees at city hall. At the
expiration of seven (7) days, the animal control officer is authorized to dispose of such licensed dog as in this chapter provided for unlicensed dogs. (Ord.
503, 12-18-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 48/151
6-2-11: INTERFERENCE UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, molest or interfere with any person who is engaged in seizing any dog, killing the same or removing the
carcass under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 261, 6-5-1968)
6-2-12: CRUELTY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maltreat or torture any dog, or having the right or authority to kill any dog, to kill such dog in an inhumane manner.
(Ord. 261, 6-5-1968)
6-2-13: ISSUING AND PROCESSING OF CITATIONS:
(A) Whenever a violation of this chapter shall occur in the presence of a policeman or the animal control officer or other designated officer of the city, he
may serve a written warning or court citation with such information as is necessary for the citation form.
(B) Warning citations will be turned into the police records clerk for processing. (Ord. 503, 12-18-1996)
ARTICLE A. VICIOUS DOGS
6-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
OWNER: A person, firm, or corporation keeping, possessing, harboring or having the care or custody of a dog.
VICIOUS DOG: (A) Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, or cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the
safety of human beings or domestic animals; or
(B) Any dog which, without provocation, has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic animal; or
(C) Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dogfighting, or any dog trained for dogfighting; or
(D) Any dog which, without provocation, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or public property in a menacing fashion or
apparent attitude of attack. (Ord. 592, 3-18-2009)
6-2A-2: DECLARING A DOG VICIOUS:
If the animal control officer or police officer has cause to believe that a dog is vicious, the animal control officer may find and declare that dog a vicious
dog. (Ord. 592, 3-18-2009)
6-2A-3: NOTICE OF DECLARATION:
Within three (3) days of declaring a dog vicious, the animal control officer or police officer shall notify the dog's owner in writing of the declaration. The
notice shall identify the requirements and conditions for maintaining a vicious dog as set forth in this article. If the owner cannot be located, the dog may be
immediately impounded and notice shall be posted on the owner's property or sent by certified mail to the owner's last known address. (Ord. 592, 3-18-
2009)
6-2A-4: HEARING ON DECLARATION:
(A) The owner of a dog declared vicious shall have the right to file with the city clerk, within seven (7) days after receiving notice, a written request for a
hearing to contest the vicious dog declaration. The hearing shall be held within ten (10) days after the city clerk receives the owner's written request.
(B) The hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner may be represented by counsel, present oral and written evidence,
and cross examine witnesses.
(C) The city council shall issue a decision within seven (7) days after the close of the hearing and shall notify the owner in writing of the decision.
(D) If the city council upholds the vicious dog declaration, the owner shall comply with all of the requirements and conditions of maintaining a vicious dog
as set forth in this chapter.
(E) The decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 592, 3-18-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 49/151
6-2A-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR KEEPING A VICIOUS DOG:
The owner of a vicious dog shall be subject to the following requirements:
(A) Confinement: All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in an enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner. The
pen or structure must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet (5' x 10') and must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If
no bottom is secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet (2'). All pens or structures must be adequately
lighted and kept clean and sanitary. The enclosure must also protect the dog from the elements.
(B) Leash And Muzzle: The owner of a vicious dog shall not allow the dog to go outside its kennel, pen, or structure unless the dog is muzzled, restrained
by a chain or leash not more than four feet (4') in length, and under the physical control of a person. The muzzle must not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent the dog from biting any human or animal.
(C) Signs: The owner of a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on the owner's premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a
vicious dog on the premises. The sign must be readable from the public highway or thoroughfare. The owner shall also display a sign with a symbol
warning children of the presence of a vicious dog. Similar signs shall be posted on the dog's kennel, pen, or enclosed structure.
(D) Insurance: The owner of a vicious dog must provide proof to the city clerk that the owner has procured public liability insurance of at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) insuring the owner for any damage or personal injury which may be caused by his or her vicious dog. (Ord. 592, 3-18-
2009)
6-2A-6: IMPOUNDMENT AND DESTRUCTION:
The animal control officer or police officer may order the impoundment and destruction of a dog where:
(A) The dog has attacked, bitten, or injured a human being or domestic animal;
(B) The dog is a "vicious dog" as defined in section 6-2A-1 of this article and the owner has failed to comply with the requirements and conditions of
keeping a vicious dog as defined in section 6-2A-5 of this article; or
(C) The dog poses a threat of serious harm to the public health or safety. (Ord. 592, 3-18-2009)
6-2A-7: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Within three (3) days of an impoundment, the animal control officer or police shall notify the dog's owner in writing of the impoundment. (Ord. 592, 3-18-
2009)
6-2A-8: HEARING ON IMPOUNDMENT/DESTRUCTION:
(A) The owner of an impounded dog shall have the right to file with the city clerk, within three (3) days after receiving notice, a written request for a hearing
to contest the impoundment.
(B) The hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner may be represented by counsel, present oral and written evidence
and cross examine witnesses.
(C) The city council shall issue a decision within three (3) days after the close of the hearing and shall notify the owner in writing of the decision.
(D) After considering all of the relevant evidence, the city council may order the destruction of the impounded dog, or may release the dog to its owner
conditional on the owner complying with the requirements for keeping a vicious dog as set forth in section 6-2A-5 of this article, or complying with any
other requirements necessary to protect the public health or safety.
(E) If the owner of an impounded dog fails to appear at a hearing or fails to request a hearing, the dog shall be destroyed. (Ord. 592, 3-18-2009)
6-2A-9: EXEMPTIONS:
(A) This chapter shall not apply to dogs used by a police department or law enforcement agency.
(B) No dog may be declared vicious for injury or damage sustained by a person who was committing wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises of the
dog's owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 50/151
(C) No dog may be declared vicious for injury or damage sustained by a person who was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog. (Ord. 592, 3-
18-2009)
6-2A-10: CHANGE OF STATUS:
The owner of a vicious dog shall notify the animal control officer or police officer within twenty four (24) hours if the vicious dog is unconfined and on the
loose, or has attacked a human being or domestic animal. (Ord. 592, 3-18-2009)
6-2A-11: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
If the owner of a vicious dog sells, gives away, or otherwise transfers custody of the vicious dog, the owner shall, within seven (7) days, provide the animal
control officer or police officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner. The previous owner shall notify the new owner of the
dog's designation as a vicious dog and of the requirements and conditions for keeping a vicious dog. (Ord. 592, 3-18-2009)
6-2A-12: DOGFIGHTING:
No person shall possess, harbor, or maintain care or custody of any dog for purpose of dogfighting, nor shall any person train, torment, badger, bait, or use
any dog for the reason of causing or encouraging the dog to attack human beings or domestic animals. (Ord. 592, 3-18-2009)
6-2A-13: PENALTIES:
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 592, 3-18-2009)
Chapter 3
ANIMALS
6-3-1: HERDING WITHIN LIMITS OF CITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to herd, hold, pasture, or detain any herd, drove, or band of sheep, horses, cattle, or any other
animals within the corporate limits of the city. (1960 Code)
6-3-2: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, or persons to permit or allow any horse, mare, colt, mule, cow, bull, calf, jack, jenney, goat, or hog belonging to him or
under his control, to run at large within the city limits. (1960 Code)
6-3-3: DUTIES OF POUNDMASTER:
It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to take up or cause to be taken up any of the above named animals found to be loose or running at large within the
city. (1960 Code)
6-3-4: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING:
Within twenty four (24) hours of the taking up of any animal running at large, the poundmaster shall notify the owner of said animal, if known, of the fact of
its being taken up, if the animal be branded and the owner of said brand be known to the poundmaster. He shall notify such brand owner of the fact that an
animal, describing the same, bearing the brand of said party isimpounded, and if not redeemed within the time specified in said notice, it will be sold to
discharge the cost and penalty of permitting it to run at large within the city limits, and the expense of impounding and keeping the same. He shall also
post in three (3) public places in the city notices giving a description of the animal, and stating that if said animal is not redeemed and all charges paid
within or before a certain time, stating the day and hour, which shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than fifteen (15) days from the date of the taking up,
that at said time and place the animal or animals so impounded will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash to pay the charges of taking up
and keeping of said animal. A copy of said notice shall be published for at least one week in the official newspaper of the city, and no sale shall be made
until at least five (5) days after said publication.
Said poundmaster shall, upon the taking up of said animal, if branded and the owner of the brand is not known to him, at once send by registered mail to
the bureau of registration a written notice, describing the animal or animals so taken by marks, brands, age, sex, kind and color, and where said animal or
animals are held. (1960 Code)
6-3-5: UNKNOWN BRAND:
Where an animal, if branded with an unknown brand and notice of the taking up sent to the bureau of registration, said animal shall not be sold for at least
ten (10) days after date of mailing such notice to said register of brands. (1960 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 51/151
6-3-6: CARE OF ANIMALS:
Any animal seized and impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be provided with proper care, food, and water while so confined by the
poundmaster. (1960 Code)
6-3-7: CLAIMED BY OWNER:
If at any time prior to the time fixed for the sale the owner of any animal or animals, so seized and impounded, shall claim the same, he shall be entitled to
the possession thereof upon payment to the poundmaster of such sum as hereinafter provided for and the legal charge and expense incident to such
taking up and keeping. (1960 Code)
6-3-8: SALE OF ANIMALS IMPOUNDED:
At the time specified in notice of sale, if the animal so impounded is not redeemed, the poundmaster shall sell the same to the highest bidder for cash, but
in no instance shall he be or become interested, either directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any animal sold by him. (1960 Code)
6-3-9: FEES:
The poundmaster shall charge for taking up, impounding and registering any animal or animals so taken up, the following fees: for a single animal the sum
of two dollars ($2.00); for any number of animals not exceeding five (5), two dollars ($2.00) for the first animal and seventy five cents ($0.75) for each
additional animal so taken up; for any number of animals not exceeding ten (10) and more than five (5), seventy five cents ($0.75) for each additional
animal over five (5), for any number of animals over ten (10), fifty cents ($0.50) for each additional animal over ten (10); provided, however, that if the
animals so taken up are sheep, the charges shall be fifty cents ($0.50) for the first sheep and fifteen cents ($0.15) per head for each additional head so
taken up, impounded and registered.
Said poundmaster shall charge, in addition to the charge of taking up, impounding and registering, seventy five cents ($0.75) per head for the first day and
fifty cents ($0.50) per head for each day thereafter for the feeding and caring of said animals; provided, however, that in case the animals taken up are
sheep or a band of sheep comprising more than ten (10) head, the fees shall be ten cents ($0.10) per day for each head over ten (10).
The poundmaster shall charge, in addition to the feeding and taking up of said animals, twenty five cents ($0.25) for posting the notice, twenty five cents
($0.25) for serving the personal notice, or mailing a description of the animal to the register of brands, twenty five cents ($0.25) per mile to serve the
notice, mileage to be collectible one way, and also the cost and expense of publishing the notice of the time and place of the sale of said animals, if notice
be published. (1960 Code)
6-3-10: RECORD TO BE KEPT:
The poundmaster shall keep in a suitable book an account of all monies received, when and from whom received, the amount paid to the treasurer, and
the date of payment, a complete description of all animals impounded, showing the time when impounded and by whom redeemed or when sold, and to
whom sold, which book or record shall be the property of the city, and open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times. (1960 Code)
6-3-11: REPORT OF POUNDMASTER:
The poundmaster shall, within ten (10) days of the sale of any animal, pay over to the treasurer of the city, all money received from the sale of such
animal, after deducting his fees and taking the treasurer's receipt therefor, and deposit the same with the clerk, and the treasurer shall credit said amount
to be known as the "stock fund". (1960 Code)
6-3-12: PAYMENT TO OWNER:
The city council may, on motion, at any time after the animal is sold, not exceeding six (6) months thereafter, order the clerk to deliver a warrant in favor of
the owner of said animal for whatever amount was received and credited to the stock fund from the sale of said animal upon due and sufficient proof as to
who was the owner of such animal. (1960 Code)
6-3-13: UNLAWFUL TO DRIVE ANIMALS INTO CITY:
If any person drives or causes to be driven any animal or animals into the city limits of the city, with the intention or the purpose of having such animal
impounded, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1960 Code)
6-3-14: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
After the expiration of six (6) months from the day of deposit of any funds received from the sale of any animal and unclaimed by the owner, said funds
may be transferred from the stock fund to any other fund of the city upon motion of the council. (1960 Code)
6-3-15: RUNNING AT LARGE OF POULTRY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 52/151
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to permit, suffer or allow, any chicken, chickens, ducks, turkeys, or geese owned by them
or under their care or control to run at large or to trespass within the corporate limits of the city, on either public or private property. (1960 Code)
6-3-16: MAINTAINING SWINE:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, corporation or association, to keep and maintain within the corporate limits of the city any pigs, hogs, or
swine; provided, however, that for the purpose of loading and shipping of any such animal or animals, it shall be lawful to keep the same in loading pens
provided for that purpose, but no such animal or animals shall be kept in such pens within the corporate limits of the city for a period of more than twenty
four (24) hours, except by written permission of the mayor. (1960 Code)
6-3-17: SLAUGHTERING OF ANIMALS AND FOWL WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to slaughter any domestic animal or fowl within the corporate limits of the city of American Falls. "Slaughter or
slaughtering" shall be defined as the killing of an animal for food.
(B) Penalties: Any violation of this regulation shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 555, 10-17-2001)
Chapter 4
IRRIGATION DITCHES, HEADGATES AND BOXES TO BE COVERED
6-4-1: UNLAWFUL ACT:
Enclosed headgates, boxes and irrigation ditches for the diversion of irrigation waters, with openings at the top or which are open, are hereby recognized
and declared to be attractive and dangerous to small children who are likely to play about the same, and on occasion to fall into the water therein
contained.
Therefore, all such headgates, boxes and irrigation ditches to be hereafter constructed within that portion of the city which has now been platted in lots and
blocks shall be covered, and all persons using or maintaining such enclosed headgates and diversion boxes that shall hereafter be constructed within said
platted portion of the city, of sufficient size to admit the body of any child, are hereby required to keep the same securely covered and locked, and all
irrigation ditches that shall hereafter be constructed within said platted portion of the city, shall be covered and all persons using or maintaining such ditch
or ditches are hereby required to cover same. (1960 Code)
Chapter 5
AIR GUNS, FIREARMS
6-5-1: DEFINITION:
Wherever the term "firearms" is used in this chapter, the term shall mean any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets or other harmful
objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or by the action of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs and including what are
commonly known as air rifles and BB guns. (1960 Code)
6-5-2: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon his person any brass knuckles, revolver, pistol, dagger, stiletto or other deadly weapon. (1960
Code)
6-5-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any kind or description within the limits of the municipality; provided, however, that this shall not
apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties. (1960 Code)
6-5-4: EXCEPTIONS; PERMITS:
The governing body may at any time, upon receipt of proper application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs and others for shooting in fixed
localities and under specified rules. Such permits shall be in writing attested by the clerk conforming to such requirements as the governing body shall
demand, and the permit thus issued shall be subject to revocation at any time by action of the governing body. (1960 Code)
Chapter 6
CURFEW
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 53/151
6-6-1: PROHIBITED HOURS FOR MINORS ON STREETS:
The purpose of this curfew chapter is to provide for the physical and psychological well being of persons under the age of eighteen (18) years of age and
to provide order and promote the safety and welfare of the residents of the city of American Falls, Idaho.
(A) It is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor for any person under sixteen (16) years of age to be present in any public place or be on the streets, alleys,
or public grounds within the municipality between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., subject to the provisions as detailed
in subsection (C) of this section.
(B) It is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor for any person from the age of sixteen (16) years of age to the age of eighteen (18) years of age, to be
present in any public place or be on the streets, alleys, or public grounds within the municipality between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., subject to the provisions as detailed in subsection (C) of this section.
(C) The provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall not apply in the following instances:
1. When such person is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such person;
2. When such person is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of
such person;
3. When such person has written permission from his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such person
so as to be abroad at such time, provided that any written permission shall be for the specific date and any blanket permission shall be considered as
no permission;
4. When such person is traveling directly to or returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above referenced
places during the prescribed period of time;
5. When such person is traveling directly to or returning directly home from a school or religious activity; or
6. When such person is attending or traveling directly to or directly home from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion. (Ord. 602, 1-19-2011)
6-6-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS AND GUARDIANS:
Any parent or parents, guardian or other person having the custody of any minor, as defined in section 6-6-1 of this section, permitting, allowing or abetting
said minor or minors to violate section 6-6-1 of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of contributing to the delinquency of said minor. The finding that said
minor has violated the said section shall be presumptive proof of the contributing to the delinquency of said minor or minors by said parent or guardian or
other person having the control of said minors. (1960 Code)
6-6-3: PRESUMPTION OF PRESENCE ON STREETS:
The finding of any minor upon the streets, alleys or other public places within the city in violation hereof shall be presumptive proof that the said minor is a
juvenile delinquent and disorderly person, and said minor shall be, by the arresting officer, immediately turned over to the custody of the juvenile court of
the county for proceedings against said minor. (1960 Code)
Chapter 7
NOTICE POSTED WHEN FUMIGATING
6-7-1: NOTICE POSTED WHEN FUMIGATING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fumigate any dwelling, room, rooms or building within the city without first having posted notices, plainly visible from
the outside, on all outside doors of such dwellings, room, rooms or building. Such notices to give warning that fumigation is under process within and to
give information as to the nature of the fumigant being used. (1960 Code)
6-7-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before undertaking fumigating as in this chapter described it is hereby required that a permit be obtained from the clerk for such fumigating. (1960 Code)
Chapter 8
ABANDONED CONTAINERS
6-8-1: UNLAWFUL ACT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 54/151
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
container which has a door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door or lid,
snaplock or other locking device. (1960 Code)
Chapter 9
PLASTIC BAGS OR COVERINGS
6-9-1: DEFINITION:
The words "plastic coverings", "plastic bags" or "plastic package" when used in this chapter shall mean any covering, package or bag made of plastic
material sufficiently thin and pliable to respond to static electricity created by contact with the human body to the extent that it clings to the human skin or
body. (1960 Code)
6-9-2: WARNING REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, or to deliver as a cover or wrapper, any plastic bag that is of sufficient size to fit over a child's
head or any bag which, when open, has an opening larger than twenty five (25) square inches or a capacity of more than one hundred twenty five (125)
cubic inches, unless there is at all times clearly printed on such bag or covering, or on a paper attached to such bag or covering, words in letters at least
one-fourth inch (1/4") high as follows:
WARNING: To avoid danger of suffocation, keep this bag (or covering) away from babies and children. Do not use in cribs, beds, carriages or play pens.
This is not a toy.
(1960 Code)
6-9-3: CERTAIN BAGS A NUISANCE:
Any plastic bag, covering or package not carrying or accompanied by the printed warning as provided in section 6-9-2 of this chapter is hereby declared a
nuisance. (1960 Code)
Chapter 10
ABANDONED VEHICLES OR PERSONAL PROPERTY
6-10-1: PREVENTION OF VEHICULAR NUISANCES:
The streets of the city are available for use by persons for vehicular travel and may also be used for short term and long term parking of legally registered,
operating vehicles; provided, that the vehicles are parked in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and of the provisions set forth in title 10,
chapters 1 and 4 of this code. The use of the streets to park abandoned, inoperative, unauthorized, uninsured or unregistered vehicles is inimical to the
well being of the citizens of the city and constitutes a public nuisance. The long term presence of inoperative, partially dismantled, junk, unregistered or
unlicensed vehicles on private property in the city is also inimical to the well being of the citizens of the city and constitutes a public nuisance. This chapter
is intended to provide measures for removal of such vehicles from locations prohibited herein. (Ord. 569, 3-3-2004)
6-10-2: UNLAWFUL ACTS AND AUTHORIZED ACTS:
(A) No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
(B) No person shall leave any unlicensed, uninsured or unregistered, or partially dismantled, or nonoperating, or wrecked or junked vehicle for a longer
time than forty eight (48) hours, on any street or right of way within the city.
(C) A vehicle that is registered, insured and operable may be considered abandoned if parked or stored on a street or legal right of way for a period
exceeding seventy two (72) hours.
Slight movement back and forth of the vehicle does not constitute a compliance with the seventy two (72) hours restriction.
(D) 1. Any reported vehicle violating this section shall first receive a warning notice of violation. Any vehicle not moved with twenty four (24) hours after
placement of the warning notice shall be cited for a parking infraction. Any vehicle not moved within seventy two (72) hours of receipt or placement of
theparking citation shall be towed at the direction of the police department.
2. The cost of removal and storage of the vehicle will be charged to the owner of the vehicle and/or the person causing the violation.
(E) No person in charge or control of any private property within the city whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow more than
one unlicensed, or unregistered vehicle on any private property, unless the same is in an enclosed building, or is located on the premises of a business
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 55/151
enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner and provided said vehicles are necessary to the operation of such business enterprise.
(F) No person in charge or control of any private property within the city whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow or leave any
partially dismantled, or nonoperating, or wrecked, or junked or discarded vehicle on private property within the city for a longer time than forty eight (48)
hours, except the same is in an enclosed building, or located on the premises of a commercial business enterprise operated in a lawful place and
manner, and provided said vehicles are necessary to the operation of such business enterprise.
(G) The term "vehicle" as used in this section is not to include recreational vehicles such as snow machines, motorcycles, golf carts, boats, campers and
motor homes unless these recreational vehicles are partially dismantled, or nonoperating, or wrecked, or junked, or discarded.
(H) No person in charge or control of any property within the city whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise shall allow any recreational
vehicles i.e., snow machines, motorcycles, golf carts, boats, campers and/or motor homes, to be parked upon any city street or city right of way during
the off season of said recreational vehicle.
"Off season" shall be defined to be the summer season for snow machines and the winter season for all other listed recreational vehicles.
1. "Winter season" shall further be defined as November 1 through March 1.
2. "Summer season" shall further be defined as March 2 through October 31.
(I) No person in charge or control of any property within the city whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any utility trailer to
remain upon any city street or city right of way for more than forty eight (48) hours. (Ord. 569, 3-3-2004)
6-10-3: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
The police department of the city is hereby authorized in its discretion to see to the removal and subsequent handling of any vehicle found unlawfully on a
city street or right of way or private property within the city in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 18, title 49, Idaho Code, as presently
adopted or subsequently amended by the legislature of the state. (Ord. 569, 3-3-2004)
6-10-4: PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBILITY FOR PARKING VIOLATION:
If a vehicle is stopped, standing, or parked in violation of this chapter, the person in whose name the vehicle is registered in this state or another state at
the time of the violation is prima facie responsible for that violation and subject to the fines and costs hereunder. (Ord. 569, 3-3-2004)
Chapter 11
OPERATION OF NONLICENSED MOTORIZED DEVICES
6-11-1: DEFINITIONS: As used in this chapter:
NONLICENSED MOTORIZED DEVICE: A steerable self-propelled vehicle with rubber tires, and shall specifically include golf carts and self-propelled lawn
mowers.
OPERATE: To control the operation of a nonlicensed motorized device.
OPERATOR: A person who operates or is in actual control of a nonlicensed motorized device.
PUBLIC STREET: Street, road, alleyway, or other public thoroughfare within the city limits. (Ord. 448, 9-19-1990)
6-11-2: PROHIBITED ACTS DESIGNATED:
(A) It is unlawful for any person to operate a nonlicensed motorized device within the city limits of the city under the following circumstances:
1. On private property of another without the express permission to do so by the owner or occupant of said property;
2. On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational areas and golf courses without express provision or permission to do so by the
proper public authority;
3. Within the right of way of any public street unless the operator has a valid driver's license issued by the state and has said driver's license in his
possession at the time of operating the device;
4. At a rate of speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour;
5. Upon any public street, except as provided herein, said devices are not allowed to be on any portions of the followingpublic streets other than to
cross them in accordance with the provisions of subsection (A)8 of this section:
Fort Hall Avenue
Harrison Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 56/151
Idaho Street
Lincoln Street
Pocatello Avenue
Said devices will be permitted on all other public streets in the city, provided they otherwise comply with the provisions hereof, and provided they
operate said devices on the extreme right side of said roadways and as far as possible outside of the normal traveled area of the street;
6. Prior to one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise or later than one-half (1/2) hour before sunset;
7. Upon any public sidewalk or walkway;
8. Across any public street, except by a most direct route, this being at right angles to the side boundaries thereof;
9. With more than two (2) persons, including the operator, on said machine. (Ord. 448, 9-19-1990)
6-11-3: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
All nonlicensed motorized devices operated within the city shall have the following equipment:
(A) Manufacturer's stock grade mufflers, or equivalent, which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of operation of the vehicle within noise
level requirements of the laws of the state, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device on said vehicle.
(B) Adequate brakes in good working order.
(C) A slow moving vehicle sign attached to the rear of said nonlicensed motorized device sized and located in accordance with applicable state law. (Ord.
448, 9-19-1990)
6-11-4: LEAVING UNATTENDED PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a nonlicensed motorized device to be or remain unattended on public property while the motor is
running or with keys for starting the vehicle left in the ignition. (Ord. 448, 9-19-1990)
6-11-5: YIELDING RIGHT OF WAY REQUIRED:
Nonlicensed motorized devices must yield right of way to allmotor vehicles licensed by the state for operation upon public highways, including, but not
limited to, the ingress and egress of the same to and from private property. (Ord. 448, 9-19-1990)
6-11-6: EXCEPTIONS FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The provisions hereof shall not apply to police officers in the performance of their duty. (Ord. 448, 9-19-1990)
6-11-7: FURTHER RESTRICTIONS AUTHORIZED:
The city council may, by resolution, further restrict or prohibit the operation of nonmotorized vehicles upon the public street or other public property within
the city and may restrict, extend, or change the public streets upon which nonlicensed motorized devices' operation may take place when, in their opinion,
the public safety and welfare so requires. (Ord. 448, 9-19-1990)
6-11-8: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS REQUIRED:
Each person operating a nonlicensed motorized device within the city shall strictly observe all traffic signs and signals and all other traffic rules and
regulations of the state, county, and/or city in addition to those rules and regulations set forth in this chapter and shall obey the orders and directions of any
peace officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic. (Ord. 448, 9-19-1990)
6-11-9: EXCEPTION FOR PARADES:
The provisions hereof shall not apply to the operation of said devices during any official police escorted parades in the city. (Ord. 448, 9-19-1990)
Title 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 57/151
7-1-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
For the purpose of regulating and governing conditions hazardous to life or property from fire, the several volumes of the national fire prevention codes
compiled and published by the National Fire Prevention Association together with such changes and amendments as may be hereafter published by the
association, are hereby adopted. Three (3) copies of said codes shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the clerk. (Ord. 363, 6-20-1979)
7-1-2: FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS:
The limits referred to in section 16.22a of the fire prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are
hereby established as follows:
All residence zones. (Ord. 235, 9-1-1965)
Chapter 2
FIREWORKS
7-2-1: FIREWORKS DEFINED:
"Fireworks" shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, fire balloons, balloons of a type
which have burning material of any kind attached thereto or which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets,
Roman candles, fountain wheels, dago bombs, sparklers, and other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any combustible or
explosive substances for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, explosion or detonation.
Exempted from this section are all toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes and toy guns and similar devices such as party poppers or party favors in which
paper caps containing not more than twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain of explosive compound per cap are used and such caps whether single, roll or
tape type and model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling of recoverable aero model rockets. (Ord.
251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-2: DANGEROUS FIREWORKS:
"Dangerous fireworks" include any of the following:
(A) Firecrackers, cannon crackers, giant crackers, salutes, silver type salutes, cherry bombs, mines, ground bombardment, grasshoppers and other
explosive articles of similar nature;
(B) Blank cartridges;
(C) Skyrockets and rockets, including all similar devices employing any combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge;
(D) Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire into the air;
(E) Chasers and whistles, including all devices which dart or travel about the surface of the ground during discharge;
(F) Snakes and hats containing bichloride of mercury;
(G) Sparklers more than ten inches (10") in length or one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter or made with other than iron wires;
(H) All articles for pyrotechnic display such as aerial shells, salutes, flash shells, sky battles, parachute shells, wines, dago bombs and similar devices;
(I) All torpedoes which explode by means of friction, or which contain arsenic, and all other similar fireworks devices including cracker balls;
(J) Fire balloons or balloons of any type which have burning material of any kind attached thereto. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-3: SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS:
"Safe and sane fireworks" include any of the following:
(A) Cone fountains with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding fifty (50) grams each;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 58/151
(B) Cylindrical fountains, whether base, spike or handle, with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding seventy five (75) grams each and inside tube
diameter not exceeding three-fourths inch (3/4");
(C) Sparklers and "dipped sticks" not more than ten inches (10") in length or one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter made on steel or iron wire and Suziki and
morning glories with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding four (4) grams each;
(D) Snakes which do not contain bichloride of mercury and pyrotechnic composition not exceeding two (2) grams each;
(E) Wheels with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding sixty (60) grains for each driver unit or two hundred forty (240) grains for each complete wheel.
The inside tube diameter of drive unit shall not exceed one-half inch (1/2");
(F) Whistles, without report and which do not dart or travel about the ground during discharge with pyrotechnic compositionnot exceeding six (6) grams
and containing no picric or gallic acid. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-4: DANGEROUS FIREWORKS PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to import, export, offer for sale, sell, possess, keep or store or permit the keeping or storing of any "dangerous
fireworks" for any use or purpose, except that a person holding a dangerous fireworks permit issued pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter
may use "dangerous fireworks" for a safely supervised and conducted public display of fireworks. Said fireworks may be stored for a period not exceeding
ten (10) days immediately preceding the date of said public display, provided the fireworks are to be used exclusively for the public display. (Ord. 251, 5-3-
1967)
7-2-5: SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS PERMIT:
No person without having a valid safe and sane fireworks permit issued pursuant to terms and conditions set forth in this chapter shall import, export,
possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, or sell any "safe and sane fireworks" for any use or purpose. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-6: APPLICATION FOR SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS PERMIT:
Any reputable person in reasonable pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal, business, or charitable purpose, desiring to engage in the sale of
"safe and sane fireworks" within the city shall first make written application to the clerk for a safe and sane fireworks permit. Each applicant shall pay to the
clerk a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) at the time he files his application. In the event no safe and sane fireworks permit is issued by the city by June 15 in the
year during which the application is made the clerk shall refund the application fee. At the time and as a condition of such filing, and with each application,
each applicant shall pay an additional fee to defray costs of preliminary investigations required hereunder and to be conducted by the said city, which fee
shall be eighteen dollars fifty cents ($18.50) per site applied for, and shall not be refundable in any event. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-7: APPLICATION FOR DANGEROUS FIREWORKS PERMIT:
Any reputable person in reasonable pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal, business, or charitable purpose, desiring to make a public display of
"dangerous fireworks" shall first make written application to the clerk for a dangerous fireworks permit. Each applicant shall pay to the clerk a fee of ten
dollars ($10.00) at the time he files his application. In the event no dangerous fireworks permit is issued by the city by June15 in the year during which the
application is made, the clerk shall refund the application fee. At the time and as a condition of such filing, and with each application, each applicant shall
pay an additional fee to defray costs of preliminary investigations required hereunder and to be conducted by the said city, which fee shall be eighteen
dollars fifty cents ($18.50) per site applied for, and shall not be refundable in any event. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-8: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit or a dangerous fireworks permit shall file his application with the clerk. Each application shall show the
following:
(A) Name and address of applicant.
(B) The purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for which it was organized.
(C) The names and addresses of the officers, trustees, and/or directors, if any, of the applicant.
(D) The location where the applicant requests permission to sell "safe and sane fireworks" or display "dangerous fireworks".
(E) When and where the applicant was organized and established, or, if a natural person, the applicant's age.
(F) The location of the applicant's principal and permanent meeting place or places, or principal place or places of business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 59/151
(G) The applicant's state sales tax permit number.
(H) If the applicant is an entity other than a sole proprietorship, the name and general description of the business activities of each parent or subsidiary
company, business or entity, and a general description of the ownership organization of each person or subsidiary, if any.
(I) Such other information as the clerk may require on a standard form submitted to all applicants and which is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety and morals. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-9: INVESTIGATION:
The clerk shall cause an investigation to be made of each application and applicant and shall submit a written report of his findings and recommendations
for or against the issuance of the permit, together with his reasons therefor, to the council, which report shall not be public information except on request of
the applicant or by order of the council. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-10: COUNCIL POWERS:
The council shall have the power in its discretion to grant or deny any application, subject to such reasonable conditions, if any, as it shall prescribe so
long as the denial of the application or any conditions imposed on the granting of the application are reasonably necessary for protection of the public
health, safety and morals. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-11: VALIDITY; TERM:
A safe and sane fireworks permit, or a dangerous fireworks permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only within the calendar year in which
issued. A permit shall be valid only for the specific premises or location designated in the permit. However, subject to reasonable conditions necessary for
protection of the public health, safety and morals, an applicant may be granted permits for more than one premises or location within the city. No permit
shall be transferable or assignable. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-12: APPLICATION TO BE FILED WITH CLERK:
Each application for a permit to sell "safe and sane fireworks" at retail shall be filed with the clerk on or before April 1, of the calendar year for which the
permit is sought; except that for the calendar year of 1967, applications for a permit may be filed on or before June 1, 1967. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-13: LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit or for a dangerous fireworks permit, shall have filed with the clerk prior to the issuance and validity of
any permit, a policy, or certified true copy thereof, of a public liability and products liability insurance, including both "accident" and "occurrence" coverage.
The insurance coverage limits for both public liability coverage and for products liability coverage shall be at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per person per occurrence, bodily injury three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence aggregate bodily injury, and one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence aggregate property damage. Each policy of insurance shall be in form and substance acceptable
to the city, and shall name as insured parties under the terms of the policy the city, all officials, elected and appointed in performance of official functions
regarding all operations under or pertaining to said permit, any licensee or licensor of the applicant, and all vendors of the fireworks covered by the permit
to be issued to the applicant. Said policy of insurance shall be so written that it cannot be cancelled without at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the
city from the underwriting insurance company. The dulylicensed insurance company or companies doing or authorized to do insurance business in Idaho,
and a copy of said policy shall be filed with the clerk prior to the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-14: SALE PERIOD RESTRICTED:
No "safe and sane fireworks" shall be sold or offered for sale except from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on June 26 to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on July
26 of each year. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-15: TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STANDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, possess, keep or store, or permit the keeping or storing of any fireworks in any permanent building
or structure, nor in any other place within the city except in temporary fireworks stands as hereinafter described.
Temporary fireworks stands from which fireworks are to be sold shall be subject to the following provisions:
(A) All retail sales for fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building or structure is hereby
prohibited.
(B) The stand in which the fireworks will be stored or sold shall not be located within twenty five feet (25') of any other building or within one hundred feet
(100') of any gasoline station or flammable liquid dispensing device or installation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 60/151
(C) All such stands shall meet the requirements of the building code of the city and all lighting circuits and other electrical equipment shall meet the
requirements of the electrical code of the city.
(D) The stand shall have exit doors at least thirty inches (30") wide at both ends of the structure and one additional door for each twenty five feet (25') of
rear wall in excess of twenty five feet (25'). All doors shall open outward from the stand and all doorways shall be kept free and clear from all supplies
and materials at all times.
(E) Each stand shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) 21/2-gallon water type fire extinguishers, in good working order and easily accessible for use in
case of fire, which shall be kept in immediate proximity to the location where the fireworks are retailed.
(F) There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty one (21) years of age or older, on duty at all times. All fireworks shall be effectively kept away from any
kind of self-service by the public, and shall be placed in a location which is unavailableand inaccessible to members of the public in capacities other
than as legal customers. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall work at or about any stand where fireworks are sold or offered for sale.
(G) No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside of any stand when it is not open for business.
(H) "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed both inside and outside the stands. No smoking shall be permitted within the stand or within twenty
five feet (25') of the stand.
(I) No temporary stand shall be erected before June 10 of any year. The premises on which the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and
debris, not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of July 26.
(J) No fireworks shall be discharged in or within twenty five feet (25') of any fireworks stand.
(K) No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any fireworks stand or permit a fire nuisance to exist.
(L) No fireworks shall remain unattended at any time regardless of whether the fireworks stand is open for business or not. If any fireworks are stored, they
shall only be stored at such places as are approved for storage of fireworks by the city fire chief or his representative.
(M) No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-16: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
Each permittee shall be required to retain at the licensed premises while said premises are open, and at the principal place of business for a year
thereafter, copies of all invoices, receipts and orders evidencing the source from which he acquired the fireworks which he handled. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-17: BOND OR DEPOSIT:
In those cases where the applicant conducts the sale of fireworks from a temporary fireworks stand, he shall post with the clerk a cash bond or cash
deposit in the amount of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or such other security as may be acceptable to the mayor or council conditioned upon the
prompt removal of the temporary fireworks stand and the cleaning up of debris from the site of the temporary fireworks stand, which deposit or security
shall be returned to the applicant only in the event he removes said temporary fireworks stand and cleans up all debris to the satisfaction of the city fire
chief, or such other official as the council or fire chief may designate. In the event of the applicant's failure to remove the stand and the debris, said
cashbond or cash deposit shall be forfeited to the city. In no event shall the applicant be entitled to the return of said cash bond or cash deposit if he has
failed to remove said temporary fireworks stand and clean up all debris by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of July 26 of any year. It shall be the legal duty of
each permittee to clear such sites and remove all debris therefrom on or before July 26 of the year in which the permit is granted, and failure to do so shall
be punishable by a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine and/or thirty (30) days' confinement in the city jail. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
7-2-18: COMPLIANCE; VIOLATION:
It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks permit to comply with all the provisions of the Idaho state fireworks act and this chapter. The
conviction of violation of the aforesaid Idaho state fireworks act or any of the provisions of this chapter by the permittee, or any of its agents, employees, or
officers shall constitute a cause, in and of itself, to deny any subsequent application for a permit. (Ord. 251, 5-3-1967)
Chapter 3
EXPLOSIVES
7-3-1: EXPLOSIVES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, keep or transport any gunpowder, nitroglycerin or other highly explosive substance within the limits of the city.
(1960 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 61/151
7-3-2: EXCEPTION PERMITTED:
A vehicle carrying explosives may be permitted on the streets of the city only if a special written permit has first been obtained from the chief of police;
such permit shall specify the exact route to be used by said vehicle and may permit the vehicle to be parked at a certain specified place for a certain
specified amount of time. Each such permit shall be valid only for the one specified use. (1960 Code)
Title 8
PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 1
PUBLIC SERVICES GENERAL REGULATIONS
8-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to:
(A) Establish reasonable rules and regulations for the operation of the water, sewer, and sanitation departments of the city.
(B) Establish reasonable fees to be charged to customers receiving water, sewer or sanitation service and provide fair, orderly and efficient procedures for
collection and termination of delinquent accounts.
(C) Establish a fair and equitable means of having persons who hook into and receive a direct and immediate benefit from existing water and sewer mains
by requiring them to participate in the capital cost of water mains fronting upon their property and which have been constructed from revenues derived
from the operation of the water and sewer systems.
(D) Establish a fair and equitable charge for the actual cost of materials and labor expended by the city whenever the city crews install water service for a
customer.
(E) Protect the public health and welfare by controlling cross connections or other sources or potential sources of contamination to the city water supply; to
prevent the introduction of pollutants into the American Falls wastewater system which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge; to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the American Falls wastewatersystem which do not receive adequate
treatment in the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and which will pass throughout the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(F) Provide a clean, efficient and adequate water system; sewer collection and treatment system; and garbage collection system for the residents of the
city. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The following definitions apply to all sections of this title:
AUTHORITY: The city of American Falls.
CITY: The mayor and city council of the city of American Falls, Idaho.
CITY CODE: As defined in section 1-1-1 of this code.
CITY INSPECTOR: The person designated by the city.
CITY STANDARDS: The Idaho standards for public works construction, as amended, unless otherwise indicated by the city.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
OWNER: A person owning real estate which is, or proposes to be, connected to the water or wastewater system, or using the garbage collection system.
PWD: Public works director.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
PURVEYOR: The city of American Falls or its authorized agent.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 62/151
USER: A person using the water; wastewater; or garbage collection system. This is synonymous with "owner". (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-3: SYSTEM MANAGEMENT GENERALLY:
The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter are established for the management of the municipal water system; the municipal sewer collection;
wastewater treatment system; and the garbage and refuse collection system of the city. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-4: PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
The public works director shall oversee and superintend the planning, operation and maintenance of the municipal water system; the municipal sewer
collection; wastewater treatment system; and the garbage and refuse collection system of the city, the making of repairs of all kinds, the construction of all
extensions and additions and all construction work of whatever nature whatsoever in connection with the present water system; sewer collection system;
wastewater treatment facility; and the garbage and refuse collection system; and any new system that may be established.
The public works director shall be subject at all times to the direction and authority of the city council. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-5: RECORD KEEPING AND FUNDS:
The city clerk-treasurer shall collect and receive all monies payable, pursuant to law, by patrons of the city water, sewer, and garbage departments. The
city clerk-treasurer shall keep full and complete records of all such monies received, the date and from whom received and shall also keep accurate and
complete account of all disbursements showing the date and amount thereof, the person to whom paid, and upon what account. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-6: SERVICE APPLICATIONS:
All applications for water, sewer, and garbage service shall be made at city hall, and shall be made by the owner of the property to be served, or by his
duly authorized agent.
When water and sewer service connections have been installed, application for water and sewer service shall be made either by the owner, or his duly
authorized agent. If the property to be served is a rental, the owner may have the billing submitted in the renter's name by completing an owner's consent
form. This form authorizes the billing to be sent to the renter, but notifies the owner that he is still responsible for nonpayment of the billing.
The city shall turn on or shut off the water services only at the request of the owner of the property, or owner's agent asdesignated in writing by the owner.
(Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-7: DIGGING PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall dig or excavate in any street or alley or under the sidewalk for the purpose of laying, removing, or repairing any water or sewer line, or for
any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit.
As a prerequisite to the issuing of such permit, the city clerk-treasurer, after notice to the building department, street department and sewer department,
shall require a fee in an amount to be set by the city council and a refundable fee, bond or undertaking from the applicant in such form as required by the
city council, which said refundable fee, bond or undertaking shall be to guarantee that the street or alley be returned to its former condition within a
reasonable time after the digging or excavation permitted by the permit.
The deposit will be refunded by the city clerk upon inspection and approval by the street superintendent. (Ord. 581, 8-16-2006)
8-1-8: WATER, SEWER, GARBAGE COLLECTION RATES:
The schedule of rates, fees and charges for water, sewer, and garbage collection shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. Copies of
all resolutions subsequently passed by the city council pursuant to this section shall be kept on file and made available in the office of the city clerktreasurer.
(Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-9: BILLING PROCEDURES:
(A) All services shall be billed on a monthly basis. The billing period for water, sewer and garbage collection service shall extend from the first to the last
day of each calendar month. Services will be billed in advance and no deposit will be required. Water, sewer, and garbage collection bills shall be
combined and billed monthly. The bill becomes past due on the sixteenth day of the calendar month in which it was issued.
(B) For purposes of this section, "owner" shall mean any person or entity who holds legal or equitable title to the property. For purposes of this section,
"occupant" shall mean a person or entity who is physically in possession of the property and is legally responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of
the same, including, but not limited to, the head of any extended family residing thereon.
(C) The owner of each building connected to the water supply of the city and/or the sewage collection system or utilizingthe garbage collection system of
the city shall be responsible and legally liable for the payment of all water, sewer, and garbage collection charges assessed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 63/151
(D) Pursuant to arrangements with the owner, a tenant of said owner may pay such charges and reduce the owner's liability by the amount of any such
payment. Acceptance by the city of such payment from a tenant shall not constitute a waiver by the city of the owner's liability for any charges not paid
by the tenant.
(E) If a building has more than one residential tenant or business utilizing space in the building, then the owner of the building shall be responsible and
legally liable for the payment of the total utility charges for all tenants in the building. The charge to be levied upon the owner shall be computed as
follows: the base fee for the building shall be the fee established for the heaviest water user tenant located in the building. For each additional tenant
without separate water service the owner shall be billed one-half (1/2) of the minimum water rate established for that type of business. If a tenant has a
separate water service, the owner will be billed the full amount established for that type of business. Sewer service fees and garbage collection fees
shall be as set by resolution.
(F) Multi-units shall be billed in full each month with credit memos given for vacancies only if the amount due is paid in full by the end of the current month.
(G) A full billing will be charged for water, sewer and garbage collection services unless the water is shut off at the city valve by city personnel only. If the
water is turned on, the owner shall not have the option to be exempt from the garbage collection service fee regardless of whether or not the owner is
utilizing the service. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-10: WHEN PAYABLE:
Bills shall be due and payable on the date mailed and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid within fifteen (15) days following the mailing date. Water or
sewer or garbage collection service, any or all, shall be discontinued if payments are more than thirty (30) days' delinquent. A delinquency charge in an
amount to be established by resolution shall be added to each delinquent bill for each certified mailing or personal service provided to said user, to defray
the costs of the city in sending out such notices.
A fee shall also be assessed for all returned checks given to the city for payment of bills as established by resolution.
Upon disconnection of either a water or sewer connection for nonpayment of bills, a reconnection charge shall be assessed in an amount to be established
by resolution. (Ord. 515,1-7-1998)
8-1-11: NOTICE OF DELINQUENCIES AND HEARING PROCEDURES:
If the bill has not been fully paid by the fifteenth day of the month after which it was issued, the same shall become delinquent and a written notice of the
delinquency and impending termination of water service shall be mailed to the premises. The written notice shall be served or mailed at least seven (7)
days prior to suspending service. Such notice shall state the date on which service is to be suspended and the right to request in writing a pretermination
hearing. This hearing will be held before the city council, who shall have the power to review disputed bills and rectify errors in the billing; provided said
written request is received by the city clerk-treasurer at least one day prior to the proposed suspension date.
Upon receipt of such timely request, the city council shall give written notice to the party requesting the hearing as to the date, time and place of said
hearing, which hearing will be held not sooner than five (5) days from the date of the request.
The city council shall make a record of any pretermination hearing and shall, within ten (10) days of the hearing, render a decision in writing, giving
reasons for the determination. (Ord. 551, 12-6-2000)
8-1-12: TERMINATION OF SERVICE:
If a request for a pretermination hearing is not made within ten (10) days after the written notice provided for herein is mailed to the premises, or if an
adverse decision is rendered against the party requesting the hearing, the city shall immediately thereafter suspend water, garbage collection and sewer
service, unless satisfactory payment arrangements are made. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-13: RESTORATION OF SERVICE:
In the event that water, garbage collection, and sewer service has been terminated, the same shall be restored only upon the payment of any past due
amounts still owing upon the utility bill, plus a reconnection charge for water and sewer service. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-14: TURNON FEES FOR WATER SERVICE:
Except for the reconnection charge, provided for in section 8-1-13 of this chapter, there shall be no turn on/off fee for water service where arrangements
are made to have serviceturned on or off during the regular workweek (Monday through Friday) between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
P.M., except for legal holidays.
In the event water service is turned on or off at any other time at the property owner's request, or in the cases of an emergency due to broken water lines,
etc., there shall be imposed, in addition to other fees required by this title and chapter, an after hours service charge, as established by resolution. (Ord.
515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-15: PAYMENT OF PAST DUE ACCOUNTS:
At the time of application for water, sewer, or garbage collection service, or of application for restoration of the same, and prior to the commencement or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 64/151
restoration of such service, the owner or occupant of any lot, property, building or residence for which such service is requested shall pay to the city any
and all past due amounts for water, sewer, or garbage collection service to the city, by such owner or occupant, whether such past due amounts are
attributable to the property for which service is now sought or are attributable to other property in the city currently or previously owned or occupied by the
applicant. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-16: WATER TURNOFF OR TURNON RESTRICTIONS:
Any water connection valve may be turned off for nonpayment of service or at any such time that an authorized city representative determines that a
health or safety hazard exists. The service will remain off until payment is made in full or the hazard is remedied by the property owner.
The city reserves the right, at any time, without notice, to shut off the water supply for repairs, extensions, or in other cases of necessity; and the city shall
not be responsible for any damage such as bursting of boilers supplied by direct pressure, the breaking of any pipes or fixtures, stoppage or interruption of
water supply, or any other damage resulting from the shutting off of water.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, entity, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity to turn "on" or "off" or otherwise tamper with any
city water connection valve that has been turned off by city officials.
(B) It shall also be unlawful for any person to accept the benefit of availability of city water service that has been previously turned off by the city.
(C) At any time any city water connection valve is turned off, for nonpayment or any other code violation, a written "notice of turnoff" shall be affixed to the
curb stand. Said noticeshall also set out the provisions hereof relative to criminal sanctions for violations thereof. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-1-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title, or the rules and
regulations as adopted by the purveyor, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall for each offense be punished by a
fine, or imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment as established by title 1, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
Chapter 2
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM
8-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth uniform requirements for users of the American Falls water system and to enable the city to protect public health
in conformity with all applicable state and federal laws pertaining thereto. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
All general definitions1 shall apply to this chapter along with the following definitions which are specific to the water system:
BACKFLOW/BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow other than in the intended direction of flow, of any nonpotable waters, foreign liquids, gases or harmful or
offensive substances into the city water supply as a result of reduced or reversed pressure.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device which, when properly installed between the city water supply system and the terminus of the customer's
water line or point of ultimate use, will prevent backflow/back siphonage.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a public water supply of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of water.
CORPORATION STOP: The valve located on city main to which service line connects.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system,
sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste
or liquids of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of introducing contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow.
CURB STOP: The valve on the water service line, owned by the city and located near the customer's property line.
CUSTOMER LINE: The pipe, valves and fittings leading from the curb stop into the premises served, including the water meter (if applicable) attached
thereto.
METER: A water meter and its enclosure, valve and related appurtenances.
METER BOX: The enclosure in which the water meter is installed, located at or near the property line.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: Any system or water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic uses, including source, treatment,
storage, transmission, distribution facilities, where water is furnished to any collection or number of individuals, or is made available to the public for human
consumption or domestic use.
VALVE BOX: The enclosure that fits over a buried valve through which a turn key fits that allows the valve to be operated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 65/151
WATER MAIN: The publicly owned water pipe laid in a street, road, alley or easement.
WATER SERVICE LINE: The water pipe, valves and fittings laid from the main to the curb stop. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-3: SEPARATE WATER CONNECTION REQUIRED:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial unit to be constructed or placed upon a lot within the city from and after the date hereof that does
not have its own separate water connection.
(B) Each property capable of title transfer and each residence located on any one property shall be considered as an individual consumer, and each
individual consumer shall besupplied through a separate service connection; provided, however, that in case of duplexes or apartments not being
capable of separate title transfer, the owner thereof may, nevertheless, by arrangement with the water department, provide for said property multiple
service connections, to serve each of the various apartments located thereon.
(C) All buildings, although joined together by party wall or similar attachments, if capable of separate title transfer, shall have for each divisible part thereof,
separate service connections.
(D) Where water through one service is furnished to two (2) or more residences or buildings occupied by different families on acreage property capable of
subdivision and transfer by proper title in fee simple, the plumbing thereon shall be arranged so that each divisible part thereof shall have its own
separate service connection.
(E) No new connection of residential or commercial units or buildings will be permitted onto the city water system until this requirement is met. (Ord. 515,
1-7-1998)
8-2-4: WATER SERVICE LINE INSTALLATION AND CHARGES:
Within a platted subdivision, a private contractor hired by the customer shall install the water service line between the main line and the curb stop, valve
box and meter box, subject to acceptance by the city as required by the American Falls development code2.
All other water service lines between the main line and the curb stop shall be installed by the city.
Whenever a water service line is installed by the city, the charges for labor and materials shall be established and modified from time to time by resolution
of the city council and shall be paid by the owner of the property. The water service line installation fee shall include the cost of pipe desired and general
conditions of the installation plus fifteen percent (15%) for overhead charges. Charges for the costs for boring, blasting or unusual rock removal shall also
be added to the charge to the customer. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-5: WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION FEE:
This section establishes an equitable system of charging new customers for the impact or burden created whenever they enlarge an existing water service
or connect a new water service to the existing wells, storage tanks, pumps, outbuildings, and appurtenances of the city water system, allof which were
funded from revenues of the city water system. The city recognizes the inherent inequity of requiring existing customers to bear the entire cost of acquiring
or building new facilities, or of utilizing excess capacity with existing facilities, in order to meet the needs of such new development.
The council hereby finds and recognizes the relationship between the nature of the uses of property and the impact thereof upon the city water system.
The council also finds that customers who connect to a water main located adjacent to their property receive a direct benefit from such water mains, which
benefit is directly proportional to the frontage of the water main along their property. The council further finds that it is fair and equitable to charge a main
construction fee for customers who connect to such mains in order to fund a portion of the cost incurred by the city in installing such mains. (Ord. 515, 1-7-
1998)
8-2-6: WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION CHARGES:
(A) All persons desiring to connect to any water main which is constructed, following the effective date of this title, in whole or in part, at city expense shall
pay a water main construction fee. This fee shall be established and modified from time to time by resolution of the city council.
(B) The charges shall be calculated on a per front foot basis of property owned by such person(s) and fronting upon a street or public right of way within
which a water main is located. Such fee shall be in addition to the water service line installation fee set forth above, and does not include the costs, if
any, for boring, blasting or unusual rock removal in construction of the main. The necessary and reasonable costs for such services shall be added to
the per front foot cost.
(C) If any such property is located upon a corner or is bounded by two (2) or more streets in which a water main is located, the calculations for the fee shall
be based upon the frontage of the longest street in which water main is located.
(D) All water mains within the city shall be deemed to have been constructed in whole or in part at city expense, unless the applicant presents written
evidence conclusively demonstrating that such main was constructed entirely from private monies or was constructed entirely with funds from a state or
federal grant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 66/151
(E) This water main construction charge shall not apply to extensions of mains undertaken by the city for its own purposes where there is no pending
request for extension, such as when the city needs to make a loop in its system. Extensions are subject to available funding, and nothing herein shall
be construed to require the city to construct an extension to the system.
(F) However, the city may, in its discretion, grant permission to a developer to construct a water main entirely at his or her expense. In that event, the city
may, by written agreement, pay over to the developer all water main construction fees collected by the city from any other person who subsequently
connects to such water main within five (5) years completion of the main. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-7: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE:
All water mains and service lines shall be installed and maintained by the city. The city shall also maintain those private installations accepted by the city.
(Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-8: PERMITS AND SERVICE CONNECTION FEES:
It shall be unlawful to install, alter, or connect any water service maintained by the city without obtaining a permit from the city and paying the service line
connection fee and, if applicable, the water main construction fee. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-9: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS OUTSIDE CITY:
Water mains shall not, without the approval of the city council, be extended outside the corporate limits of the city, and unless adequate excess water is
available for such service. Such agreements shall specifically reserve the right to terminate such service without cause, at any time, upon at least thirty
(30) days' advance written notice, or as otherwise negotiated between the city and the owner of the property. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-10: BRANCH SERVICE:
No service connection serving more than one customer shall be made. Where an existing water service provides service to several customers, the city
may terminate water service until a separate service is provided at the owner's expense. If the city does not terminate service to these existing services,
the established rate shall be charged for each customer receiving service from the existing line. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-11: INCREASING SIZE OF EXISTING RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL SERVICE LINE:
The size of an existing residential or commercial service line may be increased at the request of the owner of the property. The cost of increasing the line
shall be based on the existing fee established by resolution. This will be considered a newhookup and charged accordingly. The owner of the property will
need to abandon the smaller line or pay the utility billing in full for two (2) services. The city, not the property owner, shall disconnect the smaller line if
requested. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-12: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
All design plans and specifications for the construction of public water mains shall be prepared and approved by a professional engineer, registered in the
state of Idaho, and approved by the state of Idaho department of environmental quality. All construction of water main extensions shall also conform to the
approved plans and specifications as established by the current issue of the Idaho standards for public works construction, this code, and the standards
established by the city, and shall be approved by the public works director before the city assumes any responsibility for the maintenance of the water line.
The owner or the owner's contractor shall notify the PWD one day before any excavation is begun. No trench backfill shall be placed until the city has
inspected and approved the water pipe and a city inspector is available to inspect and test the backfill material. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-13: ABANDONED SERVICE:
All service installations connected to the water system that have been abandoned or that have not been used for two (2) years or that for any reason have
become useless for further service, at the discretion of the city, shall be disconnected at the main by the water department, and all pipe and appurtenances
removed shall be the property of the city. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-14: RESPONSIBILITY FOR FROZEN PIPES AND LEAKS:
All service installations, except summer sprinkling services, shall be placed at the depth required to avoid all probability of freezing, and the water
department shall be responsible for all frozen services owned by the city, and the owners of property served shall be responsible for all other frozen
services leading to and located on the premises served, and shall pay the cost of thawing of such privately owned pipes whenever necessary.
Owners of services are responsible for all leaks or damages on account of leaks from privately owned services and privately owned water lines leading
from the property line to the premises served. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-15: WASTING WATER PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 67/151
It is unlawful for any person to waste water or allow it to be wasted by imperfect or leaking stops, valves, pipes, closets, faucets or other fixtures, or to use
toilets without self-closing valves, or unattended open hoses; or to use water in violation of this chapter regulating use of water. The wilful wasting of water
is a misdemeanor; if such waste of water continues after receiving notice from the water department to make repairs and to desist from the waste of water,
the water department shall shut off the water supply from such premises until the necessary repairs have been made. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-16: METERS:
The PWD has the option to require the installation of water meters on any existing or new water system connections. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-17: CROSS CONNECTION:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or continued in use by the purveyor unless the water supply is protected by backflow
prevention devices as may be required by this chapter. The installation or maintenance of a cross connection which will endanger the water quality of the
potable water supply of the city shall be unlawful and is prohibited. Any such cross connection now existing or hereafter installed is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance and the same shall be abated. The control or elimination of cross connections shall be in accordance with this chapter together with the
latest edition of appropriate manuals of standard practice pertaining to the cross connection control approved by the state. The PWD shall have the
authority to establish requirements more stringent than state regulations if he deems that conditions so dictate. The purveyor shall adopt rules and
regulations as necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-18: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
(A) Backflow prevention devices shall be installed at the tees on the premises or with service connection or within any premises where, in the judgment of
the purveyor, the nature and extent of the activities, or materials stored on the premises, would present an immediate, or potential, dangerous hazard
to health and/or be deleterious to the quality of water should a cross connection occur, even though such cross connection does not exist at the time
the backflow prevention devices shall be installed under circumstances including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply.
2. Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements that make it impractical to ascertain whether
or not cross connections exist.
3. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to
assure that cross connections do not exist.
4. Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
5. Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public water supply, or where a cross connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters.
6. Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled in such a way that if back siphonage should occur, a serious hazard might
result.
7. The following types of facilities will fall into the above categories and a backflow prevention device is required to protect the public water supply. A
backflow prevention device shall be installed at these facilities:
(a) Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics.
(b) Laboratories.
(c) Metal plating industries.
(d) Sewage treatment plants.
(e) Food or beverage processing plants.
(f) Chemical plants using a water process.
(g) Petroleum processing or storage plants.
(h) Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
(i) Others specified by state.
8. Other premises, as specified by the PWD, where backflow prevention devices are required to protect the public water supply.
(B) The type of protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists:
1. An air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply may be
contaminated with sewage, industrial waste of a toxic nature, or other contaminant which could cause a health or system hazard.
2. In the case of a substance which may be objectionable, but not hazardous to health, a double check valve assembly, air gap separation or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed.
(C) Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter shall be installed at the meter, at the property line of the premises when meters are not used or at
a location designated by the purveyor. The device shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, and furthermore, where
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 68/151
no part of the device will be submerged.
(D) Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter shall be installed under the supervision of and with the approval of the purveyor.
(E) Any protective device required by this chapter shall be a model approved by the PWD. A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device will be approved if it has successfully passed performance tests of the state or other testing laboratories satisfactory to the
state and the PWD. These devices shall be furnished and installed by and at the expense of the customer.
(F) Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this chapter, except atmospheric vacuum breakers, shall be inspected and tested upon installation
and annually, or more often if necessary. Inspections, tests and maintenance shall be at the customer's expense. Whenever the devices are found to
be defective, they shall be repaired or overhauled or replaced at the customer's expense. Inspections, tests, repairs and records thereof shall be
accomplished under the purveyor's supervision by state certified testers.
(G) No underground sprinkling device will be installed without adequate backflow prevention devices at the point from which the water for irrigation is taken
from the public water supply. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-2-19: INSTALLATION PERMITS:
If cross connection control device(s) is found to be necessary, the owner of the property served must apply to the city for a specific installation permit. No
cross connection control device may be installed, removed or relocated without a valid permit. A permit fee shall be established by resolution. (Ord. 515, 1-
7-1998)
8-2-20: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
In the event an improper cross connection is not corrected within the time limit set by the PWD, or, in the event the purveyor is refused access to any
property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross connections exist, delivery of water to the property shall cease until the deficiency is corrected
to the purveyor's satisfaction. In addition, the purveyor may effect the necessary repairs or modifications at the expense of the property owner and refuse
delivery of water to the property until the cost thereof shall have been paid. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
Chapter 3
MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM
8-3-1: PURPOSE:
To set forth the uniform requirements for dischargers into the city's wastewater collection and treatment systems and enabling the "authority", the city, to
protect public health in conformity with all applicable state and federal laws pertaining thereto. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
All general definitions1 shall apply to this chapter along with the following definitions which are specific to the wastewater collection and treatment system:
ASTM: American Society for Testing Material.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, city prohibitive discharge standards, city's specific limitations on discharge, the
state of Idaho pretreatment standards or the national categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever standard is most stringent, or
whichever is in effect at the time of issuance of an industrial water acceptance form.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a discharge system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection".
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: The national pretreatment standards specifying quantities, concentrations of pollutants or pollutant
properties which may be discharged or introduced into the POTW by specific industrial dischargers.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DISCHARGER; INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER: Any nonresidential user who discharges an effluent into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping
stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, intercepting ditches and all constructed devices and appliances
appurtenant thereto.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 69/151
FLOW (Q): The volume of wastewater being discharged into the wastewater system.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
ISPWC: Idaho standards for public works construction.
IWA: Industrial wastewater acceptance form.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any user discharging nondomestic wastes into the sewerage system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: Solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business process or from the development,
recovery, or processing of natural resources.
INTERFERENCE: An inhibition or disruption of the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use of which is a cause of or
significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or to the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the clean water act, the solid waste disposal act (SWDA) (including
title 11, more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act [RCRA] and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the clean air act, and the toxic substances control act. An industrial user significantly
contributes to such a permit violation or prevention of sludge use or disposal in accordance with the above cited authorities whenever such user:
(A) Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by contract with the POTW or by federal, state or local law;
(B) Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or constituents from the user's average discharge; or
(C) Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would result in a POTW permit
violation or prevent sewage sludge use or disposal in accordance with the above cited authorities as they apply to POTW's selected method of
sludge management.
NPDES: The national pollutant discharge elimination system permit program as administered by the USEPA or state.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE: Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge, the construction of which commenced: a) after
promulgation of pretreatment standards2 under section 307(c) of the act which are applicable to such source; or b) after proposal ofpretreatment standards
in accordance with section 307(c) of the act which are applicable to such sources, but only if the standards are promulgated in accordance with section
307(c) within one hundred twenty (120) days of their proposal.
POTW: Publicly owned treatment works. Any sewage treatment works and the sewers and conveyance appurtenances discharging thereto, owned and
operated by the authority.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven (7) and hydrogen ion concentration of 10-7.
POLLUTANT: Any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection system, as described within section 8-3-6 of this chapter and/or listed in appendices
A and B, section 8-3-25 of this chapter.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in a public sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm)
in any dimension.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with minor quantities of ground water, that are not admitted intentionally.
SERVICE SADDLE: A gasketed band that fits around the outside of the sewer main into which the service line is installed.
SEWER: A pipe, conduit, ditch or other device used to collect and transport wastewater and storm water from the generating source.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER (SID): Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who:
(A) Is subject to or potentially subject to national pretreatment standards promulgated under section 307(b) or (c) of the clean water act (CWA); or
(B) Has in their wastes any priority toxic pollutants listed in appendix A, section 8-3-25 of this chapter or other toxic pollutantslisted in appendix B,
section 8-3-25 of this chapter; or
(C) Has in their wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the CWA; or
(D) Has a discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average workday; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 70/151
(E) Has an average workday flow greater than five percent (5%) of the daily average flow for the previous month flow in the city's wastewater treatment
system; or
(F) Is determined by the city to have a significant impact or potential for significant impact, either singularly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.
SLUG LOAD: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any given constituent or in any quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation, or
which adversely affects the collection system or causes interference to the POTW.
STORM DRAIN: A drain or sewer for conveying water, ground water, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids
and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater" and referred to as
nonfilterable residue.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS: Those substances listed in appendix A, section 8-3-25 of this chapter "Priority Pollutants", and any other pollutant or combination of
pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection agency under section 307 of the clean water act.
UPSET: Any exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth in
appendices A and B, section 8-3-25 of this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operationthereof.
WEF: Water environment federation.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of the community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carrying wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial firms and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground water, surface water and storm water that may
be discharged into the POTW.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM: A collective term referring to the entire piping system that transports wastewater from its source to the city
wastewater treatment plant.
WASTEWATER SYSTEM: A collective term referring to all facilities necessary to collect wastewater from the users and treat it prior to discharge into the
Snake River.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT OPERATOR: The person appointed by the city to be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the POTW under the
direction of the PWD.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM: A collective term referring to the apparatus used to treat polluted wastewater after it leaves the collection system.
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
(A) To place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or any area under the jurisdiction of
said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, objectionable waste or other matter detrimental to health.
(B) To discharge into any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(C) To construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other private wastewater disposal facility intended or used for the disposal of
wastewater or to connect to or use the city wastewater collection system, except as hereinafter provided.
(D) To maliciously, wilfully and negligently break, damage,destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a
part of the wastewater facilities. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-4: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
(A) All houses, buildings or properties under the jurisdiction of the city used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes that contain
facilities designed to discharge wastewater shall connect such facilities to a public or private wastewater disposal facility conforming to the provisions
contained herein, and no permit to construct a building shall be issued until evidence has been submitted to the building administrator that the owner
has obtained a permit, as provided herein, to construct a private wastewater disposal facility or to connect to a public sewer for the purpose of
wastewater disposal.
(B) Each owner, tenant, or occupant of each lot or parcel of land in the city upon which a building shall have been constructed for residential, commercial,
or industrial use, within three hundred feet (300') (92 m) of a street or other public way which now contains or shall hereafter contain a sanitary sewer
shall connect such building with the sewage collection system of the city and shall cease to use any other method for the disposal of sanitary or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 71/151
industrial sewage. No exceptions to this requirement shall be made except by council action. All such connections shall be made in accordance with
the rules and regulations to be adopted from time to time by the council.
(C) Upon annexation, the owner of all existing houses, buildings, or properties served by a private wastewater disposal system shall, at the owner's
expense, abandon the private wastewater disposal system and make any necessary line extensions and connect to and discharge all wastewater into
a public sewer as provided herein, at any time a public sewer becomes available for extension and/or connection, without the need for a lift station,
within three hundred feet (300') (92 m) of the property line. The abandonment of the private facility and connection to the public facility shall be
completed within sixty (60) days after the state department of health and welfare or the city PWD notifies the owner, in writing, of the availability of a
public sewer of the city, or that the private facility is not functioning properly and is causing a health problem. In the event that a lift station is required,
the owner may negotiate with the city to connect to the public sewer.
(D) The developer of a new subdivision shall, at his expense, construct the necessary extensions of the public sewer system to provide public sewer
facilities for each lot in the subdivision.
(E) Upon failure of any lot or parcel of real estate to beconnected to the sewage collection system within thirty (30) days after such connection is required
under the foregoing provisions hereof, the city shall send, by first class mail, a notice to the owner shown on the last available tax assessment roll and
the lessee or other occupant of each building so required to be connected declaring that failure to make connection within ten (10) days from the date
notice is mailed will result in disciplinary action.
(F) If any required connection is not made within the period described by such notice, the city shall take one or more of the following steps:
1. Shut off water service.
2. Make the required connection and assess the cost thereof, with penalty, against the real estate involved and commence proceedings against the
owners of such real estate involved.
(G) Every owner or lessee or other occupant of any building which is required to be connected to the sewage collection system of the city shall, after the
expiration of the period mentioned in the notice prescribed by subsection (E) of this section, cease to use any other manner of disposing of sanitary or
industrial sewage. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-5: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER, PROCEDURE:
Any owner of property outside the corporate limits of the city who desires to connect to a public sewer shall first obtain approval of the city council and
upon such approval shall sign a contract for providing sewer service. Approval by the city council shall be based on the availability of surplus capacity in
the public facility and its determination that the connection will not have a detrimental effect on the health, safety or welfare of the other users of the
wastewater system. The contract for providing sewer service shall, as a minimum, contain an agreement to comply with all policies, rules and regulations
governing the wastewater system and to pay all fees and charges for services provided, all as established herein. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-6: GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
(A) No person shall connect any possible source of inflow to the sewer collection system of the city unless the source of inflow is from a residential,
commercial, or industrial use approved by the city. It shall be illegal to connect any sump pumps, foundation drains, storm drains, surface runoff drains
or other drainage by surface means to the city sewage collection system. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any natural drainage
waters such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff or subsurface drainage to any public sewer. Such natural drainage water shall be discharged
tosewers that are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the PWD and other regulatory agencies. Natural drainage
water from limited areas which is polluted at times may be discharged to the wastewater collection if such discharge is approved by the PWD and such
fee as may be established by the city council is paid. Cooling waters or process waters shall be discharged to the public sewer; except that discharge
to a storm sewer or natural outlet shall be required if the water is never polluted based upon approval of the PWD and the appropriate state and federal
pollution control agencies.
(B) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described substances into the wastewater disposal system or otherwise to
the facilities of the authority:
1. Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances
to cause fire or explosion hazard, or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive
readings on any explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five percent (5%) nor
any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides, sulfides, and any other substances which the authority, the state or USEPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or hazard to the system.
2. Any toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, prevent entry into the collection system for
maintenance and repair or create any hazard in the receiving waters.
3. Any waters or wastewater having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 9 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works, or capable of interfering with any wastewater treatment process.
4. Solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstructions to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater
facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, spent lime, stone or marble dust, grass clippings, spent grains, spent hops,
wastepaper, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, or glass grinding or polishing wastes, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, wholeblood, paunch manure, animal hides, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, disposable diapers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 72/151
5. Wastewater or process water having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F) or sixty five degrees Celsius (65C).
6. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference; but in no case,
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant which exceeds forty degrees Celsius (40C) or one hundred four
degrees Fahrenheit (104F) unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature.
7. Wastewater containing more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) of petroleum oils, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or product of mineral oil
origin.
8. Wastewater containing floatable oils, fat or grease.
9. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded as defined in section 8-3-2 of this chapter.
10. Wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed the limitations set forth in the categorical pretreatment standards. A toxic pollutant
shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified in the toxic pollutant list set forth in appendix A, section 8-3-25 of this chapter, "Priority
Pollutants".
11. Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances exceeding limits established by the authority.
12. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the authority in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations.
13. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a "slug load" as defined in section 8-3-2 of this chapter.
14. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
15. Any waters or waste which may: interact with other waters or wastes in the public sewer system; release obnoxious gases; form total suspended
solids which interfere with thecollection system; or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
16. Any substance which may cause the city's sewage treatment plant effluent or any other product of the city's sewage treatment plant such as
treatment residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a
substance be discharged to the sewage system which may cause the city to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the solid waste disposal act, the clean air act, the toxic substance control act, or
state criteria applicable to the sludge management methods being used.
17. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits.
18. Any substance or objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
19. Any wastewater from septic tanks, except if they are discharged at the location authorized by the PWD.
20. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32F) or zero degrees
centigrade (0C) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F) or sixty five degrees centigrade (65C).
21. Pollutants released in such strength or volume as to cause interference in the treatment plant. The following discharges are not permitted unless
approved otherwise in writing by the PWD:
(a) A standard five (5) days biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than three hundred (300) parts per million by weight; or
(b) Wastes containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of total suspended solids; or
(c) Wastes containing any quantity of substances that this title declares may not be discharged into any public sewer; or
(d) A chlorine concentration of more than twenty milligrams per liter (20 mg/l); or
(e) An average daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average daily flow carried by the treatment facility receiving the waste; or
(f) Wastewater at a flow rate and/or pollutant discharge ratewhich is excessive over a relatively short time period so that there is a treatment process
upset and subsequent loss of treatment efficiency.
(C) Substances, materials, waters or wastes are considered objectionable discharges into a wastewater system if, due to their concentration, quantity or
other characteristics, they are harmful to the sanitary sewers, wastewater treatment plant or they have an adverse effect on the treatment or receiving
stream or they will endanger lives, limb or public property or they constitute a nuisance. Such discharges may be limited in concentration or quantity or
otherwise restricted or may be required to be treated before discharge into a public sewer. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-7: LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH:
Wastes shall not be discharged into the city sewer system unless the limitations, restrictions or other requirements outlined by current state, local or
federal, whichever are more stringent, have been complied with. The following limitations shall apply to wastewater discharged into the city's sewerage
system:
(A) Current national categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by the U.S. environmental protection agency (USEPA) pursuant to the act shall be
met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial categories. An application for modification of the national categorical pretreatment standards may be
considered for submittal to the regional administrator by the authority, when the authority's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal
of the pollutants as defined by CFR part 403.7.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 73/151
(B) State requirements and limitations on dischargers to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers which are subject to such standards in any instance in
which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this chapter or any other applicable ordinance.
(C) No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter.
(D) In addition to the previously stated discharge limits, no discharger shall discharge wastewater exceeding concentrations or the materials listed in
appendix B, section 8-3-25 of this chapter. The authority may impose mass limitations on dischargers which are using dilution to meet the pretreatment
standards or requirements of this chapter, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate by the authority.
(E) The authority reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-8: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial user
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, except that no agreement will relieve the industrial
user of obligation under pretreatment regulations 40 CFR part 4.03 or any promulgated categorical pretreatment standards. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-9: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
(A) Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this chapter.
Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and
expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the authority for review, and shall
be approved by the authority before construction of the facility. Each existing significant industrial discharger shall complete and submit same to
authority within one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date hereof or within ninety (90) days from issuance of an industrial wastewater
acceptance form, whichever is sooner.
(B) Dischargers shall notify the authority immediately upon the occurrence of a "slug load" or accidental discharge of substance prohibited by this chapter.
The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. Any
discharger who discharges slugs of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any
fines imposed on the authority on account thereof under state or federal law. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-10: USE OF PUBLIC SEWER:
(A) Any industrial user covered by individual wastewater discharge contracts with the city are still subject to the requirements of this chapter. When any
waters or wastes discharged or proposed to be discharged to the public sewer will constitute an objectionable discharge as defined above, or will
require more than available capacity of the wastewater treatment plant or collection system or will otherwise createa harmful effect on the economic,
social or environmental welfare of the community, the city council may:
1. Reject the wastewater;
2. Require pretreatment of wastewater to an acceptable condition before discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require facilities to equalize waste flows by controlling the quantities and rates of discharge of wastewater; and/or
4. Require extra payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastewater not covered by existing sewer charges.
When considering the above alternatives, the city council shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If the
city council permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the PWD. Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at their expense.
(B) When, in the opinion of the PWD, grease, oil and sand interceptors are necessary for the proper handling of objectionable discharges containing
floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, such interceptors shall be provided and
maintained by the owner. All interceptors shall be of a type capacity and design approved by the PWD and shall meet all requirements of the uniform
plumbing code and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the
owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal
which are subject to review by the PWD. The means of removing and disposing of captured material shall be subject to approval of the PWD and must
be performed according to the state statutes governing such removal and disposal. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-11: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
(A) When connection to a public wastewater facility is not required, as provided herein, then the owner may construct and maintain at their expense a
private wastewater disposal facility in accordance with this section.
(B) Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall obtain a permit from the Idaho department of health
and welfare. The application for such permit shall be made through the Idaho department of health and welfare and the applicant shallfurnish any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 74/151
plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by said department.
(C) A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Idaho
department of health and welfare. The department's representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event,
the applicant for the permit shall notify the department when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered.
(D) The type, capacity, location and layout of private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Idaho department of health
and welfare. No discharge to any natural outlet will be allowed from any private wastewater disposal system.
(E) The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. Disposal of
sludge from private wastewater disposal systems will be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm (if such license is required at that time)
and will be deposited at the county landfill or at such other location outside the city limits as may be approved by the county commissioners. Sludge
from private wastewater disposal systems shall not be deposited in the city wastewater collection system except at such locations as may be approved
by the PWD and at such fee as may be established by the city council.
(F) Whenever a private wastewater disposal system is abandoned, all sludge shall be removed and properly disposed of and the tank shall be filled with
soil, all to the satisfaction of the PWD.
(G) No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with or supersede any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Idaho
department of health and welfare. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-12: BUILDING SEWERS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
No person shall install or alter any sanitary sewer within the city, or tap into or connect to any sanitary sewer line, whether lateral, main or interceptor,
without first obtaining a permit from the city.
(A) No person except authorized city employees shall uncover, make any connections with or openings into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the PWD.
(B) There shall be three (3) classes of sewer service connection permits:
General permit for residential, residential-commercial, noncommercial or commercial users;
Industrial permits for industrial users; and
Municipal permits for other municipalities using the system.
1. General Permits: General permits shall be classified as in city and out of city permits:
(a) In City General Permits: In city general permits shall be applied for by the owner or the owner's agent on a form provided by the city clerktreasurer.
In city general permits shall be approved by the PWD. Approval shall only be contingent upon the availability of a public sewer adjacent
to the owner's property and the applicable provisions of this title.
(b) Out Of City General Permits: Out of city general permits shall be applied for by the owner on a form provided by the city clerk-treasurer and shall
be accompanied by an executed copy of the standard agreement for services outside the city limits. Out of city general permits shall be
accompanied by an executed copy of the standard agreement for services outside the city limits. Out of city general permits shall be approved by
the city council based on recommendation by the PWD. Approval shall be contingent upon the availability of a public sewer adjacent to the owner's
property, execution of the agreement for services outside the city limits and conformance of the proposed land use with city comprehensive plan
and the applicable provisions of this title.
2. Industrial Permits: Industrial permits shall be applied for by the owner or the owner's agent by letter to the city council accompanied by an executed
copy of the standard industrial user agreement together with any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent by the PWD, and/or
city council. Industrial permits shall be approved by the city council based on recommendation by the PWD. Approval shall be contingent upon the
same criteria used for general permits, the availability of excess capacity in the wastewater system, the applicable provisions of this title and any
other considerations the city council deems appropriate.
3. Municipal Permits: Municipal permits shall be applied for by the municipality by letter to the city council accompanied by any information considered
pertinent by the PWD and/or city council. Municipal permits shall be approved by the city council based on recommendation by the PWD. Approval
shall be contingent upon any considerations the city council deems appropriate.
(C) Service connections shall include the tap into the public sewer and the sewer service line between the tap and theprivate use area. The property owner
or the owner's agent shall be authorized to tap into the sewer collection main designated by the city after obtaining appropriate permits. The city will
supply the service saddle necessary to connect into the public sewer main.
(D) No trench backfill shall be placed until the service connection is inspected and approved by the city. The owner shall be responsible for notifying the
PWD when a connection is ready for inspection.
(E) All work in public trafficways is subject to approval by the PWD and shall be done in accordance with city code regulations and according to standards
established by the PWD. The owner or owner's agent shall notify the PWD one day before any excavation is begun and must have obtained an
excavation permit as required by title 9, chapter 10 of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 75/151
Any connection so made must be of proper design and of the appropriate materials as established by the city that are in effect at the time of the
connection.
(F) A separate and independent building sewer and service connection shall be provided for every building; except, where one building stands at the rear
of another on an interior lot and no public sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the city may allow the front building sewer to be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city
does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
(G) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the PWD, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(H) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, connection into
the public sewer, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the uniform building and uniform plumbing codes or
other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF manual of practice no. 9 shall apply.
(I) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
(J) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts,foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, unless such connection is approved by the PWD for
purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-13: SEWER CONNECTION FEES REQUIRED:
Before any permit is issued for the installation or alteration of any sanitary sewer, or before any connection is made to any sanitary sewer line, whether
lateral, main or interceptor, the applicant shall pay to the city a sewer connection fee, which fees may hereafter be established and modified from time to
time by resolution of the city council. A separate sewer connection permit must be obtained for each building using the sanitary sewer system of the city,
and except as otherwise provided herein, the service connection fee must be paid whenever a permit is required by the city.
Once the required sewer service connection fee has been paid for any building connected to the sewage collection system of the city, no further
connection fee shall be charged for the connection of any sewer serving any building constructed or reconstructed at the same place, or so near the same
place that no substantial extension of the original side sewer is necessary to serve it. However, if a new tap to the city sewer main is requested or required,
an inspection fee will be charged and a sewer service saddle will be installed. The city shall provide and be reimbursed for the actual cost of the sewer
service saddle. Proof of payment of the fee or proof of location of existing line shall be furnished by the applicant, and in the absence of such proof, a
connection fee shall be charged. (Ord. 520, 5-6-1998)
8-3-14: SEWER MAIN CONSTRUCTION CHARGE:
All persons desiring such connection to any sewer main which is constructed, following the effective date hereof, in whole or in part at city expense, shall
pay a sewer main construction charge to be established and modified from time to time by resolution of the city council.
(A) The charges shall be calculated on a per front foot basis of property owned by such person and fronting upon a street or public right of way within
which a sewer main is located. Such fee shall be in addition to the sewer system connection fee set forth in section 8-3-13 of this chapter.
(B) If any such property is located upon a corner or is bounded by two (2) or more public rights of way in which a sewer line is located, the calculation for
the sewer main construction fee shall be based upon the frontage of the longest public right of way in which a sewer main is located.
(C) All sewer mains within the city shall be deemed to have been constructed in whole or in part at city expense, unless the applicant presents written
evidence conclusively demonstrating such main was constructed entirely with funds from a state or federal grant.
(D) This sewer main construction charge shall not apply to extensions of mains undertaken by the city for its own purposes where there is no pending
request for extension.
(E) Extensions are subject to available funding, and nothing herein shall be construed to require the city to construct an extension to the system. However,
the city may, in its discretion, grant permission to a developer to construct a sewer main entirely at his or her expense. In that event, the city may, by
written agreement, pay over to the developer all sewer main construction fees collected by the city from any other person who subsequently connects
to such sewer main within five (5) years of completion of the main. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-15: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
If a developer is granted permission to construct a sewer main entirely at his or her expense, the following design and construction requirements shall be
met:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 76/151
(A) All design plans and specifications for the construction of public sewers shall be prepared and approved by a professional engineer registered in the
state of Idaho and approved by the state of Idaho department of environmental quality. All plans and specifications shall conform to standards
established by the city and shall be approved by the city and the PWD prior to construction of any public sewer.
(B) All public sewers shall be constructed in a public utility easement, trafficway or other approved right of way, properly dedicated to the public, which is
not less than fifteen feet (15') in width.
(C) The developer shall be responsible for the cost of design and construction of new public sewers in accordance with the policies established by
resolution of the city council for the "engineering and construction of improvements within public rights of way and easements within the jurisdiction of
the city and the payment of same" and in accordance with any special agreements required by the city council and for the cost of design and
construction of any existing public sewers in accordance with the provisions of this code governing sewers constructed by private funds or sewers
constructed by public funds.
(D) Construction of public sewers shall conform to the approved plans and specifications, this code and the standards established by the city, the current
issue of ISPWC and shallbe approved by the PWD before the city assumes any responsibility for the maintenance of the sewer. The owner or the
owner's contractor shall notify the PWD one day before any excavation is begun. No trench backfill shall be placed until the city has inspected and
approved the sewer pipe and a city inspector is available to inspect and test the backfill material. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-16: SEWER CONNECTION FEES ESTABLISHED:
Sewer connection fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fees so established shall be sufficient to reimburse the city for all
connections costs. Each fee shall be a fixed amount representing the average cost incurred for performing the service for which reimbursement is sought.
The following fees shall be established:
(A) General Permit: Reimbursement for processing applications and inspections for a general permit.
(B) Industrial Permit: Reimbursement for processing applications and inspections for an industrial permit.
(C) Municipal Permit: Reimbursement for processing applications and inspections for a municipal permit. This fee shall be established by the city council
on an individual basis based on the actual cost.
(D) Reimbursement; Standard Connection: Reimbursement for constructing a standard sewer connection four inches (4"), six inches (6"), or eight inches
(8") in diameter.
(E) Reimbursement; Nonstandard Connection: Reimbursement for a larger than standard diameter building sewer. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-17: USER CHARGES:
(A) General user charges shall be established by resolution of the city council. Industrial user charges and municipal user charges shall be established by
separate agreement with the city council. All charges so established shall be in proportion to the benefits derived by the user from the wastewater
service and shall be in accordance with U.S. government regulations. The charges so established shall generate sufficient revenue to repay all bonded
indebtedness, to repay the U.S. government for all loans made to local industrial users, to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities and to build a
reserve fund sufficient to pay for the future capital improvements to the wastewater facilities. The total revenue required for the wastewater system
shall be collected from all users by equitably proportioning the cost to each user based on the amount of flow (Q), biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
and total suspended solids (TSS) the useris contributing to the total system.
(B) Since measuring the individual Q, BOD and TSS contributed by each user and collecting his proportionate share of the total cost based on unit
charges for each characteristic is impractical, the general users shall be grouped in classes having similar characteristics, and the average Q, BOD and
TSS contributed by the class shall be used to determine the proportionate share of the total cost that should be generated by the class. The revenue to
be generated by the class shall then be divided by the total flow contributed by the class to establish a unit cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons of
wastewater discharged or by the total number of users in a class to establish a unit cost per user. The user charge paid by each user shall reasonably
approximate the proportional share the user would pay if the user's individual Q, BOD and TSS contribution were measured and the user's share were
calculated using the same unit charges for each characteristic that was used to determine the proportionate share of the total cost that should be
generated by each user class.
(C) The city council shall establish user classes, the charge to be levied against each user in a class and the distribution of revenues from each class. The
PWD shall place each user in a class so established and calculate his charge for wastewater service. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-18: SCHEDULE OF RATES:
(A) Sewer User Classification And Rate Schedule:
1. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that all rates for sewage service within the city and without the boundaries of the city shall be
reasonable and just and shall take into account and consideration the cost and value of the system and the operation and maintenance expenses of
the system, including repairs, debt repayment, replacement costs, depreciation, and other direct and indirect obligations incurred on behalf of said
system which are to be charged against all users of the service at such rates and amounts as shall be sufficient to secure the required revenues
necessary to meet the aforementioned expenses. No free service shall be provided to the city or any other user on the system; provided, further, that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 77/151
no discrimination shall be made in the rates to be charged other than that required due to the type or volume of waste generated as hereinafter
provided.
2. Any equitable user classification and assessment formula must assess each customer class with their pro rata portion of the volume strength loading
of that class.
3. Said user assessment must also assess against each customer class, a surcharge equal to any above normal strength wastewater loading.
4. Based on sample flow studies made by the city, the current average flow per residence in the city equals an estimated two hundred (200) gallons of
wastewater flow per day per thirty (30) day average month for a total estimated average residential volume loading per month of six thousand (6,000)
gallons.
5. Based upon sample analysis of the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids (TSS) of said residential loading, the estimated
normal strength of said residential loading for which the plant is designed will contain not more than one hundred eighty milligrams per liter (180 mg/l)
of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and one hundred eighty milligrams per liter (180 mg/l) of total suspended solids.
6. Using said residential loading as a base rate and using existing flow data for flow loading from representatives of each customer class within the city
for plant loading from all other sources, the following user classification and user rate schedule is hereby adopted.
The base sewer rate as established by resolution shall be multiplied by the equivalent user as specified below to determine the monthly rate to be
charged:
User Classification
Equivalent Users
(Each)
Residential 1.0
1.1 Single-family 1.00
1.2 Multiple-family unit 1.00
1.3 Manufactured home spaces 1.00
Public Institutions 2.0
2.1 Schools 6.50
2.2 Churches 1.00
2.3 Hospitals 8.10
2.4 Government facilities 4.00
Commercials 3.0
3.1 General business I 1.00
3.2 General business II 2.00
3.3 Motels and hotels 0.4 per unit
Sleeping rooms 0.2 per unit
3.4 Restaurants and taverns 2.00
3.5 Laundromats 6.00
3.6 Service stations 2.00
3.7 Car wash 6.00
3.8 Doctor office and medical 1.60
+ each added office 1.00
3.9 Beauty shops 2.00
Industrial 4.0
4.1 Minor industry 1
4.2 Major industry
1
Note:
1.Rates for all industrial users will be determined by flow sampling as to volume generated, and strength and type of waste involved.
7. Prior to any industrial user being allowed to hook into the city wastewater facilities, a prior agreement with the city and said proposed user as to the
estimated volume and nature of discharge from said user into the city treatment plant will be established and the rate set in accordance with the
formula set out therein.
8. For purposes of user rate formula calculation, "normal strength waste" will be defined as waste having a total suspended solids (TSS) strength of not
more than one hundred eighty milligrams per liter (180 mg/l) and a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of not more than one hundred eighty
milligrams per liter (180 mg/l).
Based upon the foregoing waste strength criteria the city would be treating up to nine (9) pounds of BOD and TSS in the base residential rate.
9. In computing any industrial fee, the six thousand (6,000) gallons per month discharge at the normal strength rates set out above shall be used as the
base upon which all industrial user rates shall be based. Any strengths discharged in excess of the normal strength criteria set out above shall be
assessed a surcharge of four cents ($0.04) per twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) per one thousand (1,000) gallons for all BOD discharged in
excess of the above stated normal strength criteria. A surcharge of two cents ($0.02) per twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons shall be assessed for all of TSS discharged in excess of the above stated normal strength criteria.
10. A surcharge will also be assessed for all discharges in excess of the six thousand (6,000) gallons per month base at the rate of ninety four cents
($0.94) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 78/151
11. Any major or minor industry allowed to connect to the city wastewater treatment system shall be monitored by the city no less than annually to
determine whether the estimated monthly flows and strength calculations are equal to or less than those being experienced, and any changes
indicated shall be reflected effective with the month following the date of monitoring.
12. The city reserves the right to refuse to connect any industrial user whose connection would introduce effluent which would:
(a) Be incompatible with;
(b) Contaminate;
(c) Reduce the efficiency of; or
(d) Overload the existing plant.
13. Any special connections not covered by the above schedules shall have fees set by the mayor and council in each individual situation. (Ord. 515, 1-
7-1998)
8-3-19: MEASUREMENT AND SAMPLING OF WATERS AND WASTES:
(A) All significant industrial users shall install a flow measuring device and an automatic sampling device in the building sewer to facilitate observation, flow
measurement and sampling of the wastes. The design and supervision of construction of the "flow measuring and sampling system" shall be by a
professional engineer registered in the state of Idaho. The design, final plans and specifications, and construction of said system must be approved by
the PWD. The industrial user must operate and maintain said system in proper operating condition. The city will read all flow measurements, collect all
samples and perform all testing of collected samples required by the city, Idaho department of health and welfare and the U.S. environmental
protection agency. Users may, at their expense, request additional sampling and testing by the city at a fee established by the PWD.
(B) Any commercial user whose charge is based on water meter readings may install a wastewater flow measuring device or separate water meter as
approved by the PWD at the user's expense, if the water meter readings are not representative of the wastewater flow. The PWD may require a
wastewater system user to install a flow measuring device in the building sewer or water meter if all or part of the water supply to the building comes
from an unmetered source. The user shall operate and maintain such device in proper operating condition.
(C) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR, part 136, "Standard Methods For Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR, part 136, "Standard Methods For Examination Of Water And Wastewater" does not
contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where EPA determines that the sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling, and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the city or other parties, as approved by EPA. Sampling methods, location,
times, durations and frequencies are to generally be determined on an individual basis as shown on the industrial wastewater acceptance form (IWA),
subject to approval by the PWD. For categorical industrial users, sampling frequencies shall be at least as stringent as anyspecified in the applicable
categorical pretreatment standards and industrial waste acceptance agreements. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-20: ADMINISTRATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGES:
(A) Wastewater Dischargers: It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to any sewer within the jurisdiction of the authority,
and/or to the POTW without having first complied with the terms of this chapter.
(B) Disclosure Forms: SIDs (significant industrial dischargers) shall complete and file with the authority, disclosure declaration in the form prescribed by the
authority. Existing SIDs shall file disclosure forms within ninety (90) days after the notice by the city, and proposed new SIDs shall file their disclosure
forms at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to the POTW. The disclosure to be made by the SID shall be made on written forms provided by the
authority and shall cover:
1. Disclosure of name, address, and location of the discharger.
2. Disclosure of standard industrial classification (SIC) number according to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", bureau of the budget,
1972, as amended.
3. Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this chapter, including appendices A and
B, section 8-3-25 of this chapter, as appropriate and as determined by bona fide chemical and biological analyses. Sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the USEPA and contained in standard methods for examination of water and wastewater.
4. Disclosure of time and duration of discharges.
5. Disclosure of average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any. All flows shall be measured, unless other verifiable techniques are approved by authority due to cost or nonfeasibility.
6. Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes,
sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
7. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or may be discharged to the sewers or works
of the authority.
8. Disclosure of the nature and concentration of anypollutants or materials prohibited by this chapter in the discharge, together with a statement
regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this chapter on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment is required for the SID to comply with this chapter.
9. Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this chapter, or federal requirements,
whichever are more stringent, the SID shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the SID will provide such additional pretreatment
and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 79/151
(a) The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for SID to comply with the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, dates relating to hiring an
engineer, hiring other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter.
(b) Under no circumstances shall the authority permit a time increment for any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds nine (9)
months.
(c) Not later than fourteen (14) days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, the SID shall submit a progress
report to the authority, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that
milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken
by the SID to return the construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports
to the authority.
10. Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production.
11. Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials (chemical utilization - average and maximum per day).
12. All disclosure forms shall be signed by a principal executive officer of the SID and a qualified engineer (licensed professional).
13. All sewers shall have an inspection and sampling manhole or structure with an opening of no less than twenty four inches (24") in diameter and an
internal diameter of no less than thirty six inches (36") containing flow measuring, recording and sampling equipment as required by the authorityto
assure compliance with this chapter.
The authority will evaluate the complete disclosure form and data furnished by the SID and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days
after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the authority shall notify the SID of the authority's acceptance thereof through issuance of
an industrial wastewater acceptance form.
(C) Industrial Wastewater Acceptance Form (IWA): The PWD shall issue to the SID an IWA which will be based on information in the disclosure form and
include:
1. Any fees and charges to be paid upon initial issuance;
2. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
3. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
4. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
5. Special conditions as the authority may reasonably require particular circumstances of a given discharge, including sampling locations, frequency of
sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule;
6. Compliance schedules;
7. Requirements for submission of special technical reports or discharge reports where same differs from those prescribed by this chapter;
8. Any special agreements the PWD chooses to continue to develop between the city and SID;
9. Standard conditions as shown in the city's industrial pretreatment study dated January 1984.
All wastewater acceptance forms shall be issued for a period not to exceed five (5) years, subject to amendment or revocation as provided in this
chapter. Under extraordinary circumstances, it may be issued for a stated period or may be stated to expire on a specific date. Wastewater
acceptance forms are issued to a specific SID for a specific operation and are not assignable to another SID or transferable to any other location
without the prior written approval of the authority.
(D) Modifications:
1. Authority's Right: The authority reserves the right toamend this title and the terms and conditions hereof in order to assure compliance by the
authority with applicable laws and regulations. Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, this title
shall be amended to require compliance by SIDs with such standards within the time frame prescribed by such standards. All national categorical
pretreatment standards adopted after the promulgation of this title shall be adopted by the authority as part of this title. Where a SID subject to a
national categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted a disclosure form as required by subsection (C) of this section, the SID shall
file a disclosure form with the authority within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard by the USEPA. In addition, any SID operating on the basis of a previous filing of a disclosure statement, shall submit to the
authority within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, the additional
information required by subsections (C)8 and (C)9 of this section. The SID shall be informed of any proposed changes in the title at least thirty (30)
days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the title shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
2. Industrial Wastewater Acceptance: Each SID shall be subject to issuance of a new IWA with appropriate modification if the existing SID changes its
process or its wastewater characteristic.
(E) Reporting Requirements For SID: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance by the SID with applicable standards set forth in this
chapter and following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new SID, the SID subject to this chapter shall submit to
the authority a report indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and
maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the SID into compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the SID.
(F) Periodic Compliance Reports: Any SID subject to a local standard set forth in this chapter, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or,
in the case of a new SID after commencement of the discharge to the authority, shall submit to the authority during the months of June and December,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 80/151
unless required more frequently by the authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration, of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent
which are limited by the pretreatment standards hereof. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated averageand
maximum daily flows during the reporting period reported in subsection (E) of this section. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement,
provided however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the authority may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by
verifiable techniques. The authority, for good cause shown, considering such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other
extenuating factors may authorize the submission of said reports on months other than those specified above.
Reports of SID's shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration or production
and mass where required by the authority. The frequency of monitoring by the SID shall be as prescribed in the industrial waste acceptance form. All
analysis shall be performed in accordance with the standard methods for examination of water and wastewater and amendments thereto.
If standard methods for examination of water and wastewater does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question or where
the EPA determines that the sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or by any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
city or other parties, approved by the EPA.
(G) Monitoring Facilities: Each SID shall provide and operate at the SID's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of each sewer discharge to the authority. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the SID's premises, except where such a location
would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the SID, the authority may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such
sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the SID.
All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
Construction shall be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of receipt of an industrial wastewater acceptance form by SID.
(H) Inspection And Sampling: The authority may inspect the monitoring facilities of any SID to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
The SID shall allow the authority or its representatives, upon presentation ofcredentials of identification, to enter upon the premises of the SID at all
reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection, sampling, or records examination. The authority shall have the right to set up on the SID's property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
(I) Confidential Information: Information and data furnished to the authority with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the
public and other governmental agency without restriction unless the SID specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
authority that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or
proprietary information of the SID.
When requested by an SID furnishing a report, the portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, the state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the SID furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. Information
accepted by the authority as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the authority until and unless
a ten (10) day notification is given to the SID. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-21: FINES AND PENALTIES:
(A) Violation: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter contained, shall be subject to the provisions of title 1, chapter 3 of this code.
(B) Recovery Of Costs Incurred By The Authority: Any user violating any of the provisions of this chapter who discharges or causes a discharge producing
a deposit or obstruction or causes damage to or impairs the authority's wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the authority for any expense,
loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The authority shall bill the user for the cost incurred by the authority for any cleaning, repair, or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter, enforceable under
the provisions of this chapter.
(C) Falsifying Information: Any person who knowingly makes anyfalse statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, and plan
or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall (in addition to civil and/or criminal penalties provided by state law) be guilty of a gross
misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted and punished accordingly. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-22: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) Emergency Suspension Of Service And Industrial Wastewater Acceptance Form: The authority may, without advance notice, order the suspension of
the wastewater treatment service to a user, including an SID, and the industrial wastewater acceptance form to an SID when it appears to the authority
that an actual or threatened discharge: 1) presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or substantial
danger to the environment; or 2) threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or to violate any pretreatment limits imposed by this chapter.
Any user notified of the authority's suspension order, shall immediately cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the user to comply with the
suspension order, the authority may commence judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the discharger's specific compliance with such
order and/or to recover civil penalties. The authority shall reinstate the industrial wastewater acceptance form and/or the wastewater treatment service
upon proof by the user of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat as set forth above.
(B) Termination Of Treatment Services: A user shall not:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 81/151
1. Fail to factually report accurately the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
2. Fail to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics;
3. Refuse reasonable access to the discharger's premises by representatives of the authority for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
4. Violate the provisions of this chapter, or any order of the authority with respect thereto. The authority may terminate wastewater treatment services to
any user who violates any of the foregoing prohibitions.
(C) Notification Of Violation; Administrative Adjustment: Whenever the authority finds that any user has violated the prohibitions in subsection (B) of this
section, the authority shall cause to be served upon such discharger a written notice (either personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested) stating the nature of the allegedviolation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the user shall respond personally or in
writing or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the authority, advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the
user shall be given the opportunity to meet to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and to establish a plan for the satisfactory correction of the
violations and prevention of a recurrence thereof.
(D) Show Cause Hearing: Where the violation of subsection (B) of this section is not corrected by timely compliance by means of administration
adjustment, the authority may order any user which suffers or permits a violation of subsection (B) of this section to show cause before the authority or
its duly authorized representative why the proposed service termination action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the user by
personal service, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the authority or its
designee regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to
show cause before the authority or its designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
no less than ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer, or authorized representative of a user. The proceedings of
the hearing shall be considered by the authority, which shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged violations of the user. Appeal of
such orders may be taken by the user in accordance with applicable local or state law.
(E) Judicial Proceedings: Following the entry of any order by the authority with respect to the violation by a user of subsection (B) of this section, the
authority may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate local court.
(F) Significant Violations, Annual Publication: A list of users who were significantly violating the terms of this chapter during the previous twelve (12)
months shall be annually published by the city in the largest newspaper published in the city. For the purpose of this section, a "significant violation" is a
violation which remains uncorrected for forty five (45) days after notification of noncompliance; which is part of a pattern of noncompliance over a
twelve (12) month period; which involves a failure to accurately report noncompliance; or which resulted in the city exercising its emergency authority
under subsection (A) of this section.
(G) Right Of Appeal: Any user or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the authority on any matter
covered by this chapter and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event that such inquiry is by a user and deals with matters ofperformance
or compliance with this chapter for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of a user's request shall not stay
enforcement proceedings pending. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this chapter may be taken in accordance with local and state
law.
(H) Operating Upsets: Any user which experiences an upset in operations which places the user in a temporary state of noncompliance with this chapter
shall inform the authority thereof within twenty four (24) hours of first awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given
orally, a written follow up report thereof shall be filed by the user with the authority within five (5) days. The report shall specify:
1. Description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on the user's compliance status.
2. Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is
reasonably expected to occur.
3. All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. A documented and
verified bona fide operating upset shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the authority against the user for any
noncompliance with this chapter which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-23: RECORDS RETENTION:
All users subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof relating to monitoring, sampling, and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a user in connection
with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of the administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation
activities brought by the authority pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all
periods of limitations with respect to any and all appeals have expired. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-3-24: PENALTY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
If any owner, tenant, occupant or other person connects any possible source of inflow to the sewage collection system that is not permitted by this chapter,
it shall be the responsibility of the city to take the appropriate action to see that the illegal inflow is stopped and the connectionremoved. The city shall also
shut off all water service to the subject property from which the source of inflow originates pending the sealing of the illegal inflow connection. The city may
also bring civil suit against the owner, tenant, occupant, or other person who causes the illegal connection to be made, to recover any and all costs and
damages incurred by the city in terminating the illegal connection.
The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of a connection except for work
performed by city forces. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 82/151
8-3-25: APPENDICES:
APPENDIX A
PRIORITY POLLUTANTS
EPA PRIORITY POLLUTANTS
1.*Acenaphthene
2.*Acrolein
3.*Acrylonitrile
4.*Benzene
5.*Benzidine
6.*Carbon tetrachloride (tetrahloromethane)
*Chlorinated benezenes
(other than dichlorobenzenes)
7.chlorobenezene
8.1,2,4-trichlorobenzene
9.hexachlorobenzene
*Chlorinated ethanes
(including 1,2-dichloroethane, 1,1,1-trichloroethane and hexachloroethane)
10.1,2-dichloroethane
11.1,1-trichloroethane
12.hexachloroethane
13.1,1-dichloroethane
14.1,1,2-trichloroethane
15.1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane
16.chloroethane
*Chloroalkyl ethers
(other than those listed elsewhere)
(chloromethy, chloroethyl, and mixed ethers)
17.bis(2-chloroethyl) ether
18.2-chloroethyl vinyl ether (mixed)
*Chlorinated naphtalene
19.2-chloronaphthalene
*Chlorinated phenols (other than those listed elsewhere; includes trichlorophenols and chlorinated cresols)
20.2,4,6-trichlorophenol
21.parachlorometa cresol
22.*Chloroform (trichloromethane)
23.*2-chlorophenol
*Dichlorobenzenes
24.1,2-dichlorobenzene
25.1,3-dichlorobenzene
26.1,4-dichlorobenzene
*Dichlorobenzidine
27.3,3-dichlorobenzidine *Dichloroethylenes (1,1 dichloroethylene and 1,2 dichloroethylene)
28.1,1-dichloroethylene
29.1,2-trans-dichloroethylene
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 83/151
30.*2,4-dichlorophenol
*Dichloropropane and dichloropropene
31.1,2-dichloropropane
32.1,3-dichloropropylene (1,3-dichloroproperie)
33.*2,4-dimethylphenol
*Dinitrotoluene
34.2,4-dinitrotoluene
35.2,6-dinitrotoluene
36.*1,2-diphenylhydrazine
37.*Ethylbenzene
38.*Fluoranthene
*Haloethers (other than those listed elsewhere)
39.4-chlorophenyl phenyl ether
40.4-bromophenyl phenyl ether
41.bis(2-chloroisopropyl) ether
42.bis(2-chloroethoxy) methane
*Halomethanes
(other than those listed elsewhere)
43.Methylene chloride (dichloromethane)
44.methyl chloride (chloromethane)
45.Methyl bromide (bromomethane)
46.Bromoform (tribromomethane)
47.dichlorobromomethane
48.chlorodibromomethane
49.*Hexachlorobutadiene
50.*Hexachlorocyclopentadiene
51.*Isophorone
52.*Naphthalene
53.*Nitrobenzene
*Nitrophenols
(including 2,4-dinitrophenol and dinitrocresol)
54.2-nitrophenol
55.4-nitrophenol
56.2,4-dinitrophenol
57.4,6-dinitro-cresol
*Nitrosamines
58.N-nitrosodimethylamine
59.N-nitrosodiphenylamine
60.N-nitrosodi-n-propylamine
61.*Pentachlorophenol
62.*Phenol
*Phthalate esters
63.bis(2-ethyThexyl) phthalate
64.butyl benzyl phthalate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 84/151
65.di-n-butyl phthalate
66.di-n-octyl phthalate
67.diethyl-phthalate
68.dimethyl phthalate
*Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
69.benzo(a)anthracene (1,2-benzanthracene)
70.benzo(a)pyrene (3,4-benzopyrene)
71.3,4-benzofluoranthene
72.benzo(k)fluoranthane (11,12-benzofluoranthene)
73.chrysene
74.acenaphtylene
75.anthracene
76.benzo(ghi)perylene (1.12-benzoperylene)
77.fluorene
78.phenathrene
79.dibenzo(a,h)anthracene (1,2,5,6-dibenzanthracene)
80.indeno (1,2,3-cd)pyrene (2,3-o-phenylenepyrene)
81.pyrene
82.*Tetrachlorpethylene
83.Toluene
84.*Trichloroethylen
85.*Vinyl chloride (chloroethylene)
*Pesticides and Metabolites
86.aldrin
87.dieldrin
88.chlordane (technical mixture metabolites)
*DDT and metabolites
89.4,4'-DDT
90.4,4'-DDE (p.p'-DDX)
91.4,4'-DDD (p.p'-TDE)
*Endosulfan and metabolites
92.a-endosulfan-Alpha
93.b-endosulfan-Beta
94.endosulfan sulfate
*Endrin and metabolites.
95.endrin
96.endrin aldehyde
*Heptachlor and metabolites
97.heptachlor
98.heptachlor epoxide
*Hexachlorocyclohexane (all isomers)
99.a-BHC-Alph
100.b-BHC-Beta
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 85/151
101.r-BHC (lindane)-Gamma)
102.g-BHC-Delta
*Polychlorinated biphenyls
103.PCB-1242 (Arochlor 1242)
104.PCB-1254 (Arochlor 1254)
105.PCB-1221 (Arochlor 1221)
106.PCB-1232 (Arochlor 1232)
107.PCB-1248 (Arochlor 1248)
108.PCB-1260 (Arochlor 1260)
109.PCB-1016 (Arochlor 1016)
110.*Toxaphene
111.*Antimony (Total)
112.*Arsenic (Total)
113.*Asbestos (Fibrous)
114.*Beryllium (Total)
115.*Cadmium (Total)
116.*Chromium (Total)
117.*Copper (Total)
118.*Cyanide (Total)
119.*Lead (Total)
120.*Mercury (Total)
121.*Nickel (Total)
122.*Selenium (Total)
123.*Silver (Total)
124.*Thallium (Total)
125.*Zinc (Total)
126.**2,3,7,8 - Tetrachlor-odibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
*Specific compounds and chemical classes as listed in the consent degree.
**This compound was specifically listed in the consent degree, because of the extreme toxicity (TCDD).
APPENDIX B
SUPPLEMENTARY LIMITATIONS
HEAVY METALS AND SIMILAR TOXIC SUBSTANCES WHICH
COULD UPSET TREATMENT PLANT OPERATION
Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such a degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the point of discharge exceeds the limits as follows:
Arsenic 0.5 mg/l
Cadmium 0.5 mg/l
Total chromium 2.0 mg/l
Copper 2.0 mg/l
Cyanide 1.0 mg/l
Lead 1.5 mg/l
Mercury 0.05 mg/l
Nickel 1.5 mg/l
Silver 0.5 mg/l
Zinc 1.5 mg/l
(Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 86/151
Footnote 1: See section 8-1-2 of this title.
Footnote 2: Federal act.
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL REFUSE COLLECTION
8-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MUNICIPAL REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE CHAPTER OF THE CITY OF AMERICAN FALLS,
IDAHO. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
All general definitions1 shall apply to this chapter along with the following definitions which are specific to the refuse collection system:
ASHES: The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials.
COLLECTOR: The person holding the contract issued or granted by the city authorizing such person to operate, conduct and maintain a municipal
garbage and refuse collection and disposal system upon, on and over streets, alleys and public ways of the city, or the city of American Falls, Idaho, in the
event the city operates the system.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, grass clippings, paper
packaging products and other items of household waste.
NONCOLLECTIBLE REFUSE: Consists of large, bulky, or heavy items that cannot be handled by the collector's equipment, including, but not limited to:
concrete products, trees and tree limbs, discarded furniture or appliances, engine blocks, dirt, dead animals, rocks, roofing, boards, or any construction or
demolition material, tires, batteries, automobile parts, and waste oil.
OWNER AND OCCUPANT: A person in possession, charge, custody and control of any premises where garbage, refuse and rubbish is collected or
accumulated.
PREMISES: Land and all buildings and structures therein including, but not limited to, by enumeration, single- or multi-family dwellings, rooming houses or
apartment houses, hospitals, convalescent and nursing homes, hotels and motels, restaurants, drive-in establishments, schools and any other place of
habitation, offices, shops or establishments or places of conducting a business, trade or occupation.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes and street cleanings.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippage, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
SANITARY CONTAINERS: Sanitary containers or receptacles shall be any such containers as shall be approved by the city council and which containers
are compatible with the refuse disposal system and the refuse to be removed. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-3: GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION PROVIDED:
The municipal refuse collection and disposal service of the city shall, by such means as the city council deems appropriate, collect and dispose of all
garbage, rubbish, refuse, paper, glass, tin cans, ashes and other debris; shall operate thereto until duly amended as provided by law. All garbage and
refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or its duly authorized contractor. No person shall collect, convey
over any of the streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city except by the terms of this chapter or resolution of the city
council. However, nothing herein contained shall prohibit any person from hauling their own private refuse from their own property in their own vehicles at
their expense without penalty; provided, that said removal by said person shall not reduce or otherwise affect that person's obligation to pay the sanitary
service fees hereinafter set out; provided, also, that all such hauling shall be in vehicles that meet the requirements of section8-4-10 of this chapter. The
right and power to amend this chapter from time to time and to repeal the same is reserved to the city. The city may from time to time grant an exclusive
contract for the operation of the municipal refuse collection and disposal service. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-4: MANDATORY COLLECTION:
(A) Collection From Entire City: All garbage, refuse, rubbish and ashes from the entire residential, commercial and industrial sections of the city property
placed for collection as provided for herein, shall be collected by the city or its duly authorized contractor necessary to maintain and preserve sanitation
of the community. Temporary failure to make such collection due to circumstances beyond the control of the city shall not relieve the occupant or the
owner of the premises from the payment of sanitary service fees herein prescribed.
(B) Collection And Disposal Service Compulsory; Exemption: No person shall be permitted to refuse to accept the refuse collection and disposal service
herein provided for, and the failure of any person to receive or use such service shall not exempt such person from the payment of charges herein
specified, except as provided in subsection 8-4-8(C) of this chapter. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-5: PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR TO PUBLISH RULES AND REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 87/151
The PWD is hereby empowered to prepare and publish such rules and regulations as may be necessary in connection with the municipal refuse collection
and garbage collection and disposal service subject to the approval of the city council and may direct that the city garbage and waste disposal crew or
authorized contractor will not collect garbage and other wastes from premises where rules and regulations are not complied with, and the failure to collect
the same by direction shall not relieve the owner or occupant from the payment of fees or penalties provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-6: CONTAINERS:
(A) Requirements: Sanitary containers or containers authorized under this section shall be provided by the city. All containers shall be maintained by the
user in good condition and at ground level. The city inspector shall have authority to refuse collection service for failure to comply herewith. It shall be
the duty of the user to maintain the same in a reasonably sanitary condition in keeping with reasonable health standards. The city inspector shall have
the responsibility of inspecting containers and to notify the user for failure to maintain the same in a reasonably sanitary condition. It is the responsibility
of the user to pay for anyand all container damages caused by their negligence, abuse or neglect.
(B) Garbage Placement: All garbage shall be placed in "sanitary containers" as defined in section 8-4-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-7: PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS:
The garbage, refuse and rubbish in and about any private residence, dwelling house, commercial or industrial building shall be placed in sanitary
containers and shall be placed at ground level near the alley line if there is a public alley right of way, unless the city inspector determines otherwise, or if
there is no access to the alley from the dwelling or other buildings, then such sanitary containers shall be placed at street level so as to be easily seen and
at the curb line. Refuse generating property not abutting public streets or alleys shall permit ground level access to the city or its refuse placed thereon in
approved sanitary containers. Placement of containers in unusual circumstances will be determined by the city inspector. The sanitary containers placed
on streets where there is no alley access shall be removed from the street within twenty four (24) hours after pick up. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-8: SANITARY SERVICE FEES:
Fees for sanitary service shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council.
(A) All commercial customers shall use such containers either alone or sharing with other customers as prescribed by the city council.
(B) Residential customers shall use such containers as shall be approved by the city council and as directed by the city inspector. In directing the size to
use, the city inspector shall consider alley or front pick up accessibility to customer use, density of surrounding population, availability of joint use with
others.
(C) The city council may grant variances from the provisions hereto, if necessary, for users having noncollectible refuse who, in the opinion of the city
council, are unable to comply with provisions of this chapter. In that event the council must state why compliance is impossible, and the acts required of
the user for the noncollectible refuse removal, the charges, if any therefor, and the duration of the grant of variance. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-9: USE OF STREETS AND ALLEYS:
No person shall be permitted to transport garbage, refuse, rubbish or ashes over the streets and alleys of the city in anything other than secured or
covered vehicles. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-10: STORING REFUSE, CLEANUP DAYS:
(A) No person shall place any garbage, rubbish or refuse in any street, alley or other public place or upon any private property, whether owned by such
person or not, within the city, except that placed in proper containers at ground level for collection, under the method provided pursuant to the authority
of this chapter. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse, garbage or rubbish on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the city shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(B) No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse or garbage in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place or in or on any occupied premises within the city. The city may authorize storage of
refuse on streets and alleys for spring and fall cleanup. The city shall designate such places and times where such accumulation is allowed by
resolution. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-11: STREET LITTER CONTAINERS:
Public street litter and waste disposal containers are not to be used by merchants and store employees for store and sidewalk sweepings, trash, papers or
cartons. They are placed there by the city for pedestrians to use in the depositing of waste material to prevent the same from littering upon the city
sidewalks and street gutters. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-12: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CONTAINERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 88/151
It shall be unlawful for anyone not authorized by the city to deposit waste material in any city owned garbage containers. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-13: CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS:
Debris resulting from the construction, reconstruction or repair of premises shall not be placed with other refuse for collection but shall be disposed of
directly by the person owning, occupying or leasing the premises. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-14: UNACCEPTABLE TRASH:
Unacceptable trash shall include demolition materials, concrete block, dirt, rocks, roofing boards, tires, batteries, automobile parts, waste oil, any
hazardous waste materials, tree limbs, tree trunks, Christmas trees, hot ashes, dead animals or animal parts, commercial or industrial wastes such as
waste grain, potato waste, slaughterhouse waste, and any other such trash as designated by the PWD. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-15: INTERFERE WITH CITY INSPECTOR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the city inspector during the performance of his duties under this chapter. (Ord. 515, 1-7-
1998)
8-4-16: SUPPRESSING NUISANCES:
The city inspector shall take cognizance of all nuisances within the limits of the city and shall take such measures as may be effectual to suppress and
abate the same. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
8-4-17: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by regulations under this chapter, by the city inspector, or any contractor whom the city has contracted for the garbage and refuse
collection may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be perfected by filing a written specification of grievances with the city clerk-treasurer. Within a
period of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days, the city council shall meet to hear such appeal. Notice of the time and place of hearing shall
be given to the person appealing at the address shown on the person's notice of appeal. The city council shall hear all parties in interest and shall issue its
order, its findings of fact and conclusions and order based thereon. Decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
Title 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
SIDEWALKS AND CURBS
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, these words are defined as follows:
CURB: A raised edging along a sidewalk which separates the street surface from the sidewalk, usually constructed of concrete. The curb may include a
gutter, in which case the curb and gutter casting is considered a curb for purposes of this chapter.
SIDEWALK: That area of public right of way between the back of the curb line and private property line, along any public street or alley, with or without an
existing concrete structure thereon. The sidewalk includes any driveway approach. (Ord. 530, 12-7-1998)
9-1-2: SPECIFICATIONS:
The specifications in the Idaho standards for public works construction, as amended, shall govern all construction and/or repair of curbs and sidewalks
within the municipality. (Ord. 530, 12-7-1998)
9-1-3: OWNER'S DUTY TO CONSTRUCT, REPAIR OR REPLACE:
It is the duty of the person owning or having control of real property along or abutting any curb or sidewalk, to construct, repair or replace the curb or
sidewalk so as to provide safe, all-weather passage for pedestrians, and to provide adequate street drainage and pavement protection, for the safety and
convenience of the traveling public. (Ord. 530, 12-7-1998)
9-1-4: CITY'S ABILITY TO REQUIRE CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 89/151
If the city council finds that curbs or sidewalks are dangerous and unsafe, requiring construction, repair or replacement thereof, the council may, at its
option:
(A) Serve written notice on the owner or person in control of the real property adjacent to the curb or sidewalk, informing that person of the unsafe
condition and requiring that person to construct, repair, or replace the curb or sidewalk as specified by the council, or, provide a plan acceptable to the
building administrator, within twenty one (21) days after receipt of the notice. In the event the necessary construction, repair, or replacement does not
take place, the council may proceed according to subsection (B) of this section; or
(B) Provide, by general ordinance, for the construction, repair, or replacement of the unsafe curb or sidewalk, and assess the cost thereof to the adjacent
property. Collection of the assessment may be done pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-1008. Nothing herein shall preclude the council from
establishing a local improvement district for the construction, repair or replacement of curbs and sidewalks, pursuant to chapter 17, title 50 of the Idaho
Code. (Ord. 530, 12-7-1998)
Chapter 2
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE
9-2-1: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE:
It shall be the duty of the owner or tenant of any premises abutting or adjoining any public sidewalk to remove all snow and/or ice from such sidewalk.
(1960 Code)
9-2-2: NOTICE TO BE GIVEN:
It shall be the duty of the municipality to give notice to any owner or tenant of any property to remove snow and/or ice, which notice shall be sent by
registered mail to the last known address of such owner, tenant or occupant. The owner or occupant shall have not more than twenty four (24) hours from
and after receipt of such notice, within which to remove the snow and/or ice as set forth in said notice. (1960 Code)
9-2-3: UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY, MUNICIPALITY TO REMOVE:
Upon failure of an owner or tenant to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the municipality shall have the right to remove such snow and/or ice and
assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the sidewalk. Such assessment to be certified to the county assessor or other proper county official
having charge of the making of the assessment roll, and such charge shall be placed on the assessment roll and collected in the same manner as other
municipal taxes are collected. (1960 Code)
Chapter 3
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
9-3-1: TREES TO BE TRIMMED:
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees on property owned or occupied by him, overhanging any public thoroughfare, so that the
branches thereon will not interfere with pedestrians or public travel. (1960 Code)
9-3-2: HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY:
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/or
shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk in the municipality. (1960 Code)
9-3-3: INJURY TO TREES AND/OR SHRUBBERY:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or without lawful authority so to do, wilfully to injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any
tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or plant, located either on private ground or on any public place or thoroughfare. (1960 Code)
9-3-4: TREES OUTSIDE OF PROPERTY LINE:
The governing body of the municipality is hereby provided full and complete control over all trees which are outside the property lines of privately owned
real property. (1960 Code)
Chapter 4
WEED AND WASTE MATTER ABATEMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 90/151
9-4-1: TITLE, CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and shall be cited as the CITY OF AMERICAN FALLS WEED AND WASTE MATTER ABATEMENT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 443,
7-11-1990)
9-4-2: NUISANCE, PROHIBITED:
No owner of any lot, place or area within the city, or occupant or person in control of same, shall permit on such lot, place or area or upon any street,
sidewalk or public right of way abutting the same, a public nuisance to exist as herein defined and found to exist by the fire chief or his authorized
representative, or the chief of police or his authorized representative. (Ord. 443, 7-11-1990)
9-4-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES DESIGNATED:
(A) All weeds, dry grasses, trees, shrubs and other vegetation, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash or any material present upon the streets, sidewalks,
adjacent public rights of way or upon private property within the city, which by reason of size, manner of growth, or location, constitutes a fire hazard to
any building, improvements, crops or other property, as well as weeds and other vegetation, which by reason of promiscuous propagation are likely to
cause damage to public streets and sidewalks, or which interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by the neighbors, are declared to be a
public nuisance.
(B) Regularly cultivated, mowed and useful grasses and pastures shall not be declared a public nuisance. However, if the fire chief or his authorized
representative determines it necessary to protect adjacent improved property from fire exposure, an adequate fire break may be required.
(C) "Waste matter" as hereinafter defined, which by reason of its location and character is unsightly or which interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of
property by the neighbors, or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises, or any adjoining
premises, or the abatement of a nuisance as defined by this chapter is declared a public nuisance.
(D) "Waste matter" is defined for the purpose of this chapter as unused or discarded matter having little or no substantial market value, which is exposed to
the elements and/or is not enclosed in any structure or otherwise completely concealed from public view, and which consists (without limitation or
exclusion by enumeration) of such matter and material as:
1. Rubble: To include asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, dirt, and/or gravel piles, unused building or mobile home foundations;
2. Rubbish: To include crates, cartons, metal and glass containers, newspapers, boxes, wood shavings, lumber scraps, bedding, lawn clippings,
furniture, home appliances, washers, dryers, freezers, refrigerators, dilapidated outbuildings, fragments of buildings; and
3. Vehicular Components: To include automotive bodies, trailers, tires, farm equipment, and commercial equipment components and/or parts thereof.
(Ord. 443, 7-11-1990)
9-4-4: NUISANCE ABATEMENT NOTICE:
If it is determined by the fire chief or his authorized representative, or the chief of police or his authorized representative that a "public nuisance", as herein
defined, exists on any lot, place or area, or upon any street, sidewalk, or public right of way abutting the same, the chief of the fire department or the chief
of police or an authorized representative shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed "Notice To Clean
Premises"; shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance; shall describe the
nuisance in terms reasonably sufficient to identify the same; shall direct the abatement of the nuisance; shall specify the penalty provision as provided
herein; and shall specify the appeal process as provided herein. Such notice may be on a form prescribed by the city. (Ord. 443, 7-11-1990)
9-4-5: ABATEMENT NOTICE, SERVICE:
The notice required by section 9-4-4 of this chapter may be served in the following manner:
(A) By personal service on the owner of said lot, place, or area, if the owner lives within the city, and by personal service on the occupant or person in
charge or control of the property, if such person can be identified; or
(B) If said owner does not live within the city, by registered mail to the owner at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise
known; and, by personal service on the occupant or person in charge or control of the property, if such person can be identified; or
(C) Should the owner not be known or have an available address, by posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting a public right of way and by
publication of said notice at least once a week for the period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by personal service
on the occupant or person in charge or control of the property, if such person can be identified. Said newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice
that property in the city has been posted in accordance with this chapter and contain a general statement of the effect of such postings. The date of
such newspaper advertisements shall not be considered in computing the appeal periods provided by this chapter. (Ord. 443, 7-11-1990)
9-4-6: APPEAL:
Within ten (10) days from the date of posting, mailing, or personal service of the required notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such lot,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 91/151
place or area affected may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. At the regular meeting, or
recessed meeting of the city council, not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty six (26) days thereafter, the city council shall proceed to hear and
pass upon such appeal, and the decision of the city council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 443, 7-11-1990)
9-4-7: ABATEMENT REQUIRED, TIME LIMIT:
It shall be the duty of the owner or person occupying or controlling any lot, place or area in the city which has been declared a public nuisance as provided
herein, within ten (10) days from the date of notification as provided herein, or in case of an appeal to the city council, within ten (10) days from the
determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to remove the nuisance as stated. (Ord. 443, 7-11-1990)
9-4-8: VIOLATION, PENALTIES:
(A) Failure to abate the stated nuisance shall be a misdemeanor.
(B) Any chronic nuisance shall be a misdemeanor. A chronic nuisance occurs any time a property receives two (2) or more nuisance abatement notices for
a substantially similar or related nuisance activity within a three hundred sixty five (365) day period.
(C) The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive remedies and the city may invoke all remedies, civil and criminal, provided for abatement of nuisances.
(Ord. 597, 2-3-2010)
9-4-9: ABATEMENT BY CITY, COSTS:
Upon the failure to abate a stated nuisance within the time limits of section 9-4-7 of this chapter, the city may remove the same, doing whatever is
necessary to accomplish the abatement cleanup, removal and related work. The costs thereof may be assessed against the property and collected as
provided by law, particularly as provided by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 10, "Special Assessments", or the city may collect the costs by civil action. (Ord.
443, 7-11-1990)
9-4-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this chapter is held to be invalid for any reason, such invalidation shall not affect the validity and
enforceability of any of the remaining provisions hereof. (Ord. 443, 7-11-1990)
Chapter 5
STREETS AND ALLEYS CONTINUOUS
9-5-1: STREETS AND ALLEYS CONTINUOUS:
Streets and alleys laid out in any addition to the city shall be continuous with and correspond in directions and width to the streets and alleys of the city to
which they are an addition. (1960 Code)
Chapter 6
SIGNS AND AWNINGS
9-6-1: MANNER OF CONSTRUCTION:
(A) Signs erected over the sidewalk shall be constructed entirely of metal not lighter than N. 28 U.S. gauge, or other equally substantial material. Frames
shall be constructed of angles or other rolled steel shapes not thinner than N. 20 U.S. gauge steel. The lower edge of any such sign shall not be less
than eight feet (8') from the sidewalk and such sign shall not extend horizontally to within one foot (1') of sidewalk width.
(B) All signs shall be supported from the buildings in front of which they are placed with proper metal supports securely bolted or fastened to masonry
walls. All signs extending over the sidewalk shall be laterally secured with guywires which are made adjustable by means of turnbuckles. Where
buildings set back of the property line, signs may be mounted on a single steel pole that is securely anchored in concrete.
(C) The framework of all boards or signs placed upon the roof of any building or structure shall be of iron or steel and shall be so constructed and fastened
to the roof as to be capable of withstanding a wind pressure of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square foot of surface area. Said board or sign
shall be set back from the firewall of said building or structure a distance of least three feet (3') so as to leave a clear passageway around and in front
of the same. The bottom line of the surface of said board or sign shall be at least four feet (4') in the clear above the roof of said building so as to leave
a clear passageway under the same. (1960 Code)
9-6-2: AWNINGS, ERECTION OF:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 92/151
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to erect, construct or maintain within the city any awning or covering over any sidewalk
except folding awnings and those that are raised by means of rollers, constructed of cloth or canvas, placed upon substantial iron or wood frames and
securely fastened to the building. The lower edge of the frame of any such awning shall be not less than seven feet (7') from the sidewalk, and the lower
edge of the cloth or canvas skirt of such awning shall be not less than six and one-half feet (61/2') from the sidewalk. (1960 Code)
9-6-3: BANNERS ON AWNINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any banner of any kind whatsoever upon any awning over any sidewalk in the city, the lower edge of which
banner extends below the lower edge of the awning on which it is hung. (1960 Code)
Chapter 7
REFUSE IN BUILDINGS; STAGNANT WATER
9-7-1: REFUSE IN BUILDINGS; STAGNANT WATER:
No person shall permit or suffer to be in or accumulate in, or upon any yard, lot, place or premises or upon any street or sidewalk adjacent to or abutting
upon any lot, block, place or premises, or in any building or shed owned or occupied by him or them or for which he or they may be agents within the limits
of the city, any stagnant water or impure water, refuse, vegetable decay or decaying substance, garbage or filth of any kind, nor suffer such yard, lot,
place, building or premises to be or to remain in such condition as to cause or create a nuisance or offensive smell or to pollute or render unhealthful the
atmosphere or the premises or hereby to be, become, cause or create a public nuisance. (1960 Code; amd. Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
Chapter 8
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
9-8-1: ADOPTION OF RESOLUTION:
In order for the city council to avail itself of the remedies provided in Idaho Code sections 50-334, 50-335 and 50-1008, it shall first adopt a resolution
declaring that it deems a nuisance to exist, as provided in Idaho Code section 50-334, or that a building or structure is, in the opinion of the city council, so
dilapidated or is in such condition as to menace the public health or the safety of persons or property on account of increased fire hazard or otherwise, as
provided in Idaho Code section 50-335. (Ord. 320, 12-1974; amd. Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
9-8-2: PUBLIC HEARING:
Thereafter, the city council shall hold a public hearing at which any person interested in the alleged nuisance or in the property may appear and object to
the designation of nuisance or menace to public health or the safety of persons or property. (Ord. 320, 12-1974; amd. Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
9-8-3: NOTICE OF HEARING:
Notice of the aforesaid hearing shall be given by certified mail to all persons, associations, corporations or copartnerships holding, owning or maintaining
the property, building or structure declared to be a nuisance or a menace to public health or property. No such hearing shall be held and no further action
taken until twenty (20) days after such notice shall have been regularly deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 320, 12-1974; amd. Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
9-8-4: FINAL DETERMINATION:
After such hearing the city council shall make a final determination as to whether a nuisance exists or that the building or structure menaces the public
health or safety. (Ord. 320, 12-1974; amd. Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
9-8-5: NOTICE, TIME LIMIT FOR REMOVAL:
If the city council determines that a nuisance exists or that a building or structure menaces the public health or safety, notice thereof shall be given in the
manner and to the persons specified in section 9-8-3 of this chapter. Said persons shall be advised that they will have a reasonable time, to be specified
by the city council, within which to abate the nuisance or repair or remove the building or structure or suffer the same to be done by the city and the cost
thereof assessed against the property upon which the nuisance, building or structure is situated as provided in Idaho Code section 50-1008. (Ord. 320, 12-
1974; amd. Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
Chapter 9
WATER RATES
(Rep. by Ord. 515, 1-7-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 93/151
Chapter 10
EXCAVATING
9-10-1: LICENSE TO EXCAVATE:
No person shall dig or excavate in any street or alley in the city of American Falls without first obtaining a license therefor from the city clerk. (Ord. 319, 7-
17-1974)
9-10-2: BOND REQUIRED:
As a prerequisite to the issuing of such license, the city clerk shall require a fee in an amount to be set by the city council together with a refundable fee,
bond or undertaking from the applicant in such form as required by the city council, which said refundable fee, bond or undertaking shall be to guarantee
that the street or alley be returned to its former condition within a reasonable time after the digging or excavation permitted by the license. (Ord. 581, 8-16-
2006)
9-10-3: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (Ord. 319, 7-17-1974)
Chapter 11
TREE PLANTING, PROTECTION AND REMOVAL
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting,
maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city of American Falls. (Ord. 598, 2-3-2010)
9-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
HAZARDOUS TREES OR SHRUBS: Those with dead limbs or branches which could fall and cause hazard to anyone on public property.
PEST INFESTED TREES OR SHRUBS: Any tree or shrub that, because of disease from pests, can affect the health of other trees and shrubs within the
city.
PUBLIC TREE OR SHRUB: Any tree or shrub on any public property or right of way.
THREAT: A "threat" consists of any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence which endangers the growth or health of trees and/or shrubs.
TREE TOPPING: The improper pruning or severe cutting back of limbs within a tree's crown or the removal of the top portion of the trunk of a tree. (Ord.
598, 2-3-2010)
9-11-3: TREE BOARD:
(A) Authority And Power:
1. A city tree board for the city of American Falls, state of Idaho, shall be created and established, consisting of five (5) members, citizens and residents
who reside or work within Power County, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Members of the board shall serve
without compensation in an advisory capacity to the city council.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and develop planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in
parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented to the city council for their acceptance and approval. The plan shall also
be delivered to the city building administrator for consideration and guidance on issuance of building permits, subdivision permits, and other planning
and building matters.
(B) Term Of Office:
1. The term of the five (5) board members to be appointed by the mayor are:
(a) One member will serve for one year;
(b) Two (2) members will serve for two (2) years;
(c) Two (2) members will serve for three (3) years.
2. If any board member leaves the board before his/her term is finished, a successor shall be appointed by the mayor for the remainder of that term.
After the expiration of the initial terms of office, members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms of office. (Ord. 598, 2-3-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 94/151
9-11-4: APPLICABILITY:
The plan shall include all trees, plants and shrubs located within street rights of way, parks, golf courses, buffer zones, and public lands within the city
limits, and to trees, plants and shrubs located on private property that constitute a hazard or threat as described in this chapter. (Ord. 598, 2-3-2010)
9-11-5: LICENSING AND INSURANCE:
City trees and shrubs shall be maintained by qualified city employees or under the direction of a certified arborist that is licensed and insured. (Ord. 598, 2-
3-2010)
9-11-6: LANDSCAPING:
All new development shall include parkway trees from the small and medium tree list of recommended trees and shrubs developed by the board. Tree
plantings shall comply with the "site vision triangle" of intersections and at proper setback distances. (Ord. 598, 2-3-2010)
9-11-7: TREE PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL:
The planting, maintenance, and removal of all public trees in parks and recreational areas of the city shall be done within the guidelines and standards set
forth by the board. (Ord. 598, 2-3-2010)
9-11-8: TREE PROTECTION:
The following guidelines and standards shall apply to trees on public property, in the tree protection plan:
(A) It shall be prohibited for any person, firm, or city department to "top" any public trees.
(B) All planting and removal of public trees or shrubs should be done according to the work plan prepared for the city by the board.
(C) No disposal of toxic waste matter shall be placed within the proximity of the root zone of any trees or shrubs.
(D) No attached devices or structures (i.e., tree houses or signs) may be placed on trees.
(E) Trees and shrubs will be pruned or removed in accordance with the definition of "clear vision triangle" contained in the American Falls development
code, section 11-16-2 of this code. (Ord. 598, 2-3-2010)
9-11-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Upon the discovery of a "threat" as defined herein, the city building administrator shall at once cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the
property upon which such diseased or infested tree is situated, by personal service, or certified mail, return receipt requested, and the notice shall state
that such condition must be cured by the property owner within ten (10) days from the date of the official notice or the threat may be treated as a nuisance
and may be abated by the city with all costs of abatement assessed against the property owner. The property owner may appeal the building
administrator's decision to the city council by lodging written notice with the city clerk within such ten (10) day period. The hearing shall be held within
seven (7) days after the city clerk receives the property owner's written request. The hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply.
The property owner may be represented by counsel; present oral and written evidence and cross examine witnesses. The city council shall issue a
decision within three (3) days after the close of the hearing and shall notify the property owner in writing of the decision. If the city council upholds the city
building administrator's determination that a threat exists, the threat shall be abated by the city and all costs of abatement shall be assessed against the
property owner. The decision of the city council is final.
The city shall also have the authority to enforce any provisions of this chapter by civil and/or criminal proceedings.
Where it has been determined that a public tree(s) has been damaged or removed in violation of this chapter and/or Idaho Code 6-202, the offending
person or firm shall be assessed treble the cost of repair or replacement. The city shall determine that cost using accepted plant appraisal methods as set
forth in the current edition of the "Guide For Plant Appraisal", published by the International Society Of Arboriculture.
Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other legal entity that violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may also be fined a
sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any one offense and may be confined in the municipal jail for a period of not more than six (6)
months. All violations, which are of a continuing nature, shall constitute a separate offense for each day of such continuance. (Ord. 598, 2-3-2010)
Title 10
TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
ADOPTION OF IDAHO MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 95/151
10-1-1: INTENT:
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the governing body of the city to aid and assist by whatever means possible, for the utmost consistency in traffic
regulation among and between agencies of Idaho having such jurisdiction. Toward that end, adoption of the Idaho motor vehicle laws by the cities of Idaho
is a necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity within the state. (Ord. 287, 12-16-1970, eff. 1-2-1971)
10-1-2: ADOPTION OF IDAHO MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the use of all streets and public thoroughfares of the city that certain
code, identified as the 1969 revised edition, Idaho motor vehicle laws, more particularly title 49, Idaho Code, published by the department of law
enforcement, and as the same may hereafter be revised by the Idaho legislature, or amended by the governing body, and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length herein. (Ord. 287, 12-16-1970, eff. 1-2-1971)
10-1-3: COPIES TO BE KEPT ON FILE:
Three (3) copies of the Idaho motor vehicle laws, together with any revisions or amendments, duly certified by the city clerk, shall be kept on file in his
office for use and examination of and by the public. (Ord. 287, 12-16-1970, eff. 1-2-1971)
Chapter 2
BICYCLES
10-2-1: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required herein.
(B) The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.
(C) These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any public thoroughfare or public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles. (1960 Code)
10-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the municipality, to ride or propel a bicycle on any public thoroughfare unless such bicycle has been licensed
and a license plate is attached thereto. (1960 Code)
10-2-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a bicycle license and license plate shall be made to the clerk. A fee of one dollar ($1.00) per annum shall be paid before such license is
issued. (1960 Code)
10-2-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
(A) The clerk, upon receiving proper application therefor, is authorized to issue a bicycle license which shall be effective until the end of the calendar year.
(B) The clerk shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.
(C) The clerk shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued, the number on the
frame of the bicycle and a record of all bicycle license fees collected. (1960 Code)
10-2-5: ATTACHMENT OF LICENSE PLATE:
(A) The clerk, upon issuing a bicycle license, shall also issue a license plate bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle, the name of the
municipality and the calendar year for which issued.
(B) Each license plate shall be firmly attached to the bicycle in such a position as to be plainly visible.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a license plate from a bicycle during the period for which issued except upon a transfer of ownership or in
the event the bicycle is dismantled. (1960 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 96/151
10-2-6: INSPECTION:
The clerk shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the same and shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical
condition. (1960 Code)
10-2-7: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Upon the expiration of any bicycle license the same may be renewed upon application and payment of the same fee as upon the original application.
(1960 Code)
10-2-8: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
Upon the sale or transfer of a licensed bicycle the licensee shall remove the plate and shall either surrender the same to the clerk or may upon proper
application, but without payment of an additional fee, have said plate assigned to another bicycle owned by the applicant. (1960 Code)
10-2-9: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and a license plate is attached thereto. (1960 Code)
10-2-10: BICYCLE DEALERS:
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the clerk of every bicycle purchased or sold
by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such bicycle by name or make, the
frame number thereof, and the number of license plate, if any, found thereon. (1960 Code)
10-2-11: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of this title which by their nature can have no application. (1960 Code)
10-2-12: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
(A) Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signs, signals and other control devices applicable to vehicles unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
(B) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to
disobey the direction of any such sign; except, where a person dismounts from the bicycle to make such turn, in which event such person shall then
obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (1960 Code)
10-2-13: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
(A) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(B) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. (1960 Code)
10-2-14: RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS:
(A) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride asnear to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
(B) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
(C) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. (1960
Code)
10-2-15: SPEED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. (1960 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 97/151
10-2-16: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on said roadway. (1960 Code)
10-2-17: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle to attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon any public thoroughfare. (1960 Code)
10-2-18: CARRYING ARTICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry a package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon
the handlebars. (1960 Code)
10-2-19: PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a bicycle in such a manner as to interfere or obstruct pedestrian traffic. (1960 Code)
10-2-20: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
(B) The clerk is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon, and when such signs are in place it shall be
unlawful for any person to disobey the same. (1960 Code)
10-2-21: LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT:
(A) Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty feet (50') to three hundred
feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance
of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance
of at least one hundred feet (100'), except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
(C) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (1960
Code)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
10-3-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The chief of police shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic regulations of the municipality
to make effective the provisions of said regulations, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary. (1960
Code)
10-3-2: SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the approved specifications. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose
shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the municipality. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the
provisions of this title shall be official traffic control devices. (1960 Code)
10-3-3: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic regulations
of the municipality, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. (1960
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 98/151
10-3-4: WHEN TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED:
No provisions of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official
sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that
signsare required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. (1960 Code)
10-3-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "Go", "Caution" or "Stop" or exhibiting different colored lights successively one
at a time or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and said terms and light shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as
follows: (1960 Code)
(A) Green alone or "Go":
1. Vehicular traffic facing a red light or other stop signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then
before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone, except that after such stop, a right turn shall be
permitted when the same can be executed with safety. (Ord. 284, 10-7-1970)
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. (1960 Code)
(B) Yellow alone or "Caution" when following the green or "Go" signal:
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited
immediately thereafter. (Ord. 415, 1-5-1986)
2. Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall
yield the right of way to all vehicles.
3. Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
(C) Red alone or "Stop":
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the
intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
(D) Red with green arrow:
1. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrowbut shall yield the right
of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
(E) In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this chapter shall be
applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. (1960 Code)
10-3-6: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows:
(A) Walk: Pedestrians facing such a signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way.
(B) Wait Or Don't Walk: It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. (1960 Code)
10-3-7: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(A) Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 99/151
(B) Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(C) Railroad Crossings: This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall
be governed by the rules set forth in chapter 7 of this title. (1960 Code)
10-3-8: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS:
(A) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is
an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device
or any railroad sign or signal.
(B) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial
advertising.
(C) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and
of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(D) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. (1960 Code)
10-3-9: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any part thereof. (1960 Code)
10-3-10: CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES:
The chief of police is hereby authorized:
(A) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
(B) To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (1960 Code)
10-3-11: TRAFFIC LANES:
(A) The chief of police is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
(B) Where such traffic lanes have been marked it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (1960 Code)
Chapter 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
10-4-1: HOURS PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
(A) Tyhee Street: No vehicle other than school buses shall be permitted to park along the west side of Tyhee Street between Taylor Street and East Park
Street, between the hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. on any day when any school operated by the
Independent School District 381 shall be in session.
(B) Taylor Street: There shall be a student drop off zone on the south side of Taylor Street beginning at the corner of Taylor Street and Tyhee Street and
then extending in a westerly direction toward Fort Hall Avenue for a distance of one hundred twenty five feet (125'). No vehicle shall be permitted to
park along this section of Taylor Street for any reason other than to make a temporary stop for the sole purpose of dropping off students between the
hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. on any day when any school operated by the Independent School District 381
shall be in session.
(C) Violation An Infraction: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction as set forth under Idaho law. (Ord.
562, 10-16-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 100/151
10-4-2: PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
(A) Stopping, Standing, Or Parking Prohibited; No Signs Required: It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:
1. On a sidewalk;
2. In front of a public or private driveway;
3. Within an intersection;
4. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
5. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
6. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
7. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
8. Alongside or opposite any street obstruction or excavation when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
9. On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a curb of a street;
10. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
11. Alongside any curb marked or painted with yellow paint; and
12. Alongside or within any marked bicycle lane which abuts the edge of a public street.
(B) Fort Hall Avenue:
1. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park along the southeast curb line of Fort Hall Avenue between its intersection with West Park Street in the city.
2. It shall further be unlawful for any vehicle to park along the northwest curb line of Fort Hall Avenue between its intersection with Howard Street and
Lincoln Avenue.
(C) Bennett Avenue:
1. In order to create a safe and orderly flow of traffic in the vicinity of Hillcrest Grade School, parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on the south side
of Bennett Avenue from its intersection with Pierce Street to its intersection with Fillmore Street.
2. Further, that same portion of Bennett Avenue shall be prohibited to parking and shall have the use of its right hand lane limited to loading and
unloading of passengers only, as shall be designated by signs and street markings.
3. The north side of that same portion of Bennett Avenue shall be used for angle parking only, as shall be designated by the city.
(D) Pocatello Avenue:
1. Vehicle parking shall be prohibited on the southeast side of Pocatello Avenue from its intersection with Gifford Avenue to its intersection with Hillcrest
Avenue.
(E) Parking In Alley: It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within an alley except in the following circumstances: 1) vehicles may be parked in an
alley while actually involved in the loading and unloading of passengers or merchandise, so long as they are parked in a manner or under such
conditions to leave available at least ten feet (10') of width of the alley for the free movement of vehicular traffic when possible and, 2) vehicles may be
parked in an alley upon written permission from the chief of police for exceptional circumstances shown.
(F) Definitions: The term "vehicle" as used in this section shall also include recreational vehicles such as snow machines, motorcycles, golf carts, boats,
campers and motor homes. (Ord. 595, 10-7-2009)
10-4-3: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
(A) No vehicle except a vehicle belonging to a handicapped person, provided further that such vehicle is designated as "handicapped", as per Idaho law,
shall park:
1. Along the west side of Fort Hall Avenue from Idaho Street to the alley from the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) P.M.,
Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. (Ord. 471, 4-6-1994)
2. In the two (2) handicapped parking spaces designated near Hillcrest Elementary School, beginning at the southwest corner of the intersection of
Bennett Avenue and Pierce Street, thence east along the south side of Bennett Avenue a distance of fifty six feet (56'). (Ord. 518, 3-18-1998)
10-4-4: VIOLATIONS OF PARKING REGULATIONS:
Any violations of the parking regulations provided for in this chapter shall be punishable as infractions, pursuant to Idaho law. (Ord. 539, 10-6-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 101/151
Chapter 5
VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS; TRUCK ROUTES
10-5-1: WEIGHT LIMIT:
The weight limit for the residential streets of American Falls shall be twenty six thousand (26,000) pounds. (Ord. 552, 12-20-2000)
10-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and the derivations shall have the meanings given in this section:
DESTINATION POINT: Any lawful business premises for the loading or unloading of cargo or the final lawful parking place.
DEVIATING TRUCK: A truck that leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling within the city.
OVERSIZED TRUCK OR LOAD: Any truck or load on a truck which would be prohibited on the roads of the state by Idaho Code section 49-1010, or which
may only travel on state roads by permit, pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-1004.
PERSON: A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
RESIDENTIAL ROUTES: All other streets, avenues, alleys and ways not designated as "truck routes", shall be designated and referred to as "residential
routes".
TRUCK: Any vehicle designed or operated for the purpose of transportation of property, and whose actual vehicle weight exceeds twenty six thousand
(26,000) pounds, and does not include a semitractor, which weighs less than twenty six thousand (26,000) pounds and is separated at the time of
operation from the trailer.
TRUCK ROUTE: A way over certain streets as designated by the city, over and along which trucks (as defined herein) coming into and going out of the city
must operate. (Ord. 552, 12-20-2000)
10-5-3: APPLICATION OF REGULATION:
(A) Trucks: All trucks within the city shall be operated only on the designated truck routes of the city.
(B) Exceptions: This section shall not prohibit:
1. Emergency Vehicles: The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city.
2. Public Utility Trucks: The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or materialmen, while engaged in the
repair, maintenance, or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the city.
3. Detoured Trucks: The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour.
4. Residentially Parked Semitractors: The operation of semitractors on residential streets solely for the purpose of temporarily parking the tractor
portion on private residential property with the permission of the property owner, in compliance with other laws and ordinances.
5. Moving, Service, Delivery Trucks: Trucks that may have occasional use in connection with moving, delivery of goods, or performance of service in a
residential area.
(C) Time Limit: Except as otherwise provided herein, all trucks within the city may be parked on established truck routes for a period not to exceed twenty
four (24) hours, unless special permission is obtained from the chief of police or his designee. Such trucks shall be parked in a manner so as not to
block driveways or other streets or to be a vision hazard for other drivers.
(D) Parking Allowed: Parking is generally permitted on the following streets:
Bannock Avenue from Harrison Street to its intersection with Sunbeam Road.
Falls Avenue from Lincoln Street to McKinley Street.
Fort Hall Avenue from the Highway 39 bypass to Lincoln Street.
Harrison Street.
Idaho Street from Fort Hall Avenue to Highway 39.
Lee Street from Fort Hall Avenue to Whitman Avenue.
Lincoln Street.
McKinley Street from Falls Avenue to Teton Avenue.
North Oregon Trail to Roosevelt Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 102/151
Pocatello Avenue.
Roosevelt Street from North Oregon Trail to Bannock Avenue.
Sunbeam Road.
Whitman Avenue.
(E) No Parking Areas: Areas of the truck routes that shall not be used for truck parking are designated as follows:
Bannock Avenue between Roosevelt Street and Sunbeam Road.
Fort Hall Avenue between Lee Street and the Highway 39 bypass.
Fort Hall Avenue between West Park Street and Taylor Street.
McKinley Street between Falls Avenue and city limits.
Pocatello Avenue between Bannock Avenue and city limits.
Sunbeam Road between Bannock Avenue and city limits.
(F) Motors Running: No truck or trailer shall be parked with its motor or refrigeration unit running for more than one-half (1/2) hour. (Ord. 552, 12-20-2000)
10-5-4: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) Clerk Maintains Maps: Accurate maps setting out truck routes designated by the city shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be
available to the public.
(B) Street Department To Maintain Signs: The street department shall cause all truck routes upon which truck traffic is required to travel to be clearly
signposted.
(C) Weigh In: The chief of police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether
this chapter has been complied with. (Ord. 552, 12-20-2000)
10-5-5: PENALTY:
Other than excepted herein, it is unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor for any person to operate a truck at any time upon any residential routes.
(Ord. 552, 12-20-2000)
10-5-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The owner and the operator of any vehicle or other contrivance over and upon any street, avenue, alley or way within the city shall be jointly and severally
responsible for any and all damages which any of such truck routes or residential routes may sustain as a direct or indirect result of any operation of said
vehicle or other contrivance on any said truck or residential routes in violation of any of the terms or conditions hereof. All said damages may be recovered
by the city in an action at law or equity. (Ord. 552, 12-20-2000)
Chapter 6
SPEED LIMITS
10-6-1: ERECTION OF SIGNS:
The chief of police or other city agent may erect appropriate speed limit signs and school zone signs as deemed necessary to give notice and advise the
general public of the maximum speed limits enacted in this chapter. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
10-6-2: GENERAL SPEED LIMIT:
The speed of twenty five (25) miles per hour is the maximum speed allowed upon any street within the municipality except as otherwise provided in this
title. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
10-6-3: SPEED IN CERTAIN AREAS FIFTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR:
After due consideration of the need therefor, a traffic investigation, and recommendations of the state department of transportation, there is established a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 103/151
maximum speed limit not to exceed fifty five (55) miles per hour as follows:
State Highway 39 within the city limits of American Falls, Idaho. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
10-6-4: SPEED IN CERTAIN AREAS THIRTY MILES PER HOUR:
After due consideration of the need therefor, a traffic investigation, and recommendations of the state department of transportation, there is established a
maximum speed limit not to exceed thirty (30) miles per hour as follows:
Fort Hall Avenue between Harrison and Lee and out to American Falls marina.
Fort Hall Avenue between Lincoln and Harrison.
Harrison Avenue between Fort Hall and Bannock.
Lincoln Street between Teton and Fort Hall.
Pocatello Avenue between Bannock and city limits. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
10-6-5: SPEED IN CERTAIN AREAS TWENTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR:
After due consideration of the need therefor, a traffic investigation, and recommendations of the state department of transportation, there is established a
maximum speed limit not to exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour as follows:
For all other existing streets within or controlled by the city of American Falls unless otherwise designated. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
10-6-6: SCHOOL ZONE SPEED REGULATIONS:
After due consideration of the need therefor, there is established a maximum speed not to exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour in the areas of schools
(school zones) and the speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour shall be in effect only Monday through Friday, inclusive, from seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. until four o'clock (4:00) P.M. from August 25 through June 10 of each year. The twenty five (25) miles per hour school zones are designated as
follows:
Fort Hall between Polk Street and Lincoln Street.
Lincoln Street between Fort Hall Avenue and Teton Street.
Pocatello Avenue between city limits and fifty feet (50') west of Bannock Avenue. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
10-6-7: SPEEDING VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A violation of the speed regulations adopted in this chapter shall constitute an infraction and the penalty therefor shall be as provided in the Idaho
infraction rules as set out in the Idaho Code, adopted July 1, 1983, as amended from time to time, three (3) copies of which are available for use and
examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
10-6-8: SEVERABILITY:
Provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid, such
declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter but they shall remain in effect, it being
the intentthat this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
10-6-9: ESTABLISHMENT:
As established by this chapter, maximum speeds on any street or highway within the city of American Falls and/or within the purview of the city's
jurisdiction are established by an engineering study or traffic investigation, or both, that has been reviewed and approved by an engineer licensed within
the state of Idaho. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
10-6-10: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING CODE PROVISIONS:
Any provision of this code in conflict with the provisions set forth in this chapter is repealed and of no force or effect. (Ord. 557, 12-5-2001)
Chapter 7
WILLOW BAY RECREATION AREA REGULATIONS
10-7-1: AUTHORITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 104/151
The chief of police is hereby authorized to set and to change as needed, regulations covering the use, the speed, movement, parking and to close or open
areas to all or some types of motorized equipment in the Willow Bay recreation area including the beach area as the reservoir water level recedes. (Ord.
453, 7-17-1991)
10-7-2: REGULATIONS FLEXIBLE:
The chief of police is authorized to change regulations adopted by him under section 10-7-1 of this chapter as required or desirable because of the type of
organized activity being conducted at the Willow Bay recreation area at the time. (Ord. 453, 7-17-1991)
10-7-3: ERECTION OF SIGNS:
The chief of police is hereby authorized to place appropriate signs in various places in the Willow Bay recreation area, including the beach area as the
reservoir water level recedes to advise the public of regulations adopted hereunder or of changes made to them. (Ord. 453, 7-17-1991)
10-7-4: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
A violation of the regulations adopted by the chief of police pursuant to this chapter shall constitute an infraction and the penalty therefor shall be as
provided in the Idaho infraction rules as set out in the Idaho Code, adopted July 1, 1983, and as amended from time to time, three (3) copies of which are
available for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 453, 7-17-1991)
Title 11
DEVELOPMENT CODE
Chapter 1
PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Division I. Purpose And Authority
11-1-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter establishes the purpose of this title, identifies the enabling statute pursuant to which it is adopted, repeals conflicting ordinances, provides
rules for the transition from previous regulations to this title, and establishes rules for the interpretation of this title. (1992 Development Code)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city by fulfilling the purposes and requirements of the
local planning act of 1975 and implementing the comprehensive plan. Specific statements of purpose accompany some provisions of this title, but the
comprehensive plan provides the full statement of the city's purpose and intent in planning and zoning activities. (1992 Development Code)
11-1-3: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by thelocal planning act of 1975. It includes the zoning ordinance required by Idaho Code section 67-
6511 and the subdivision ordinance required by Idaho Code section 67-6513. It also fulfills the other requirements of the local planning act, including the
provision for variances required by Idaho Code section 67-6516, the adoption of procedures for processing permits required by Idaho Code section 67-
6519, and the adoption of a hearing procedure required by Idaho Code section 67-6534. (1992 Development Code)
Division II. Impact Of Title On Development
11-1-4: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED:
All prior city ordinances are repealed to the full extent of their inconsistency with this title, specifically including titles 11 and 12 of the municipal code of
American Falls, both of which are replaced by this title. (1992 Development Code)
11-1-5: VESTED RIGHTS:
A vested right is the right to proceed with development that was under construction or had obtained some form of final approval from the city before the
effective date hereof. Vested rights to proceed with development initiated prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be established by:
(A) Having obtained a building permit in full compliance with previous ordinances (such vested rights expire with the permit); or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 105/151
(B) Having obtained approval of a preliminary plat or conditional use permit in full compliance with previous ordinances (such vested rights expire with the
approval or permit); or
(C) Having recorded a final plat in full compliance with previous ordinances.
(D) Approval of a preliminary plat or recording of a final plat establishes a vested right to the lot layout and road network design of the subdivision. It does
not establish a vested right for the development of any lot. (1992 Development Code)
11-1-6: NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS:
A nonconforming use or building is one that was in compliance with all applicable regulations at the time it was initiated or constructed, but that would not
comply with one or more requirements of this title, if presented for approval after its effective date. Nonconforming uses and buildings maycontinue subject
to the rules established here.
(A) Any nonconforming use abandoned for more than twelve (12) months shall be terminated. Abandonment shall not be measured by the owner's intent,
but solely by the fact that use ceases for a period of twelve (12) or more months. (1992 Development Code)
(B) There shall be no limit on repair or maintenance activities for nonconforming uses or buildings, but no such activity shall increase the degree of
nonconformity, except where the administrator permits a minor increase in nonconformity to provide handicapped access to a structure, as required by
law. Repair and maintenance of nonconforming buildings will be subject to the requirements of the international building and energy codes. (1992
Development Code; amd. Ord. 563, 4-16-2003)
(C) Changes in occupancy may be permitted in nonconforming commercial or industrial buildings; provided, that the new occupancy is no more intense
(with intensity being measured by traffic and noise generation, parking requirements, and similar factors) than the existing. Requests for such changes
in nonconforming occupancies shall be processed as applications for a special use permit.
(D) Nonconforming buildings may be replaced, but only where the effect of the replacement is to lessen the adverse impact of the nonconformity on the
city and the degree of nonconformity is not increased. Requests for replacement of nonconforming buildings shall be processed as applications for
special use permits, except that any nonconforming building destroyed by fire or other catastrophe may be replaced without a special use permit if the
degree of nonconformity is not in any way increased and the replacement is completed within twelve (12) months of the building's destruction. There
may be additional restrictions on the replacement of nonconforming buildings in airport safety zones or special flood hazard areas. (1992 Development
Code)
11-1-7: IMPACT ON PRIVATE AGREEMENTS:
This title does not nullify easements, covenants, deed restrictions, and similar private agreements, but where any such private agreement imposes
standards that are less restrictive than those of this title, this title shall govern. (1992 Development Code)
Division III. Interpretation Of Title
11-1-8: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
All provisions of this title shall be interpreted as theminimum requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to
implement the local planning act and the comprehensive plan. This title is designed to be consistent with the comprehensive plan and should be liberally
construed to achieve its purposes and intent. (1992 Development Code)
11-1-9: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS:
When future city ordinances, or state or federal law, impose additional standards on activities regulated by this title, the most restrictive standard shall
govern. (1992 Development Code)
11-1-10: BURDEN OF PROOF:
The burden of proof shall, in all proceedings pursuant to this title, rest with the developer. (1992 Development Code)
11-1-11: LIABILITY:
No individual, including council and commission members, or the administrator or other city employees, who acts in good faith and without malice in the
performance of duties assigned by this title, shall be held liable for errors or omissions in its administration. Any suit brought against such an individual
shall be defended by the city and any judgment resulting from such a suit shall be the liability of the city. (1992 Development Code)
11-1-12: SEVERABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 106/151
If any provision of this title is held to be invalid by any court, the remainder shall continue in full force and effect. (1992 Development Code)
11-1-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This title shall become effective upon publication, as required by law. (1992 Development Code)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
Division I. Permit Requirements And Procedures
11-2-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter requires a permit for all land development and building activity in the city and establishes procedures forthe administration of this title,
including the procedures for processing permit applications required by Idaho Code section 67-6519 and the hearing procedure required by Idaho Code
section 67-6534. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A permit shall be required for any division of land, grading, excavation, construction, reconstruction, or any land development, land use, or building activity,
including modification of address of a tract of land with a previously existing address, except as specifically exempted by section 11-2-3 or 11-2-4 of this
chapter. Applications for permits shall be processed as described in this chapter. (Ord. 582, 8-16-2006)
11-2-3: EXEMPTIONS FOR LAND DIVISIONS:
No permit shall be required for land divisions resulting from the following activities:
(A) An adjustment of lot lines shown on a recorded plat that does not reduce the area, frontage, width, depth, or building setback lines on any lot below the
minimum requirements of this title, and does not change the original number of lots in the plat;
(B) An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate, or as a result of a court decree for the distribution of property;
(C) An unwilling sale of land as a result of condemnation, or the acquisition of street rights of way or other public ways or spaces by a public agency;
(D) An exchange of land for the purpose of straightening adjacent property boundaries which does not result in a change in land use;
(E) Any division in which all parcels created or remaining are more than twenty (20) acres in size and which does not involve the dedication of streets or
other public ways or spaces; or
(F) The creation of cemetery lots.
(G) State law may require a record of survey for some activities exempted by this title. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-4: EXEMPTIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY:
Activities listed here are not exempt from any requirement of this title, except the requirement for a permit. No permit shall be required for:
(A) Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes or that is exempt from the requirements of the international building codes, except where such
excavation or grading is for the purpose of mining, which is not permitted in some zoning districts and always requires a special use permit, or within
special flood hazard areas, where all grading is subject to permit;
(B) Repairs or remodelings that do not alter the exterior dimensions of the building involved by more than six inches (6");
(C) Accessory buildings that are also exempted from review by the international building codes (note that this generally exempts accessory buildings with
a floor area of 120 square feet or less), except where such accessory buildings are located within an airport safety zone or special flood hazard area;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 107/151
(D) Fences that are also exempted from review by the international building codes (all fences must be in compliance with subsection 11-12-4(C) of this
title);
(E) Minor utility installations, except where such installations are in an airport safety zone or special flood hazard area; and
(F) Certain signs, as provided in appendix A, section 11-17-1 of this title.
(G) The international building codes may require a building permit for some activities exempted by this title. (1992 Development Code; amd. Ord. 563, 4-
16-2003)
11-2-5: APPLICATION FORMS:
Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the city. Multiple copies of applications and supporting materials, including a site plan, may be
required by the administrator. Applications shall contain all information required to demonstrate compliance with this title, and no incomplete application
shall be accepted. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-6: APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees for each type of permit established by this title shall be established by resolution of the council. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-7: LOT SPLIT PERMITS:
The lot split permit procedure is designed to assure that the creation of new parcels of land does not result in violationof this title or unnecessary
applications for variances. City review of proposed lot splits also helps protect utility easements and streets from encroachment and consumers from
purchasing inaccurately described property. Applications for lot split permits shall follow the procedure described herein. An application for a lot split permit
may be submitted and processed simultaneously with an application for a development permit or combined into an application for a special use permit, in
which case it shall be approved or disapproved by the commission along with the application for the special use permit.
(A) The developer shall file a properly completed application form, including a record of survey, the required supporting materials, and the required
application fee with the administrator.
(B) The administrator shall determine whether the proposed lot split is in compliance with the comprehensive plan and this title. If he/she finds that the
proposed lot split complies, the application for a permit shall be approved. If he/she finds that the proposed lot split does not comply, the application for
a permit shall be disapproved. Conditions may be attached to approval of the permit, as provided in section 11-2-11 of this chapter.
(C) The administrator shall notify the developer of the decision within ten (10) days, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
(D) The administrator may refer any lot split application to the commission for confirmation of its compliance or lack of compliance with the comprehensive
plan and this title. All such referrals shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting.
(E) The administrator's decision may be appealed to the council using the appeals procedure of section 11-2-14 of this chapter. Any person wishing to
appeal a decision shall file a notice of appeal with the administrator within ten (10) days after notice of the decision being appealed is received.
Developers proceed at their own risk during the appeal period.
(F) Approval of a lot split permit alone does not constitute or imply approval of a permit for any prospective use of the lot created. (1992 Development
Code)
11-2-8: SUBDIVISION PERMITS:
The subdivision permit procedure is designed to assure that land development is accompanied by installation of the necessary on site public facilities and
that it is compatible with neighboring land uses, the landscape setting, and the capacity of off site public facilities and services. City review of subdivisions
helps protect utility easements androad rights of way from encroachment and protects consumers from purchasing inaccurately described property.
Applications for subdivision permits shall follow the procedure described herein. In order to reduce the number of hearings required, an application for a
subdivision permit may be submitted and processed simultaneously with an application for a special use permit for a special use on one or more of the
proposed subdivision lots.
(A) The developer shall file a request for a sketch plan review with the administrator. Sketch plan review is not required for minor subdivisions, but the
developer of such a subdivision may elect to follow the sketch plan review procedure.
(B) The administrator shall place the sketch plan review on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting at which time will allow its proper
consideration.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 108/151
(C) The commission shall review the sketch plan. Sketch plan review is not a regulatory proceeding, but an opportunity for the commission to be made
aware of the proposal, and for the applicant to be made aware of possible questions and the applicable requirements of this title.
(D) The developer shall file a properly completed application form, including a preliminary plat, the required supporting materials, and the required
application fee with the administrator.
(E) The administrator shall place a hearing on the application on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting for which the notice requirements of
subsection (G) of this section can be met and at which time will allow proper consideration of the proposed subdivision.
(F) The administrator may contract for professional review of the application, with the cost of that review being covered by the application fee. Such
reviews shall be prepared in the form of a written report submitted to the administrator for use at the hearing. The administrator shall, upon its receipt,
provide a copy of this report to the developer and place it on file for public review with the other application materials.
(G) The administrator shall provide notice of the hearing, as follows: (1992 Development Code)
1. By first class mail documented by a certificate of mailing to all adjoining property owners and all owners of property within three hundred feet (300')
of the site at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing, except as provided in subsection (G)4 of this section; (Ord. 502, 9-18-1996)
2. By newspaper publication: One legal notice in the official newspaper, appearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing; and
3. By first class mail: To media and interested individuals who have requested, in writing, that the administrator provide such notice, and to all
potentially affected public service providers; (1992 Development Code)
4. Where two hundred (200) or more first class mailings would be required, the administrator may limit mailings to the nearest one hundred ninety nine
(199) property owners, while still providing all other required forms of notice. (Ord. 502, 9-18-1996)
5. All notices shall comply with the requirements of section 11-2-12 of this chapter.
(H) The commission shall conduct a hearing on the proposed subdivision following the procedure established in section 11-2-16 of this chapter. No
application for a subdivision shall be reviewed if the developer or a representative is not present.
(I) The commission shall determine whether the proposed subdivision is in compliance with the comprehensive plan and all requirements of this title. If it
finds that the proposed subdivision complies, it shall approve the application. If it finds that the proposed subdivision is not in compliance, it shall
disapprove the application. Conditions may be attached to approval of the permit, as provided in section 11-2-11 of this chapter. Approval of the permit
for a minor subdivision shall also constitute commission approval of that subdivision's final plat.
(J) The administrator shall notify the developer and interested parties of the commission's decision within ten (10) days.
(K) The commission's decision may be appealed to the council using the appeals procedure of section 11-2-14 of this chapter. Any person wishing to
appeal a decision shall file a notice of appeal with the administrator within ten (10) days after notice of the decision being appealed is received.
Developers proceed at their own risk during the appeal period.
(L) The developer may file a final plat with the administrator at any time after the subdivision permit is approved. Phased final platting is permitted by
section 11-15-5 et seq., of this title. No commission review (subsections (M) through (P) of this section) shall be required for minor subdivisions.
(M) The administrator shall place the final plat on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting at which time will allow for proper review of the
proposed final plat.
(N) No public notice or public hearing is required for final plats, but no final plat shall be reviewed if the developer or a representative is not present.
(O) The commission shall review the final plat and determine whether it is in compliance with the subdivision permit, the comprehensive plan, and this title.
If it finds that the final plat complies, it shall approve that plat. If it finds that the final plat is not in compliance, it shall disapprove that plat. Conditions
may be attached to approval of a final plat, as provided in section 11-2-11 of this chapter.
(P) If the commission approves the final plat, or in the case of a minor subdivision, the administrator shall place it on the agenda of the next regular council
meeting. Commission disapproval of a final plat may be appealed to the council using the appeals procedure of section 11-2-14 of this chapter. Any
person wishing to appeal a decision shall file a notice of appeal with the administrator within ten (10) days after notice of the decision being appealed is
received.
(Q) The council shall determine whether the final plat is in compliance with the subdivision permit, the comprehensive plan, and this title. If it finds that the
final plat complies, it shall approve that plat. If it finds that the final plat is not in compliance, it shall disapprove that plat. Conditions may be attached to
council approval of a final plat, as provided in section 11-2-11 of this chapter.
(R) The administrator shall notify the developer and interested parties of the council's decision within ten (10) days.
(S) Approval of a subdivision permit or plat does not constitute or imply approval of a permit for any prospective use of any lot created. (1992 Development
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 109/151
11-2-9: DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
The purpose of the development permit procedure is to ensure that routine land development and building activity complies with this title. Applications for
development permits shall follow the procedure described herein. (1992 Development Code)
(A) The developer shall file a properly completed application form, the required supporting materials, and the required application fee with the
administrator. The application for a development permit may be submitted and processed simultaneously with the application for a lot split permit (see
section 11-2-7 of this chapter), a building permit required by the international building codes (see title 4, chapter 1 of this code) or, in the case of home
occupations, the application for a business license. (1992 Development Code; amd. Ord. 563, 4-16-2003)
(B) The administrator shall determine whether the proposed building or use is in compliance with the comprehensive plan and this title. If he/she finds that
the proposed building or use complies, the application for a permit shall be approved.If he/she finds that the proposed building or use does not comply,
the application for a permit shall be disapproved.
(C) The administrator shall notify the developer of the decision within ten (10) days, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
(D) The administrator may refer any building permit application to the commission for confirmation of its compliance or lack of compliance with the
comprehensive plan and this title. All such referrals shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting. (1992 Development Code)
(E) The administrator's decision may be appealed to the commission using the appeals procedure of section 11-2-14 of this chapter. Any person wishing to
appeal a decision shall file a notice of appeal with the administrator within ten (10) days after notice of the decision being appealed is received.
Developers proceed at their own risk during the appeal period. No substantially similar application for a special use permit involving the same property
that has been denied shall be made until at least six (6) months from the date of denial of the previous application. (Ord. 519, 4-15-1998)
11-2-10: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
The purpose of the special use permit procedure is to implement the comprehensive plan by requiring intensive public review of certain developments, and
by requiring those developments to comply with performance standards designed to assure their compatibility with neighboring uses, the landscape
setting, and the capacity of public facilities and services. Applications for special use permits shall follow the procedure described herein.
(A) The developer shall file a request for a sketch plan review with the administrator.
(B) The administrator shall place the sketch plan review on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting at which time will allow its proper
consideration.
(C) The commission shall review the sketch plan. Sketch plan review is not a regulatory proceeding, but an opportunity for the commission to be made
aware of the proposal, and for the applicant to be made aware of possible questions and the applicable requirements of this title.
(D) The developer shall file a properly completed application form, the required supporting materials, and the required application fee with the
administrator.
(E) The administrator shall place a hearing on the application on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting for whichthe notice requirements of
subsection (G) of this section can be met and at which time will allow proper consideration of the proposed subdivision.
(F) The administrator may contract for professional review of the application, with the cost of that review being covered by the application fee. Such
reviews shall be prepared in the form of a written report submitted to the administrator for use at the hearing. The administrator shall, upon its receipt,
provide a copy of this report to the developer and place it on file for public review with the other application materials.
(G) The administrator shall provide notice of the hearing, as follows: (1992 Development Code)
1. By first class mail documented by a certificate of mailing to all adjoining property owners and all owners of property within three hundred feet (300')
of the site at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing, except as provided in subsection (G)5 of this section; (Ord. 502, 9-18-1996)
2. By newspaper publication: One legal notice in the official newspaper, appearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing;
3. By first class mail: To media and interested parties and individuals who have requested, in writing, that the administrator provide such notice, and to
all potentially affected public service providers;
4. By posting on the site: At least seven (7) days before the hearing, a sign conveying the required notice shall be posted on the site. Such signs shall
be prominently visible from the nearest public street; (1992 Development Code)
5. Where two hundred (200) or more first class mail notices would be required, the administrator may limit first class mail notice to the nearest one
hundred ninety nine (199) property owners, while still providing all other required forms of notice. (Ord. 502, 9-18-1996)
6. All notices shall comply with the requirements of section 11-2-12 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 110/151
(H) The commission shall conduct a hearing on the proposed special use following the procedure established in section 11-2-16 of this chapter. No
application for a special use permit shall be reviewed if the developer or a representative is not present.
(I) The commission shall determine whether the proposed special use is in compliance with the comprehensive plan and all requirements of this title. If it
finds that the proposed special use complies, it shall approve the application. If it finds that the proposed special use does not comply, it shall
disapprove the application. Conditions may be attached toapproval of the permit, as provided in section 11-2-11 of this chapter.
(J) The administrator shall notify the developer and interested parties of the commission's decision within ten (10) days.
(K) The commission's decision may be appealed to the council using the appeals procedure of section 11-2-14 of this chapter. Any person wishing to
appeal a decision shall file a notice of appeal with the administrator within ten (10) days after notice of the decision being appealed is received.
Developers proceed at their own risk during the appeal period. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-11: CONDITIONS:
Conditions may be imposed on any lot split, development, subdivision, or special use permit approval, or variance, if:
(A) The conditions are clearly designed to assure compliance with one or more specific requirements of this title; and
(B) A list of all conditions imposed is provided to the developer with notice of the decision. That list shall specifically identify the provision of this title the
condition is designed to implement. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-12: HEARING NOTICES:
All required notices shall provide the following information:
(A) The name and mailing address of the developer;
(B) A legal description of the development site;
(C) The present land use at the site;
(D) The proposed use and, for subdivisions, proposed number of lots and average proposed lot size;
(E) The body (commission or council) that will conduct the hearing;
(F) The date, time, and place of the hearing;
(G) A statement of the availability of application materials for public review; and
(H) A statement that "Public Comment Is Encouraged". (1992 Development Code)
11-2-13: APPROVALS VALID FOR TWO YEARS:
Permits, including variances, shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of approval, unless extended by a development agreement, as provided in
section 11-15-5 et seq., of this title. Where work has not been completed within the two (2) years allowed, the administrator shall provide written notice to
the developer that the permit has expired, that all vested rights have been lost, and that a new permit must be obtained before development is initiated or
resumed. (1992 Development Code)
Division II. Appeals And Variances
11-2-14: APPEALS:
Any person may appeal any decision of the administrator to the commission and any decision of the commission to the council using the procedure
described herein.
(A) The appellant shall file a properly completed appeals form, the required supporting materials, and the required appeals fee with the administrator.
(B) The administrator shall place a hearing on the appeal on the agenda of the next regular commission/council meeting for which the notice requirements
can be met. Notice requirements for an appeal shall be the same as for the permit application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 111/151
(C) The commission/council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal following the procedure established in section 11-2-16 of this chapter. No appeal shall
be heard if the appellant or a representative, and when the appellant is not the developer, the developer or a representative is not present.
(D) The commission/council shall determine whether the decision being appealed is in compliance with the comprehensive plan and this title, and affirm,
modify, or overturn that decision accordingly.
(E) The administrator shall notify the appellant and interested parties of the commission/council decision within ten (10) days. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-15: VARIANCES:
Variances are intended to provide relief for landowners who, due to some unique physical characteristic of their property that is beyond their control, would
have no beneficial use of the property if this title is strictly enforced. Applications for variances shall follow the procedure described herein. Whenever the
need for a variance is anticipated, the application for a variance may be combined with a lot split, subdivision, development, or special use permit. Where
an application for a variance is combined with an application fora lot split or building permit, that permit shall be approved or disapproved by the
commission along with the variance.
(A) The developer shall file a properly completed application form, including a site plan, the required supporting materials, and the required application fee
with the administrator.
(B) The administrator shall place a hearing on the variance on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting for which the notice requirements can
be met. Notice requirements for a variance shall be the same as for a special use permit.
(C) The commission shall conduct a hearing on the proposed variance following the procedure established in section 11-2-16 of this chapter. No
application for a variance shall be reviewed if the developer or a representative is not present.
(D) The commission shall approve a variance only upon finding that:
1. The need for a variance results from physical limitations unique to the lot on which the variance is requested;
2. Failure to approve the variance will result in undue hardship because no reasonable conforming use of the lot is possible without a variance;
3. The alleged hardship has not been created by action of the lot's owner or occupants;
4. Approval of the variance will not create a nuisance or result in potential harm to adjoining properties or the neighborhood;
5. Approval of the variance will not have an adverse affect on the implementation of the comprehensive plan; and
6. The variance is the minimum relief from the requirements of this title necessary to permit a reasonable conforming use;
7. Additional findings may be required for variances in airport safety zones or special flood hazard areas.
(E) Conditions may be attached to the approval of a variance, as provided in section 11-2-11 of this chapter.
(F) The administrator shall notify the developer and interested parties of the commission's decision within ten (10) days.
(G) The commission's decision may be appealed to the council using the appeals procedure of section 11-2-14 of this chapter. Any person wishing to
appeal a decision shall file a notice of appeal with the administrator within ten (10) daysafter notice of the decision being appealed is received.
Developers proceed at their own risk during the appeal period. (1992 Development Code)
Division III. Procedure For Hearings Required By Title
11-2-16: HEARING PROCEDURE:
This procedure shall be followed in all hearings.
(A) The presiding officer shall announce the purpose and subject of the hearing.
(B) The presiding officer shall determine whether proper notice of the hearing has been provided. If proper notice has not been provided, the hearing shall
be rescheduled.
(C) The presiding officer shall determine whether the application form required by this title is complete and includes all required supporting materials. If the
application is not complete, the hearing shall be rescheduled.
(D) The presiding officer shall ask if any commission/council member wishes to declare a conflict of interest, as defined by Idaho Code section 67-6506, in
the matter to be heard and excuse any member who declares such a conflict from participation in the hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 112/151
(E) The presiding officer shall ask the administrator to present a report on the proposal being considered.
(F) The presiding officer shall direct questions from commission/council members to the administrator. Questions asked at this time shall be solely for the
purpose of clarifying the location and nature of the proposed development.
(G) The presiding officer shall remind those present that all statements given must address the merits of the proposed development as measured by its
compliance or lack of compliance with the comprehensive plan and this title.
(H) The presiding officer shall ask for a statement from the developer or his or her representative. Commission/council members may ask questions
following this statement. All questions and replies shall be directed through the presiding officer.
(I) Following the developer's statement, the presiding officer shall ask for statements from the public. Persons giving statements shall begin by stating their
name and mailing address. Commission/council members may ask questions following any statement. All questions and replies shall be directed
through the presiding officer.
(J) When all statements have been given, the presiding officer shall ask if any person who gave a statement wishes to speak in rebuttal to other
statements or to clarify their statement. Neither new statements nor the introduction of new evidence shall be permitted at this time. Questions from
commission/council members may follow each rebuttal or clarification.
(K) The presiding officer shall close the public hearing and call for discussion and action by the commission/council.
(L) Written statements, plans, drawings, photographs, or other materials offered in support of statements at a hearing are part of that hearing's record and
shall be retained by the city. Supporting materials shall be left with the administrator after each statement is made. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-17: ADDITIONAL HEARING PROCEDURES:
These procedures may be used without prior notice to assist in the conduct of large or controversial hearings.
(A) The commission/council may impose time limits on the statements given in order to assure completion of the agenda.
(B) The commission/council may require persons who wish to make a statement to register their intention to do so with the administrator before the
hearing. The presiding officer shall use the register to call on persons to present their statements. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-18: HEARINGS TO BE TAPED:
As required by Idaho Code section 67-6536, the administrator shall keep a transcribable tape record of all hearings on file for at least six (6) months after
the final hearing on the development. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-19: DECISION RECORD:
All decisions of the commission or council shall be reported in the form of findings of fact and conclusions of law, as required by Idaho Code section 67-
6535. The completed decision record shall include the application materials, any report prepared by or on contract for the administrator, and all materials
submitted by the developer or citizens at the public hearing. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-20: DECISION DEADLINE:
This section establishes the "reasonable time" fordeliberation on applications by the commission required by Idaho Code section 67-6519. The
commission shall make a decision on an application for a permit within one hundred eighty (180) days of the meeting at which the application first
appeared on the commission agenda, except that the commission may table any application for which a large scale development study is required by
section 11-12-17 of this title for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days while the required study is conducted. Any time after the one hundred
eighty (180) days, the applicant can demand a decision within sixty (60) days. (Ord. 541, 12-15-1999)
Division IV. Enforcement Of Title
11-2-21: FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT:
Whenever the administrator becomes aware of an activity for which a permit is required by this title, but for which a permit has not been approved, he/she
shall notify the occupant (and owner, if they are not the same) of the site to immediately cease all unpermitted activity. Notice shall be given by posting on
the site and/or first class mail. If activity does not cease immediately, the administrator shall ask the city attorney to take prompt action, as authorized by
Idaho Code section 67-6527, to end the unpermitted activity and, if a permit is not subsequently issued, to require restoration of the site to its original
condition. Required restoration shall include restoration of vegetative cover where sites have been graded in violation of this title. (1992 Development
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 113/151
11-2-22: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
A certificate of compliance shall be issued before any building or use is occupied. A certificate of compliance indicates that an on site inspection has
shown that the building or use complies with this title, including any conditions imposed upon its approval. Occupancy of a building or use without a
certificate of compliance shall be a violation of this title. The issuance of a certificate of compliance shall not be construed as approval of any violation of
this title that may have been undiscovered during the inspection. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-23: TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
A temporary certificate of compliance may be issued to permit temporary use of a building in cases where weather prevents prompt completion of such
required improvements as landscaping. No temporary certificate of compliance shall be valid for more than ninety (90) days. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-24: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
The procedure for enforcement of this title shall be as described herein.
(A) The administrator shall notify the occupant (and owner, if they are not the same) of the violation by first class mail and/or posting on the site. The notice
shall describe the violation, cite the sections of this title being violated, and order the occupant/owner to attain compliance within thirty (30) days.
(B) Any person who receives a notice of violation may request inspection by the administrator to show that compliance has been attained within the thirty
(30) days allowed, or:
1. File a written request with the administrator for an extension of time to attain compliance, with such extensions being limited to a maximum of sixty
(60) days and culminated by an inspection to show that compliance has been attained; or
2. File an appeal of the administrator's notice, following the appeals procedure of section 11-2-14 of this chapter. All enforcement actions shall be
stayed while the appeal is being heard.
(C) If any person notified of a violation in accordance with subsection (A) of this section fails to attain compliance within the time allowed, or is found to be
in violation at an appeals hearing, the administrator shall ask the city attorney to take immediate action to end the violation.
(D) The city attorney shall take effective action, civil or criminal, to promptly end the violation. (1992 Development Code)
11-2-25: PENALTIES:
Violations of this title shall be a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine in any amount not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by
imprisonment for a period of not longer than thirty (30) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day in which a violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense. (1992 Development Code)
Division V. Amendment Of Title Or Comprehensive Plan
11-2-26: AMENDMENTS:
Any person may petition for the amendment of this title or the comprehensive plan. Amendments may also be initiated by the commission or council, but
the council must refer any amendment it proposes to the commission for action asdescribed herein. The amendment procedure shall be as described
herein and in Idaho Code section 67-6509 or 67-6511.
(A) The developer shall file a properly completed application form, the required supporting materials, and the required application fee with the
administrator.
(B) The administrator shall place a hearing on the application on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting for which the notice requirements can
be met and at which time will allow proper consideration of the proposed amendment.
(C) The administrator may contract for professional review of the application, with the cost of that review being covered by the application fee. Such
reviews shall be prepared in the form of a written report submitted to the administrator for use at the hearing. The administrator shall, upon its receipt,
provide a copy of this report to the developer and place it on file for public review with the other application materials.
(D) The administrator shall provide notice of the hearing, as follows:
1. By newspaper publication: One legal notice in the official newspaper, appearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing; and
2. By first class mail: To other media and interested agencies and individuals who have requested, in writing, that the administrator provide such notice,
and to all potentially affected public service providers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 114/151
3. These additional forms of notice are required for zoning map amendments, including the initial zoning of areas proposed for annexation: (1992
Development Code)
(a) By first class mail documented by a certificate of mailing: To all adjoining property owners and all owners of property within three hundred feet
(300') of the site at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing, except as provided in subsection (D)4 of this section; and (Ord. 502, 9-18-1996)
(b) By posting on the site: At least seven (7) days before the hearing a sign conveying the required notice shall be posted on the site. Such signs
shall be prominently visible from the nearest public street. (1992 Development Code)
4. Where two hundred (200) or more first class mailings would be required, the administrator may limit first class mailings to the nearest one hundred
ninety nine (199) property owners, while still providing all other required forms of notice. (Ord. 502, 9-18-1996)
(E) The commission shall conduct a hearing on the proposed amendment following the procedure established in section 11-2-16 of this chapter. No
application for an amendment shallbe reviewed if the developer or a representative is not present.
(F) For zoning amendments, the commission shall determine whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan, and
recommend that the council approve or disapprove it accordingly. For comprehensive plan amendments, the commission shall determine whether the
proposed amendment is in the public interest, and recommend that the council approve or disapprove it accordingly.
(G) The administrator shall convey the commission's recommendation to the council and, unless the application is withdrawn, place a hearing on the
application on the agenda of the next regular council meeting for which the notice requirements can be met. Notice shall be provided in the same
manner as for the hearing before the commission.
(H) The council shall conduct a hearing on the proposed amendment following the procedure established in section 11-2-16 of this chapter. For zoning
amendments, this hearing shall also constitute the first reading of the ordinance required by Idaho Code section 50-901. No application for an
amendment shall be reviewed if the developer or a representative is not present.
(I) For zoning amendments, the council shall determine whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan and adopt or
disapprove it accordingly. For comprehensive plan amendments, the council shall determine whether the proposed amendment is in the public interest
and adopt or disapprove it accordingly.
(J) The administrator shall notify the developer and interested parties of the council's decision within ten (10) days, but no amendment to this title shall
become effective until that amendment has been adopted as an ordinance and published as required by law. (1992 Development Code)
Chapter 3
ZONING DISTRICTS, MAP AND REGULATIONS
11-3-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter creates zoning districts and overlay districts for use in the city and adopts an official map of those districts. It also provides rules for the
interpretation of zoning district boundaries. (1992 Development Code)
11-3-2: ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following zoning districts are established to implement the comprehensive plan:
Residence zone, class A
Residence zone, class B
Core commercial
Highway commercial
Light industrial
Heavy industrial
Implementation of the comprehensive plan also requires the establishment of airport safety and floodplain overlay districts. (1992 Development Code)
11-3-3: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
The "official zoning map of the city of American Falls" is adopted, by reference, as part of this title. A dated copy of that map shall be maintained for public
inspection at the office of the administrator. (1992 Development Code)
11-3-4: ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Zoning district boundaries shall be as shown on the "official zoning map of the city of American Falls", but any person who disputes the location of a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 115/151
zoning district boundary, as interpreted by the administrator, may request review of the administrator's decision using the appeals procedure of section 11-
2-16 of this chapter. (1992 Development Code)
11-3-5: ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
The following chapters of this title establish the purpose of each zoning district, describe the uses permitted in each district upon approval of a
development permit, and describe the uses permitted in each zoning district after public review for compliance with the applicable performance standards
and approval of a special use permit. These chapters also establish specifications and performance standards for each zoning district. (1992 Development
Code)
11-3-6: MAP:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 116/151
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 117/151
(1992 Development Code)
Chapter 4
RESIDENCE ZONE, CLASS A
11-4-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter establishes the residence zone, class A (RA) zoning district, the purpose of which is to protect property values and the quality of life in
neighborhoods of single-family dwellings by excluding the concentrations of people and traffic and the potential nuisances associated with higher density
residential, commercial, and industrial development. (1992 Development Code)
11-4-2: PERMITTED USES:
The permitted uses allowed in the RA zoning district shall be: (1992 Development Code)
(A) Single-family dwellings at least twenty feet (20') in width at their narrowest dimension. (Ord. 472, 5-4-1994)
(B) Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with single-family dwellings in the areas included in the RA zoning district.
(C) Minor utility installations.
(D) Home occupations, in compliance with the detailed performance standards of appendix B, section 11-17-2 of this title. A development permit is
required for the establishment of a home occupation.
(E) "Customary" accessory uses shall not include the keeping of livestock, kennels, or other uses, structures, or activities that are prohibited or restricted
by the performance standards of section 11-4-5 of this chapter. (1992 Development Code)
(F) Accessory structures not over twenty feet (20') from finish grade to peak of roof customarily associated with single-family dwellings in the areas
included in the RA zoning district. (Ord. 486, 6-17-1995)
11-4-3: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
The uses permitted in the RA zoning district after public review for compliance with the applicable performance standards and approval of a special use
permit shall be:
(A) Radio or television antennas that are over fifteen feet (15') in height above the structure to which they are accessory (shorter antennas are customary
accessory uses);
(B) Two-family dwellings;
(C) Churches; (Ord. 564, 8-20-2003)
(D) Hospitals, nursing homes, congregate living facilities, and medical clinics, dentist offices, and attorney offices; (Ord. 578, 1-4-2006)
(E) Schools;
(F) Parks and playgrounds; and
(G) Major utility installations and public facilities, including water storage tanks, fire stations, recreation centers, and similar public facilities. (Ord. 564, 8-
20-2003)
11-4-4: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not explicitly permitted by section 11-4-2 or 11-4-3 of this chapter shall be prohibited. (1992 Development Code)
11-4-5: SPECIFICATION STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 118/151
(A) Setback From Street: All buildings shall be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from any property line paralleling a street, except:
1. On corner lots where the minimum setback from any street on which no dwelling presently does or may reasonably be expected to front on the same
side, the setback from the street may be reduced to twenty feet (20'); or
2. Where the dwellings on fifty percent (50%) or more of the lots on the same block and same side of the street have been built to a fairly even setback
line of less than twenty five feet (25') from the street, future buildings may extend to the reduced setback line. Minor irregularities shall be ignored in
determining whether or not a reduced setback line has been established by past development. When any dispute arises in the determination of a
front building line, the decision of the administrator may be appealed using the procedure provided in section 11-2-14 of this title. (Ord. 483, 5-17-
1995)
(B) Side Yard: All buildings shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of at least seven and one-half feet (7.5'); except that one accessory building, one
hundred forty four (144) square feet or less, including the overhang, and at least ten feet (10') from the principal building may be located up to the side
yard property line. (Ord. 505, 3-19-1997)
(C) Rear Yard: No setback is required from a platted alley. Where no alley is platted, a minimum rear yard setback of seven and one-half feet (7.5') is
required.
(D) Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall be sixty percent (60%). (Ord. 483, 5-17-1995)
11-4-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO RA ZONING DISTRICT:
These performance standards apply within the RA zoning district. All developments are also subject to the applicable performance standards of chapters
10 through 15 of this title.
(A) Fences: Fences in excess of six feet (6') in height shall be prohibited. Fences constructed from the street frontage to the building setback line shall not
exceed four feet (4') in height. The construction of fences that obstruct views at intersections or points of access to public roads is prohibited by
subsection 11-12-4(D) of this title. (1992 Development Code)
(B) Outdoor Storage: There shall be no outdoor storage in required front or side yards, except the temporary storage of construction materials and
equipment used for construction authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this title or the international building codes. (1992 Development Code; amd.
Ord. 563, 4-16-2003)
(C) Signs: See appendix A, section 11-17-1 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
(D) Radio And Television Antenna Height Limitations: Radio and television antennas in excess of ten feet (10') in height above the structure to which they
are accessory shall be prohibited. (Ord. 538, 9-15-1999)
Chapter 5
RESIDENCE ZONE, CLASS B
11-5-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter establishes the residence zone, class B (RB) zoning district, the purpose of which is to protect property values and the quality of life in
neighborhoods of single- and multiple-family dwellings by excluding the potential nuisances associated with commercial and industrial uses. (1992
Development Code)
11-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
The permitted uses allowed in the RB zoning district shall be:
(A) Single- and two-family dwellings.
(B) Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with one- and two-family dwellings in the RB zoning district.
(C) Minor utility installations.
(D) Home occupations, in compliance with the detailed performance standards of appendix B, section 11-17-2 of this title. A development permit is
required for the establishment of a home occupation.
(E) "Customary" accessory uses shall not include the keeping of livestock, kennels, or other uses, structures, or activities that are prohibited or restricted
by the performance standards of section 11-5-6 of this chapter. (1992 Development Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 119/151
(F) Accessory structures not over twenty feet (20') from finish grade to peak of roof customarily associated with one- and two-family dwellings in the areas
included in the RB zoning district. (Ord. 486, 6-7-1995)
11-5-3: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
The uses permitted in the RB zoning district after publicreview for compliance with the applicable performance standards and approval of a special use
permit shall be:
(A) Radio or television antennas that are over fifteen feet (15') in height above the structure to which they are accessory (shorter antennas are customary
accessory uses);
(B) Multiple-family dwellings, including condominiums;
(C) Churches;
(D) Hospitals, nursing homes, congregate living facilities, and senior citizen centers;
(E) Daycare centers and schools;
(F) Parks and playgrounds; and
(G) Major utility installations and public facilities, including water storage tanks, fire stations, recreation centers, and similar public facilities. (Ord. 564, 8-
20-2003)
11-5-4: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not explicitly permitted by section 11-5-2 or 11-5-3 of this chapter shall be prohibited. (1992 Development Code)
11-5-5: SPECIFICATION STANDARDS:
The specification standards for the RB zone shall be the same as for the RA zone. (1992 Development Code)
11-5-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO RB ZONING DISTRICT:
The performance standards for the RB shall be the same as for the RA. (1992 Development Code)
Chapter 6
CORE COMMERCIAL ZONE
11-6-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter establishes the core commercial (CC) zoning district, the purpose of which is to provide a place at the center of the city for major public
institutions and for retail stores and service uses that are compatible with a "Main Street" development pattern of reliance on on-street parking or public or
shared parking lots, commercial buildings fronting directly on the sidewalk and street, one hundred percent (100%) lot coverage, service access via alleys,
and signs on the buildings rather than freestanding. (1992 Development Code)
11-6-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted shall be consistent with the purpose of this zoning district. Examples of the uses that may be appropriate, if consistent with the "Main
Street" development pattern, include:
(A) Administrative offices of transportation, communications, and utilities services, and travel agencies (SLUC 4923-24).
(B) Retail stores, excluding retail sales of building materials, hardware, and farm equipment (SLUC 52); retail sales of automobiles and other vehicles,
marine craft, aircraft, and their accessories, and gasoline service stations (SLUC 55); retail sales of farm and garden supplies (SLUC 596); retail sales
of fuel (SLUC 598); and other retail sales that require extensive on site parking or outdoor sales or storage space.
(C) Financial, insurance, real estate services (SLUC 61); and personal services (SLUC 62).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 120/151
(D) Business services (SLUC 63), excluding warehousing and storage services (SLUC 637); equipment, automobile, and truck rental services (SLUC
6397); and other business services that require the outdoor storage of materials or products or outdoor parking of equipment or vehicles.
(E) Repair of consumer electronic equipment and appliances, watches, and other repair services (SLUC 649) that do not involve automobiles, other
vehicles, or heavy equipment.
(F) Professional services (SLUC 65), including healthcare and hospital services, and the administrative functions of government agencies.
(G) Educational and miscellaneous services (SLUC 68 and 61) that are consistent with the intent of this zoning district.
(H) Cultural, entertainment, and recreational facilities (SLUC 7) that are consistent with the intent of this zoning district.
(I) Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with the uses permitted in the CC zoning district, including one accessory dwelling unit per
commercial use.
(J) Minor utility installations.
(K) The administrator may refer any application for a development permit in the CC zoning district to the commission for a determination of the proposed
use or building's compliance (or failure to comply) with the purpose of this zoning district. Such referrals shall be placed on the agenda of the next
regular commission meeting. (1992 Development Code)
11-6-3: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
The uses permitted in the CC zoning district, after public review for compliance with the applicable performance standards and approval of a special use
permit, shall be:
(A) Radio or television antennas that are over fifteen feet (15') in height above the structure to which they are accessory (shorter antennas are customary
accessory uses).
(B) Major utility installations and public facilities, including water storage tanks, fire stations, recreation centers, and similar public facilities.
(C) Any commercial use excluded by section 11-6-2 of this chapter, but which the developer clearly demonstrates will comply with the intent and purposes
of the CC zoning district. (1992 Development Code)
11-6-4: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not permitted by section 11-6-2 or 11-6-3 of this chapter shall be prohibited. (1992 Development Code)
11-6-5: SPECIFICATION STANDARDS:
One hundred percent (100%) lot coverage shall be permitted in this zoning district, except where it borders an RA or RB zoning district. Section 11-12-15
of this title requires a landscaped buffer between new developments in the CC zoning district and residential uses. The maximum building height shall be
thirty five feet (35'). (1992 Development Code)
11-6-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO CC ZONING DISTRICT:
(A) Service Access: All service access to uses and buildings shall be via an alley, and all uses and buildings shall have service doors, ramps, etc.,
commensurate with their needs on the alley.
(B) Alleys: Alleys shall be required, and must be twenty feet (20') or more wide, with a compacted base and minimum three inch (3") gravel surface.
Utilities shall be placed in a manner that does not interfere with freight delivery vehicles.
(C) Roof Drainage: Roofs shall be designed so that drainage is not directed onto sidewalks.
(D) Curbing, Gutter And Sidewalks: All uses and buildings shall provide curbing, gutters, and sidewalks on all street frontages. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of seven feet (7') wide.
(E) Signs: See appendix A, section 11-17-1 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 121/151
Chapter 7
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE
11-7-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter establishes the highway commercial (HC) zoning district, the purpose of which is to provide a place for diverse retail and service uses,
particularly those which occupy comparatively large parcels or require extensive parking and loading areas. The uses permitted in this zoning district are
expected to generate traffic, including truck traffic, but generally do not have the nuisance potential of an industrial use. (1992 Development Code)
11-7-2: PERMITTED USES:
(A) Hotels and motels, campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks (SLUC 15).
(B) Newspapers and commercial printers (SLUC 2710 and 2740).
(C) Bus passenger terminals (SLUC 4213), broadcast studios (SLUC 4731, 4741, and 4751) and the administrative offices of transportation,
communications, and utility services.
(D) Wholesale uses (SLUC 51), but excluding the wholesale of farm products (SLUC 515); heavy equipment (SLUC 518); metals, minerals, and fuels or
other petroleum or chemical products (SLUC 5191-92); and scrap and waste products, including recyclables (SLUC 5193), or other wholesale uses
requiring extensive outdoor work or storage areas.
(E) Retail uses (SLUC 52).
(F) Financial, insurance, real estate and personal services (SLUC 61 and 62).
(G) Business services (SLUC 63), excluding rental or lease of heavy equipment and warehousing and storage services where the materials or products
stored are not fully enclosed within a building, or other miscellaneous business services involving outdoor storage.
(H) Repair services (SLUC 64), excluding the repair of heavy equipment.
(I) Professional services (SLUC 65).
(J) Contract construction services (SLUC 66), excluding those with outdoor storage of heavy equipment or construction materials.
(K) Government services (SLUC 67) excluding those with outdoor storage of heavy equipment or construction materials.
(L) Educational and miscellaneous services (SLUC 68-69), and cultural, entertainment, and recreational facilities (SLUC 7).
(M) Veterinary hospitals for small animals, and kennels.
(N) Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with the uses permitted in the HC zoning district, including one accessory dwelling per use.
(O) Minor utility installations. (1992 Development Code)
11-7-3: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
The uses permitted in the highway commercial zoning district, after public review for compliance with the applicable performance standards and approval
of a special use permit, shall be:
(A) Major utility installations.
(B) Any use specifically excluded in section 11-7-2 of this chapter because it requires outdoor work or storage areas, but which effectively screens all
outdoor storage areas from public view by a combination of site design (i.e., shielding storage with buildings), fences or walls, and landscaped buffers,
as provided in subsection 11-7-6(C) of this chapter.
(C) Any manufacturing use that is similar to the permitted uses in scale, intensity, and impact on neighboring uses.
(D) Multi-family dwellings. (Ord. 526, 8-5-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 122/151
11-7-4: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not permitted by section 11-7-2 or 11-7-3 of this chapter shall be prohibited. (1992 Development Code)
11-7-5: SPECIFICATION STANDARDS:
The maximum building height shall be thirty five feet (35'). (1992 Development Code)
11-7-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO HC ZONING DISTRICT:
(A) Curbing, Gutter And Sidewalks: All uses and buildings shall provide curbing, gutters, and sidewalks on all street frontages. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of five feet (5') wide.
(B) Off Street Parking And Loading Areas: See appendix C, section 11-17-3 of this title.
(C) Landscaped Buffers For Adjoining Uses: See section 11-12-15 of this title.
(D) Signs: See appendix A, section 11-17-1 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
Chapter 8
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE
11-8-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter establishes the light industrial (LI) zoning district, the purpose of which is to provide adequate area for industrial uses that have limited
nuisance potential and an industrial "park" appearance. (1992 Development Code)
11-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the LI zoning district shall be consistent with the purpose of this zoning district. Examples of the uses that may be appropriate, if
consistent with an industrial park development pattern, include:
(A) Manufacturing uses, excluding food and kindred products (SLUC 21); textile mill products (SLUC 22); lumber and wood products (SLUC 24); paper
and allied products (SLUC 26); chemical and allied products (SLUC 28); petroleum refining (SLUC 29); stone, clay, and glass products, including
cement (SLUC 32); and primary metal industries (SLUC 33).
(B) Transportation, communications, and utilities uses (SLUC 4).
(C) Wholesale uses (SLUC 51), but excluding the wholesale of farm products (SLUC 515); heavy equipment (SLUC 518); metals, minerals, and fuels or
other petroleum or chemical products (SLUC 5191-92); and scrap and waste products, including recyclables (SLUC 5193).
(D) Business, repair, contract construction, and government services (SLUC 63-64 and 66-67).
(E) Professional, educational, and miscellaneous services (SLUC 65 and 68-69); and cultural, entertainment, and recreational facilities (SLUC 7)
consistent with the purpose of this zoning district.
(F) Veterinary hospitals and kennels.
(G) Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with the uses permitted in the LI zoning district, including one accessory dwelling per industrial
use.
(H) Minor utility installations.
(I) The administrator may refer any application for a development permit in the LI zoning district to the commission for a determination of the proposed use
or building's compliance (or failure to comply) with the purposes of this zoning district. Such referrals shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular
commission meeting. (1992 Development Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 123/151
11-8-3: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
The uses permitted in the LI zoning district after public review for compliance with the applicable performance standards and approval of a special use
permit shall be any manufacturing or wholesale use that is specifically excluded by section 11-8-2 of this chapter, but which the developer clearly
demonstrates will comply with the intent and purpose of the LI zoning district. (1992 Development Code)
11-8-4: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not permitted by section 11-8-2 or 11-8-3 of this chapter shall be prohibited. (1992 Development Code)
11-8-5: SPECIFICATION STANDARDS:
The maximum building height shall be forty five feet (45'). (1992 Development Code)
11-8-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO LI ZONING DISTRICT:
(A) Off Street Parking And Loading Areas: See appendix C, section 11-17-3 of this title.
(B) Landscaped Buffers For Adjoining Uses: See section 11-12-15 of this title.
(C) Signs: See appendix A, section 11-17-1 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
Chapter 9
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE
11-9-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter establishes the heavy industrial (HI) zoning district, the purpose of which is to provide adequate, appropriate areas for industrial uses that
have a significant nuisance potential. (1992 Development Code)
11-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
Due to the potential nuisances and hazards associated with heavy industrial uses, all new uses proposed in the HI zoning district shall require a special
use permit. The permitted uses in this zoning district shall be:
(A) The repair, remodeling, and expansion, but not change, of existing uses.
(B) Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with the uses permitted in the HI zoning district, including one accessory dwelling per industrial
use.
(C) Major and minor utility installations. (1992 Development Code)
11-9-3: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
All changes in use and new uses in the HI zoning district require a special use permit. (1992 Development Code)
11-9-4: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not permitted by section 11-9-2 or 11-9-3 of this chapter shall be prohibited. (1992 Development Code)
11-9-5: SPECIFICATION STANDARDS:
Reserved. (1992 Development Code)
11-9-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO HI ZONING DISTRICT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 124/151
(A) Off Street Parking And Loading Areas: See appendix C, section 11-17-3 of this title.
(B) Landscaped Buffers For Adjoining Uses: See section 11-12-15 of this title.
(C) Signs: See appendix A, section 11-17-1 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
Chapter 10
AIRPORT SAFETY OVERLAY
11-10-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
The purpose of the airport safety overlay district (ASOD) is to provide for the safety of aircraft pilots and passengers and protect a substantial investment
of public funds by assuring that land development and construction activities within the ASOD are compatible with the safe continued use of the American
Falls airport. (1992 Development Code)
11-10-2: HEIGHT LIMITATION ZONES:
This overlay zoning district is composed of several height limitation zones, which include all land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional
surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces appurtenant to the American Falls airport. These zones are shown on a supplement to the official
zoning map established by section 11-3-3 of this title. An area located in more than one of these zones is considered to be in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation.
(A) Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: The inner edge of the approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is two hundred fifty feet
(250') wide. The approach zone expands uniformly outward to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a horizontal distance of five
thousand forty feet (5,040') from the end of the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(B) Transitional Zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces described in subsection 11-10-3(B) of this chapter.
(C) Horizontal Zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of five thousand feet (5,000') from the center of each end of the primary surface
and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
(D) Conical Zone: The conical zone is the area that commences at the outer edge of the horizontal zone and extends outward a horizontal distance of four
thousand feet (4,000'). (1992 Development Code)
11-10-3: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Except as provided in subsection (E) of this section or by variance, no structure or tree shall be allowed to exceed the height limitations established herein.
(A) Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as
the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
(B) Transitional Surface: Slopes seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface
and the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation. In addition, there is transitional sloping
seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they
intersect the conical surface.
(C) Horizontal Zone: One hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation.
(D) Conical Zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward beginning at the edge of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty feet (150')
above the airport elevation, and extending to a height of three hundred fifty feet (350') above the airport elevation.
(E) Exception From Height Limitations: Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the construction or maintenance of any structure of thirty five feet (35') or less
in height, or the growth of any tree to a height up to thirty five feet (35') above the surface of the land, except in the approach zones. (1992
Development Code)
11-10-4: USE RESTRICTIONS:
No use shall create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and other lights, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 125/151
bird strike hazards, or in any way endanger or interfere with the operation of aircraft. Note that this performance standard applies throughout the city. (1992
Development Code)
11-10-5: NONCONFORMING USES; ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
Nonconforming uses and buildings are regulated by the provisions of section 11-1-6 of this title and, within this overlay district, these additional
requirements.
(A) Nonconforming uses, which may include trees, shall be required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance of any markers and/or lights
Power County deems necessary to indicate their presence to the operators of aircraft. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and
maintained at the expense of Power County.
(B) The repair and, under specified circumstances, replacement of nonconforming uses and buildings is permitted by section 11-1-6 of this title, but no
nonconforming use, building, or tree shall be permitted to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date hereof. (1992
Development Code)
11-10-6: PERMITS; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Permit requirements for development activity are established in chapter 2 of this title. Within the ASOD, permit requirements shall be expanded to include
the planting of any tree with a growth habit of more than thirty five feet (35') and the construction of any building or structure that is more than thirty five
feet (35') in height and is exempted from the requirement for a permit by section 11-2-4 of this title (this includes agricultural outbuildings and similar
accessory structures). (1992 Development Code)
11-10-7: VARIANCES:
The variance procedure is described in section 11-2-15 of this title. Any application for a variance of the height limitations established for the ASOD shall
be accompanied by a determination from the federal aviation administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and
the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. (1992 Development Code)
11-10-8: OBSTRUCTION MARKING AND LIGHTING:
The approval of any application for a permit or variance within the ASOD may be conditioned on the installation, operation, and maintenance, at the
owner's expense, of the markings and/or lights necessary to indicate the presence of an obstruction to aircraft operators. (1992 Development Code)
11-10-9: AIRPORT IMAGINARY SURFACES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 126/151
(1992 Development Code)
Chapter 11
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY
Division I. Administration Of National Flood Insurance Program
11-11-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter adopts the procedures and performance standards required for American Falls' participation in the national flood insurance program. (1992
Development Code)
11-11-2: BOUNDARY:
The floodplain overlay district (FOD) includes and is coterminous with all special flood hazard areas within the city and the area of city impact, as identified
by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA). (1992 Development Code)
11-11-3: DEVELOPMENT DEFINED:
In the FOD, "development" shall include any activity that may potentially affect flood flows. This includes all land disturbance, including grading and the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 127/151
construction of fills for any purpose, as well as all building construction, and is more comprehensive than the definition of "development" used in other
portions of the city. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-4: WARNING, DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
All applicants for permits in the FOD shall sign an acknowledgment stating:
(A) I understand that, while the degree of flood protection required by the city is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific
and engineering considerations, larger floods can and will occur.
(B) I understand that projected flood levels may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
(C) I understand that this title does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damage.
(D) I understand that this title does not create any liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof, or on the part of the federal insurance
administration, for flood damages. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-5: ADDITIONAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
All applications for permits in the FOD shall be accompanied by the following information:
(A) Elevation of the lowest floor of all proposed buildings.
(B) Elevation to which any existing or proposed building has been or will be floodproofed.
(C) For all buildings other than single-family dwellings, certification by an engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods used comply with these
performance standards.
(D) Where alteration of any watercourse or wetlands is proposed, a description of the extent to which the watercourse or wetlands will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development and proof that all state or federal permits required for that alteration have been approved.
(E) The developer shall provide base flood elevation data for all subdivisions or special permit uses that include fifty (50) or more lots or dwelling units or
five (5) or more acres. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-6: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR:
The administrator shall serve as the local floodplain ordinance administrator and perform the duties listed below:
(A) Determine that all required state and/or federal permits have been obtained before reviewing any application for a permit in the FOD.
(B) Where base flood elevation data are not provided by FEMA, obtain and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from
state, federal, or other sources as a basis for the administration of these performance standards.
(C) Maintain a record of the actual elevation of the lowest floor of new or substantially improved buildings, and whether or not the building contains a
basement.
(D) Maintain a record of the floodproofing certifications required by subsection 11-11-5(C) of this chapter.
(E) Notify Power County and the Idaho department of water resources prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of that
notification to the federal insurance administration.
(F) Maintain records of appeal actions and report all variances allowed to the federal insurance administration. (1992 Development Code)
Division II. Performance Standards For Special Flood Hazard Areas
11-11-7: ANCHORING:
New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 128/151
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring
methods may include, but are not limited to, the use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-8: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS:
(A) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage, and using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(B) All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed, or elevated, or located, so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within their components during flooding. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-9: UTILITIES AND SOLID WASTE:
(A) New and replacement potable water systems shall be designed to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(B) New and replacement sewage disposal systems shall be designed to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the
system into floodwaters.
(C) Solid waste handling and storage facilities shall not be located in the FOD. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-10: HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES:
Storage and handling of hazardous substances in the FOD is prohibited. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-11: SITE PLANNING:
Design and construction of all subdivisions and uses for which a special use permit is required shall minimize flood damage. Utilities shall be located and
designed to minimize flood damage, and the site shall be graded and drained to guide floodwaters around and away from existing and/or proposed
buildings. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-12: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT:
Subsections (A) and (B) of this section apply only where base flood elevations have been established by FEMA.
(A) Construction or substantial improvement of any dwelling shall result in the lowest floor being elevated to or above base flood elevation.
(B) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor are prohibited, except where designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic forces on exterior walls by
allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by an engineer or architect, or meet the
following minimum standards:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding,
shall be provided;
2. The bottom of such openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade; and
3. Such openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(C) Where base flood elevation data are not available through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source, applications must be
reviewed to assure that the proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. This determination of reasonableness shall be based on
evidence submitted with the application by the developer, including historical flood records, including photographs of past flood events and similar
documentation. The minimum elevation above grade in such cases shall be two feet (2'). (1992 Development Code)
11-11-13: NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT:
Construction or substantial improvement of any nonresidential building shall result in the lowest floor being elevated to or above base flood elevation or,
together with the attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(A) Be floodproofed so that below base flood level, the building is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
(B) Be designed and constructed to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(C) Present a certification from an engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction comply with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the performance standards of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 129/151
(D) Meet the performance standard of subsection 11-11-12(B) of this chapter for enclosed spaces below the lowest floor.
(E) Developers floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot (1') below the
floodproofed level. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-14: MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved within the FOD shall be elevated on and securely anchored to a permanent
foundation, so that the lowest floor is at or above base flood elevation where a base flood elevation has been established, or at least two feet (2') above
grade where no base flood elevation has been established. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-15: FLOODWAYS:
The floodway is the channel of a river or other watercourse and any adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1'). The floodway is a hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which
carry debris and potential projectiles, and due to the high erosion potential. Encroachments into the floodway, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development is prohibited, unless an engineer or architect certifies that the encroachment will not result in any increase in the
flood level during the base flood discharge. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-16: MAINTENANCE OF FLOOD CAPACITY:
Continuing maintenance to prevent the reduction of flood carrying capacity in altered or relocated watercourses shall be required. (1992 Development
Code)
11-11-17: AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO ZONES):
An area of shallow flooding is an AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). In these areas, base flood depth ranges from one to three feet
(3'), a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident.
(A) Construction and substantial improvement of dwellings in AO zones shall result in the lowest floor being elevated above the highest adjacent grade of
the building site to or above the depth number specified on the FIRM or to at least two feet (2'), where no depth number is specified.
(B) All new construction and substantial improvement of nonresidential buildings in AO zones shall:
1. Be graded and drained to guide floodwaters around and away from existing and/or proposed buildings; and
2. Have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site to or above the depth number specified on the FIRM or, where
no depth number is specified, to at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade; or
3. Together with its attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that any space below that level is watertight, with substantially
impermeable walls and structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Compliance
shall be certified by an engineer or architect. (1992 Development Code)
Division III. Variances In Floodplain Overlay District
11-11-18: ADDITIONAL FINDING FOR VARIANCES:
The approval of any variance in the FOD shall be based on all findings required by section 11-2-15 of this title, and the additional finding that approval of
the variance will not result in increased flood levels, a threat to public safety, or extraordinary public expense. (1992 Development Code)
11-11-19: NOTICE OF VARIANCE:
Where a variance of the requirements of this chapter is approved, the administrator's notice of the decision shall state that the city is not liable for any flood
damages that result from the variance. Where a variance of the elevation requirements of this title is approved, the administrator shall also notify the
developer that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (1992
Development Code)
Chapter 12
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Division I. Performance Standards Ensuring Adequate Infrastructure
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 130/151
11-12-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter establishes general performance standards for land and building development activity throughout the city. (1992 Development Code)
11-12-2: CONTINUING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All developments shall demonstrate continuing compliance with the applicable performance standards. (1992 Development Code)
11-12-3: UTILITIES:
(A) Provision Required: All developments, and all lots or parcels within a development, shall have direct access to municipal water and sewer utilities.
Provision of utilities, including any extension of water and sewer mains, shall be the responsibility of the developer in accordance with this code. (Ord.
517, 3-18-1998)
(B) Easements: No building shall be placed in any utility easement, public or private. Only wire or rail fences, or solid wood fences with a separable section
across the easement may be constructed across utility easements. Note that private utilities may impose even more restrictive requirements on fences
crossing their easements. (1992 Development Code)
11-12-4: ACCESS:
(A) Access Required: All developments and all lots or parcels within a development shall have safe, direct access to a dedicated public street that meets
or exceeds the standards of appendix E, section 11-17-5 of this title. Provision of access, including street extensions, shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
(B) Private Streets: Direct access to a dedicated public street may be permitted via private streets, in the discretion of the commission, subject to the
following:
1. Unique or special circumstances exist with respect to the proposed use, design, location, topography, or other features of the development or its
surroundings such that private streets will serve to enhance the overall development.
2. Private streets shall provide safe and effective movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in compliance with the standards of appendix E, section
11-17-5 of this title.
3. Private streets shall provide adequate access for service and emergency vehicles.
4. Private streets shall not adversely affect access or good transportation planning to adjacent property and to the area of travel networks.
5. Private streets shall not landlock adjacent property due to topography or parcel layout.
6. Other than to provide emergency access, private streets shall not interfere with the continuity of public streets.
7. The use or alignment of private streets shall not interfere with the continuity of public streets.
8. An appropriate mechanism shall be established for the maintenance and repair of private streets, including provisions for the funding thereof. (Ord.
596, 1-6-2010)
(C) Access Drives: All access driveways, including residential driveways, shall comply with the standards for access driveways found in appendices C and
E, sections 11-17-3 and 11-17-5, respectively, of this title.
(D) Clear Vision Triangles: A clear vision triangle shall be maintained at all street intersections and all points of access to a public street.
1. No solid fence or wall, planter, hedge, shrub, or other visual obstruction more than three feet (3') in height above grade shall be permitted within a
clear vision triangle.
2. No parking shall be permitted within a clear vision triangle.
3. Trees shall be permitted in clear vision triangles, but only if all branches are removed to a height of at least seven feet (7') above grade.
(E) Access To Arterials: The number of points of access to arterial streets shall be minimized.
(F) Access To Commercial And Industrial Uses: No commercial or industrial use shall have its principal access through an area in the RA or RB zoning
districts. (1992 Development Code; amd. Ord. 596, 1-6-2010)
11-12-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
All uses shall provide off street parking and loading areas as required by appendix C, section 11-17-3 of this title, except in the CC zoning district, where
reliance on on street parking shall be permitted. Snow storage shall not be permitted to reduce the size of required off street parking or loading areas.
(1992 Development Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 131/151
11-12-6: CURBING, GUTTER AND SIDEWALKS:
Curbing, gutter and sidewalks shall be provided by all new developments where these facilities do not exist, within six (6) months of building permit
application date, except where the city specifically waives this requirement. The administrator's refusal to waive this requirement may be appealed to the
commission using the appeals procedure of section 11-2-14 of this title. (Ord. 479, 11-16-1994)
Division II. Performance Standards Ensuring Public Health And Safety
11-12-7: HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES:
Any use that is, or may reasonably be expected to be, subject to the reporting requirements of the emergency planning and community right to know act of
1986 (EPCRA) shall demonstrate continuing compliance with state and federal requirements for the storage and handling of hazardous substances. (1992
Development Code)
11-12-8: NUISANCES:
Potential nuisances and hazards shall be mitigated by appropriate means.
(A) Noise: No commercial or industrial development shall create excessive levels of noise adversely affecting other commercial or residential uses.
Excessive noise, as measured at the property line of the affected use, is any noise that exceeds the standards of table 11-12-I of this section, as
follows:
TABLE 11-12-I
DETAILED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NOISE
Land Use Category
Exterior Design Noise Level - L10
Residences, motels, schools, libraries, hospitals, parks, and similar uses 70 dBA
Other developed lands 75 dBA
L10 Means this noise level may be exceeded 10 percent of the time. dBA = decibels.
(B) Light, Glare, Heat: No commercial or industrial development shall direct light, glare, or heat beyond its property line. Welding equipment and other
sources of intense light or glare shall be shielded from the view of neighboring properties or public ways by enclosure in a building, location on the
property, or construction of a fence or wall.
(C) Dust, Smoke: No development shall generate dust, smoke, odors, or other airborne pollutants that travel beyond its property line, except as permitted
by state and federal air quality standards.
(D) Drainage: No development shall channel storm or melt water runoff so as to adversely affect neighboring properties or public ways. (1992
Development Code)
(E) Solid Waste Storage: Solid waste shall be stored in enclosures or containers and in such a manner as not to attract rodents or other vermin, be
susceptible to spillage by dogs or cats, generate odors beyond the property line or liquid runoff; or permit blowing of paper and other lightweight waste.
No solid waste, including construction or demolition debris, shall be buried within the city, except where permitted by the international building codes as
a rubble fill for a construction site. (1992 Development Code; amd. Ord. 563, 4-16-2003)
11-12-9: SWIMMING POOLS:
Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed with a suitable fence or structure so as to prevent access to the pool by unwary persons and/or children. (1992
Development Code)
11-12-10: EXCAVATION AND GRADING:
The international building codes are hereby adopted to regulate excavation and grading activities. (1992 Development Code; amd. Ord. 563, 4-16-2003)
11-12-11: RESERVOIR AND RIVER SETBACKS:
(A) American Falls Reservoir: In order to provide for the effects of continuing shoreline erosion, all structures shall be at least five hundred feet (500') from
the high water mark of American Falls Reservoir.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 132/151
(B) Snake River: All structures shall be at least one hundred feet (100') from the canyon rim along the Snake River. (1992 Development Code)
11-12-11.1: DAYCARE:
Childcare services shall be provided in compliance with this title and state law1. (Ord. 469, 11-17-1993)
Division III. Performance Standards Ensuring Land Use Compatibility
11-12-12: USE OF REQUIRED YARDS:
Yards created by required setbacks shall remain unenclosed, except as permitted by this performance standard.
(A) Overhangs: Eaves, rain gutters, bay windows, and similar above grade extensions may extend no more than three feet (3') into a required yard.
(B) Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings may be located in side and rear yards, within the required setbacks.
(C) Loss Of Required Yard Space: No space required to make up any required yard, or to maintain the required maximum lot coverage, shall be removed
from the lot by sale, lease, or other conveyance. (1992 Development Code)
11-12-13: LAND USE COMPATIBILITY:
The review of special use permit applications shall include a determination that the proposed development is compatible with neighboring uses, with
compatibility being evaluated using each of the factors listed herein:
(A) Lot coverage and the extent of landscaping, including the effectiveness of proposed buffers.
(B) Building bulk, height, and scale.
(C) The effect on scenic views from adjoining properties and public spaces.
(D) Activity levels, as measured by traffic and noise generation, parking area requirements, the number and size of signs, hours of operation, and similar
indicators.
(E) The extent of functional connections with adjoining developments (existing and anticipated), including shared access to arterial streets, shared parking
and service access, shared buffering and open space, and shared pedestrian circulation. (1992 Development Code)
11-12-14: LAND USE ALONG ARTERIAL STREETS:
Where residential development is proposed along an arterial street, reverse frontage and deeper lots shall be used to separate homes and traffic, and the
developer shall provide a sidewalk or trail and landscaped buffer along the arterial. Landscaped buffer standards are found in table 11-12-II in section 11-
12-15 of this chapter. (1992 Development Code)
11-12-15: LANDSCAPED BUFFERS:
(A) Landscaped buffers shall be provided as required by table 11-12-II in this section, and appendix D, section 11-17-4 of this title. Wherever landscaped
buffering is required by this title, a planting plan shall be required as part of the application for a permit. That plan shall show the width of the buffer, the
number, size, and species of all proposed plant materials, how the proposed buffer will be graded (i.e., level, berm, swale); how irrigation will be
provided, and, where applicable, the location of any fences, walls, sign poles or pedestals, or other structures that will placed in the buffer.
(B) Existing vegetation shall be retained to serve required buffering or screening functions wherever possible.
TABLE 11-12-II
BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS1
Development
Development
Basic Buffer Width
(Feet)
Height Adjustment (See
Appendix D)
Headlight
Buffer
Security
Fence
Heavy industrial Any area zoned RA or
RB
50 1:1 For parking Required
Heavy industrial Any arterial street 12 None Optional Required
Light industrial Any area zoned RA or 50 .80:1 For parking Required
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 133/151
RB
Light industrial Any other use or any
public way
20 None Optional Optional
Highway commercial Any area zoned RA or
RB
20 .80:1 For parking Optional
Highway commercial Any public way 12 None Optional Optional
Core commercial Any area zoned RA or
RB
20 None For parking Optional
Higher density residential, manufactured
home parks
Lower density
residential
20 None For parking Optional
New residential subdivision Any arterial street 20 None Optional Optional
Note:
1.Detailed performance standards for the design and installation of buffers are found in appendix D, section 11-17-4 of this title. Note that the
buffering requirements of this table apply in both directions. That is, a residential development proposed adjacent to an existing commercial use
would have exactly the same buffering responsibility as a new commercial development proposed next to a residential subdivision.
(1992 Development Code)
11-12-16: TEMPORARY USES:
Any use permitted in the HC, LI, or HI zoning districts may also be established as a temporary use in those zoning districts.
(A) Development Permit: A development permit (see section 11-2-9 of this title) shall be required for a temporary use, but the duration of the permit shall
be for a specified term not exceeding ninety (90) days.
(B) Access And Parking: No temporary use shall reduce the number of parking spaces provided by any other use below that required by appendix C,
section 11-17-3 of this title, or interfere with safe access to a property or circulation through any parking or loading area. (1992 Development Code)
Division IV. Large Scale Development
11-12-17: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT:
A large scale development includes one hundred (100) or more residential lots or units or commercial uses that will potentially generate one thousand
(1,000) or more ADT (average daily trips).
(A) Large scale developments shall provide additional on and off site public facilities necessitated by their development. Such facilities shall be provided in
compliance with all requirements of this title and may include: off site runoff and erosion control measures, central sewerage systems; such off site road
improvements as deceleration or acceleration lanes, left turn lanes, signs or signals, and bridges or culverts; solid waste transfer stations; emergency
services buildings and apparatus, including fire engines and ambulances; and neighborhood parks (which may include space used for recreational
trails) at a rate of two (2) acres per thousand population.
(B) The public facilities needs of any large scale development shall be determined through a fact finding process conducted by the commission, at the
expense of the developer. The commission may retain professional planners and/or engineers to conduct this study, the purpose of which shall be to
determine what new facilities needs may be attributed to the proposed development. The large scale development study process shall be conducted as
follows:
1. The administrator shall determine whether a proposed development is a "large scale development" as defined in chapter 16 of this title;
2. The administrator shall not approve a permit for or schedule a hearing on an application determined to be for a large scale development, but shall,
instead, place initiation of a large scale development study on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting; at which
3. The commission shall review the application. If it confirms the administrator's determination, the commission shall require a large scale development
study.
4. Where a large scale development study is required, the developer shall place a deposit with the administrator in the amount required by the
resolution establishing fees for the administration of this title. The administrator shall retain appropriate professional assistance for the study, drawing
against the deposit as necessary. Additional actual costs shall be billed to the developer, with such costs being paid before a hearing on the
application is scheduled. Any unused funds shall be returned to the developer upon completion of the study.
5. An application shall be considered complete and a hearing conducted only after completion of the large scale development study. (1992
Development Code)
Footnote 1: IC  39-1101 et seq.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 134/151
Chapter 13
ADDITIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR LOT SPLITS AND SUBDIVISIONS
11-13-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter provides additional performance standards applicable to the division of land for sale and/or development. (1992 Development Code)
11-13-2: PLAT OR RECORD OF SURVEY REQUIRED FOR ALL LAND DIVISIONS:
A record of survey or plat shall be required for all land divisions, except as provided in section 11-2-3 of this title, and for all areas to be annexed. Records
of survey and plats shall meet all requirements of title 50, chapter 13 of the Idaho Code "Plats And Vacations", as amended1, and all requirements of
appendix F, section 11-17-6 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
11-13-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR LOT SPLITS:
A lot split is the creation of any parcel of land of less than twenty (20) acres for the purpose of sale, lease, rental, or development. All lot splits shall comply
with the following requirements:
(A) Lot splits shall not be used as a means to evade the requirements of this title for subdivisions.
(B) Any lot created shall be capable of accommodating a permitted use allowed by this title.
(C) Any lot created shall have direct access to an existing public street in compliance with the standards of this title.
(D) Any lot created shall have direct access to city water and sewer and private utilities.
(E) Lot splits shall comply with all other applicable standards of this title.
(F) The provision of access and utilities to the lot created, including any necessary extension of streets or utility mains, shall be the responsibility of the
developer. (Ord. 596, 1-6-2010)
11-13-4: AVOIDING INCREMENTAL SUBDIVISION:
An application for a subdivision permit may be rejected solely on the grounds that the application does not provide a master plan for the development of
the entire contiguous holdings of the developer or owner. (1992 Development Code)
11-13-5: SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
Subdivisions shall comply with all applicable standards of this title and the following design requirements:
(A) Subdivisions shall be designed to perpetuate the original city plan, including the arcuate street system extending uphill from the existing developed
area, the grid system in the more level areas, and the practice of dedicating major drainageways as public open space. Within this framework,
subdivisions shall be designed to minimize the length of streets and utility lines required by their development; exposure to natural hazards and
damage to natural assets, including soil erosion and the acceleration of storm and melt water runoff; exposure to nuisances, including traffic; and
conflict with neighboring land uses.
(B) Every lot created shall be capable of accommodating a permitted use allowed by this title.
(C) No double frontage lots shall be created.
(D) Side lot lines shall run as nearly perpendicular to the street as possible. The creation of acutely angular lots shall be avoided, except where necessary
to accommodate the terrain or previously existing property lines. A utility easement of five feet (5') in width shall be provided along all side lot lines and,
where no alley exists, along all rear lot lines.
(E) No lot shall be divided by the boundaries of any taxing jurisdiction. (1992 Development Code)
11-13-6: SUBDIVISION OF IRRIGATED LANDS:
All subdivisions shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Idaho Code section 31-3805, as amended, which provides for approval of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 135/151
subdivisions by irrigation entities. Subdivisions which are to be annexed and provided with city water service shall dedicate all existing water rights
appurtenant to the subdivided land to the city. (1992 Development Code)
11-13-7: SUBDIVISION OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
Subdivisions that are in, or include a portion of, the FOD shall comply with the additional requirements of chapter 11 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
11-13-8: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS:
The following improvements shall be provided in all subdivisions:
(A) Survey monuments as required by state law and this title.
(B) A connection to the city's potable water system for each lot, including any extension of mains required to serve the subdivision and fire hydrants.
(C) A connection to the city's sewage collection system for each lot, including any extension of mains required to serve the subdivision.
(D) Private utility connections (power, natural gas, telephone, cable television) for each lot, including any extension of lines or cables required to serve the
subdivision, in compliance with the standards established by the utility involved.
(E) Paved streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and streetlights as specified in appendix E, section 11-17-5 of this title, with all streets being dedicated to the
public.
(F) A storm drainage system, as necessary.
(G) Any other improvement required for compliance with this title.
(H) Underground utilities shall be provided where possible. All utility (public and private) service connections shall be installed to the property line of every
lot created before the base course of the street is laid. (1992 Development Code)
11-13-9: CONDOMINIUMS:
For the purposes of this title, "townhouses" and other forms of attached multiple ownership dwellings are included in the term "condominium".
(A) All condominium developments shall be platted.
(B) The developer shall provide evidence that a proper condominium agreement, party wall easements, and other documents necessary to provide for
attached multiple ownerships have been recorded. (1992 Development Code)
11-13-10: VACATION OF SUBDIVISION PLAT:
Requests for the vacation of a subdivision plat shall follow the procedure provided in Idaho Code section 50-1306A, except that, prior to conducting the
required public hearing on the proposed vacation, the council shall refer the proposed vacation to the commission for its review and comment. (1992
Development Code)
11-13-11: AMENDMENT OF SUBDIVISION PLAT:
To resubdivide or replat, or to amend the plat of an approved or recorded subdivision, the developer shall file a new application for a subdivision and such
application shall be processed in the manner set forth in this section. All requirements of the American Falls subdivision ordinance shall apply except the
requirement for a hearing, which shall not be required. The final proposed amended plat shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and a
recommendation shall be made by the commission to the mayor and city council.
Before scheduling the amended plat for consideration by the mayor and city council, the public works department will check the amended plat for any utility
or road easements that should be included. The mayor and city council shall then consider and take final action on the proposed amended plat at a
regularly scheduled public meeting of the council. (Ord. 510, 7-16-1997)
Chapter 14
ADDITIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
11-14-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 136/151
This chapter provides additional performance standards for the development of manufactured home parks. (1992 Development Code)
11-14-2: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS ARE SUBDIVISIONS:
Manufactured home parks are subdivisions and shall comply with the platting requirements of section 11-13-2 of this title and all other applicable
requirements of chapter 13 of this title that are not superseded by the performance standards of this chapter. (1992 Development Code)
11-14-3: TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY:
Any manufactured home park that permits transient (less than 31 days) occupancy is a commercial use, shall be classified as a recreational vehicle park,
and shall be permitted only in the HC zoning district. (1992 Development Code)
11-14-4: MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DESIGN:
Manufactured home parks shall comply with all applicable performance standards of this title and the following design requirements:
(A) Manufactured home parks shall be designed to minimize: exposure to natural hazards and damage to natural assets, including soil erosion and the
acceleration of storm and melt water runoff; exposure to nuisances, including traffic; and conflict with neighboring land uses.
(B) Each manufactured home space shall be plainly marked and numbered, and no more than one manufactured home shall be placed on each space. A
directory sign with a map of the park showing all manufactured home spaces by number shall be placed at each entrance to the park.
(C) No manufactured home park shall have a density of morethan eight (8) spaces per acre.
(D) Each manufactured home space shall have a minimum width of not less than fifty five feet (55').
(E) The minimum setbacks within manufactured home parks shall be:
1. Front yard: Ten feet (10').
2. Side yard: Fifteen feet (15').
3. Rear yard: Fifteen feet (15').
(F) Accessory buildings, including storage sheds, shall be permitted within the setbacks, but the lot coverage on a manufactured home space shall be
limited to seventy five percent (75%).
(G) Solid waste containers shall be provided. Those containers shall be in compliance with subsection 11-12-8(E) of this title and effectively screened from
public view (both from adjoining properties, and from the view of park residents).
(H) All manufactured home parks shall provide and maintain landscaped buffers as required by section 11-12-15 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
11-14-5: MANUFACTURED HOME PARK IMPROVEMENTS:
The following improvements shall be provided in all manufactured home parks:
(A) Survey monuments as required by state law and this title.
(B) A connection to the city's potable water system for each space, including any extension of mains required to serve the park and fire hydrants.
(C) A connection to the city's sewage collection system for each space, including any extension of mains required to serve the park.
(D) Private utility connections (power, natural gas, telephone, cable television) connections for each space, including any extension of lines or cables
required to serve the park, in compliance with the standards established by the utility involved.
(E) Paved streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and streetlights as specified in appendix E, section 11-17-5 of this title, with all streets being dedicated to the
public.
(F) A storm drainage system, as necessary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 137/151
(G) Any other improvement required for compliance with this title.
(H) Underground utilities shall be provided where possible. All utility (public and private) service connections shall be installed onto every space created
before the base course of the street is laid. (1992 Development Code)
Chapter 15
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
11-15-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter provides the tools needed to assure that the improvements required by this title are in fact installed and maintained. (1992 Development
Code)
11-15-2: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A required improvement is any improvement that must be provided to comply with this title. (1992 Development Code)
11-15-3: INSTALLATION AT DEVELOPER'S EXPENSE:
The installation of all required improvements shall be at the developer's expense. The city may, at its discretion, participate in the costs of adding capacity
to required improvements in order to provide for anticipated future developments. (1992 Development Code)
11-15-4: STANDARDS FOR REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
(A) All required improvements shall be installed in compliance with the policies of these regulations and any design and engineering standards separately
adopted by the city or other agencies responsible for providing service to the development.
(B) All required improvements shall be installed in accordance with the "Idaho Standard Specifications For Public Works Construction". (1992
Development Code)
11-15-5: TIME OF INSTALLATION OR DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
(A) Developers may install all required improvements before a final plat is recorded or the development is offered for lease or sale, leased, sold, or
occupied.
(B) Developers may elect to record final plats of the development in phases and/or offer phases of the development for lease, sale, or occupancy before all
required improvements are installed. Phasing shall be permitted pursuant to a development agreement that:
1. Incorporates a conceptual site plan of the entire development (the site plan used as a basis for permit approval) and a detailed site plan and
construction drawings of the initial phase(s).
2. Identifies all required improvements in the initial phase(s) and establishes their estimated cost.
3. Sets a schedule for the completion of the required improvements in the initial phase(s) and an anticipated schedule for future phases.
4. Guarantees completion, repair, and one year's maintenance of all required improvements in the initial phase(s), using one of the methods listed in
section 11-15-7 of this chapter, and provides a process for the submission of detailed plans, cost estimates, and the guarantee of improvements in
future phases.
5. Provides a process by which the city may, if necessary, complete required improvements using the guarantee(s) provided.
6. Provides a process by which either party may request renegotiation of the development agreement.
7. Provides a process by which the development agreement may be transferred, with city approval, to the developer's successors.
8. Provides that the development agreement and any vested rights it confers shall be void if the city is required to call a guarantee to complete required
improvements or if the anticipated schedule required by subsection (B)3 of this section is not met or renegotiated. The developer shall have the right
to renegotiate the anticipated schedule without losing vested rights, provided that such negotiations are initiated by the developer, within ninety (90)
days after his or her failure to initiate or complete a phase as scheduled.
9. An initial phase is any phase anticipated to begin within eighteen (18) months. The anticipated schedule may set times for the initiation or completion
of a phase in terms of reasonable ranges of no more than twelve (12) months. (1992Development Code)
11-15-6: EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 138/151
The effect of a development agreement shall be to create vested rights in the conceptual site plan, as it was approved. Development agreements do not
insulate developments from changes in state or federal regulations or changes in building and fire codes. (1992 Development Code)
11-15-7: GUARANTEES:
Completion of the improvements identified in a development agreement shall be guaranteed by one of the following methods:
(A) The developer may place an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost in escrow, with that amount and accumulated
interest being released only after the city has inspected and accepted the required improvements. A development agreement may provide for the
phased release of a portion of the escrowed funds as work proceeds, but at least twenty five percent (25%) of the amount in escrow shall be retained
until all required improvements are installed, inspected, and accepted. If any required improvements are not completed as provided in the development
agreement, the city shall use as much as necessary of the escrow account to complete those improvements before returning any remaining balance to
the developer.
(B) The developer may provide an irrevocable or standing letter of credit for an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost.
The letter of credit shall be released only after the city has inspected and accepted the required improvements. If any required improvements are not
completed as provided in the development agreement, the city shall use as much as necessary of the credit available to complete those improvements.
(C) Large development may be completed in phases, with a separate final plat for each phase, but only where the development agreement provides for
the timely installation of essential improvements, sets a schedule for each phase, provides for financial assurance by one of the methods listed in this
section for each phase, and specifies a process for renegotiation of the agreement if the schedule is not met. (1992 Development Code)
11-15-8: INSPECTION FEES:
Fees for the inspection of required improvements shall be set by resolution. Inspection fees shall be paid before any work on required improvements is
permitted. (1992 Development Code)
11-15-9: INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Required improvements shall be inspected by the administrator before acceptance. Acceptance of required improvements shall be by action of the council,
following submission of the developer's written request for acceptance and receipt of the administrator's report that all improvements have been inspected
and are in compliance with these regulations. (1992 Development Code)
11-15-10: AS BUILT DRAWINGS:
Reproducible as built drawings of all subdivision improvements shall be provided to the city at the developer's expense. (1992 Development Code)
11-15-11: WARRANTY OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Required improvements shall be warranted by the developer for both materials and workmanship for one year after their acceptance. Such a warranty
provision shall be included in all development agreements. Where all required improvements will be completed before a final plat is approved and the
development is offered for lease, sale, or occupancy, a warranty agreement shall be submitted for approval. Enforcement of the warranty shall be assured
by:
(A) Retention of ten percent (10%) of an escrow account established to comply with section 11-5-7 of this title;
(B) A continuing letter of credit, as provided in section 11-5-7 of this title, but for ten percent (10%) of the cost of the required improvements; or
(C) Establishment of a new escrow account, in which an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the cost of all required improvements is deposited, and
which shall be released only upon expiration of the warranty. (1992 Development Code)
11-15-12: CONTINUING MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
The continuing maintenance of any private improvement required for compliance with any performance standard of this title shall be required. The
maintenance of landscaped areas shall include irrigation, maintenance of the irrigation system, and weed and pest control. (1992 Development Code)
11-15-13: MAINTENANCE MECHANISM:
Any development subject to continuing maintenance requirements that results, or may reasonably be expected to result, in the creation of multiple
ownerships shall create a communityassociation or other mechanism to assure continuing maintenance. The developer shall submit the proposed
declaration of covenants, articles of incorporation, and bylaws for the community association with his or her application for a permit and shall provide
evidence that these documents have been recorded before a certificate of occupancy is issued. (1992 Development Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 139/151
11-15-14: FAILURE TO MAINTAIN:
Failure to maintain any required improvement shall be a violation of this title. (1992 Development Code)
Chapter 16
DEFINITIONS
11-16-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter provides definitions for important terms used in this title. Any dispute about the meaning of a term used in this title shall be resolved using the
appeals procedure of section 11-2-16 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
11-16-2: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
Terms include both their singular and plural forms; i.e., "building" includes "buildings", and, except where otherwise indicated, terms include their common
derivatives; i.e., "adjacent" includes "adjoining". Verbs include all tenses; i.e., "are" includes "were" and "will be".
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES: Accessory buildings and uses are those customarily associated with, and clearly subordinate to, a principal
building or use. An "accessory apartment" is an independent (separate entrance, bathroom, kitchen) living unit, within a single-family dwelling permitted by
this title that is maintained solely for the use of family members. An "accessory dwelling" is a single-family dwelling located on a commercial or industrial
property and occupied by the owner, a manager, or a guard.
ADJACENT: As used in this title, "adjacent" includes all parcels that directly border a lot and all parcels separated from the lot by only a public or private
easement or right of way, including roads and irrigation canals.
ADMINISTRATOR: The city employee (employed either directly or via a contract with another agency or private firm) responsible for the administration of
this title.
AIRPORT: Refers to the American Falls airport. The following definitions are used in the administration of the airport safety standards of chapter 10 of this
title:
Approach Surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary
surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope established in subsection 11-10-3(A) of this title. In plan view, the perimeter of
the approach surface coincides with the perimeterof the approach zone.
Conical Surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the outer edge of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to one (20:1), for a
horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
Horizontal Surface: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty feet (150') above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which, in plan view, coincides
with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds any height limitation established in chapter 10 of this title.
Primary Surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. The primary surface extends two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of the runway.
The width of the primary surface is two hundred fifty feet (250'). The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the
nearest point on the runway centerline.
Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
Structure: Any object, including any mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, without being limited to, buildings, towers, tanks, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines.
Transitional Surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at ninety degree (90) angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a
slope of seven feet (7') horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and
conical surfaces.
Tree: For the purposes of chapter 10 of this title, any object of natural growth.
Utility Runway: A runway constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds'
maximum gross weight and less.
Visual Runway: A runway intended for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. For the purposes of the FOD, specifically includes liquid or
gas storage tanks.
BUILDING BULK: "Building bulk" may be measured and compared in terms of floor area ratio (the total square footage of all floors as a percent of lot size)
or similar measures.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from mean natural grade to the highest point on a building. "Building height" excludes chimneys, vents, and
antennas.
CITY: The city of American Falls, Idaho.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 140/151
CLEAR VISION TRIANGLE: The area that provides the visibility required for safe access to streets. Clear vision triangles shall be determined as follows:
(A) At Street Intersections: The clear vision triangle includes the area defined by extending a line between two (2) points, one on each lot line paralleling
the street, each of which is thirty feet (30') from the lot corner at the intersection; and
(B) At Other Points Of Access: The clear vision triangle includes the area defined by extending a line between two (2) points, one on the lot line paralleling
the street, and one on the outer edge of the driveway, each of which is fifteen feet (15') from the point where the driveway crosses the lot line.
COMMERCIAL: Includes all land uses in SLUC 4923 and 4924, 52-59, 61-69, 71-79, and 8221, except that any use in SLUC 639, 64, 66, 72-79, or
8221 that includes an outdoor or only partially enclosed work and/or materials handling and/or storage yard. All such uses shall be considered
industrial.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of the city of American Falls established by title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
COMPATIBILITY: Land uses need not be identical to be compatible, but must be sited, designed, constructed, and used in such a way that the normal
functions and operation of neighboring uses do not seriously conflict, and so that their appearance is harmonious.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive plan of the city of American Falls.
COUNCIL: The elected governing board of the city of American Falls.
DAYCARE: Care and supervision provided for compensation during part of a twenty four (24) hour day, for a child or children not related by blood or
marriage to the person or persons providing the care in a place other than the child's or children's own home or homes.
Daycare Center: Provides daycare for thirteen (13) or more children.
Family Daycare Home: Provides care for six (6) or fewerchildren.
Group Daycare Facility: Provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children.
DEVELOPMENT: "Development" is used as a generic term covering any and all activities regulated by this title. The developer is, by definition, the
owner of the parcel on which a development has been proposed, but an owner may appoint a representative for proceedings required by this title.
EPCRA: The emergency planning and community right to know act of 1986. Refers to 42 USC 1101 through 11050, as amended.
FLOODPLAIN: For the purposes of this title, synonymous with "special flood hazard area". The following definitions are used in the administration of
chapter 10 of this title:
Base Flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood".
Flood: Partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of
runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Insurance Rate Map: Abbreviated FIRM. The official map on which the federal insurance administration has delineated areas of special flood
hazard and risk premium zones applicable to the city.
Flood Insurance Study: The official report of the federal insurance administration, including flood profiles, flood boundary maps, and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking, building access; or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that it does not place the
building in violation of the nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
Manufactured Home: For floodplain management purposes, the definition of "manufactured home" shall be expanded to include recreational vehicles,
travel trailers, and similar vehicles or trailers that are left in place for one hundred eighty (180) or more consecutive days. Recreational vehicles, travel
trailers, and similar vehicles or trailers are not manufactured homes for flood insurance purposes.
Manufactured Home Park: For the purposes of chapter 10 of this title, a "manufactured home park" is any lot or parcel used for the purpose of renting
or leasing ten (10) or moremanufactured home spaces.
New Construction: Buildings for which the "start of construction" was on or after the effective date hereof.
Special Flood Hazard Area: Land subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) always includes the letters A or V.
Start Of Construction: Applies to both substantial improvements and new construction and means the date a permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repairs, placement, or other improvements was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. "Actual start" means
either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as pouring a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundation, or erection of temporary forms; nor does it include installation of accessory buildings.
Substantial Improvement: Repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a building, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
building's market value either before the improvement or repair is started, or where the building has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects its external dimensions. The term does not include any project for the improvement of a
building required to comply with state or local codes assuring safe living conditions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 141/151
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: Any material regulated by EPCRA.
HIGHER DENSITY RESIDENTIAL USE: Any residential use that is designed for occupancy by more than two (2) families. Includes, without
distinctions, apartments, condominiums, duplexes, townhouses, and all other forms of attached housing. Also includes manufactured home parks.
HOME OCCUPATION: A commercial activity conducted in a dwelling or a building accessory to a dwelling. Home occupations, by definition, comply
with the performance standards of appendix B, section 11-17-2 of this title.
INDUSTRIAL: Includes all land uses in SLUC 21-51, 637, and 82-89, plus any use defined as industrial in the definition of "commercial" in this section,
except SLUC 4923 and 4924.
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT: Any subdivision or land use change, or group of subdivisions or land use changes created from the same parcel, that
includes more than one hundred (100) proposed dwelling units or that potentially generates more than one thousand (1,000) automobile trips per day
at peak occupancy.
LOCAL PLANNING ACT (Also Local Planning Act Of 1975): Refers to Idaho Code sections 67-6501 through 67-6537, and subsequent amendments.
LOT: For the purposes of this title, "lot" is used both as a generic term for a development site, and to refer to any parcel of land created and described
by a record of survey or plat.
LOT COVERAGE: The percent of the lot covered by structures, including the main and all accessory buildings, and impervious surfaces, including
patios, drives, and walks.
LOT SPLIT: Creation of any parcel of land of less than twenty (20) acres for the purpose of sale, lease, rental, or development.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, manufactured pursuant to the authority of 42 USC 5401 (the national manufactured home construction and
safety standards act), that is transportable in one or more sections, and which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40)
body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. A "manufactured home park" is any
lot used for occupancy by manufactured homes that will not be placed on a permanent foundation.
MINOR UTILITY INSTALLATIONS: Includes cable television, electric power, and telephone cables and transmission lines, and natural gas pipelines
that serve the area through which they are routed. Also includes transformer boxes and other minor appurtenances to those transmission lines or
pipelines.
OCCUPANCY: The use of a building or lot. Occupancies are classified using the standard land use coding system (SLUC).
OUTDOOR MATERIAL HANDLING OR STORAGE: Stockpiling, storage, processing, or packaging of materials for any reason (it need not be for
commercial use), including the long term storage of construction materials and inoperative machinery or vehicles, that is not enclosed in a building and
that is visible from a public street.
PLAT: The legal map of a subdivision.
PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDER: A "potentially affected publicservice provider" is any local agency, including special districts, that provides any public
facility or service that may possibly be affected by a proposed development. State law specifically states that school districts are potentially affected
public service providers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: As per Idaho Code section 49-2801, "recreational vehicle" means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping
trailer, with or without motive power, designed for recreational or emergency occupancy.
SETBACK: The distance between the property line and the outer wall, at grade, of the principal building on the same lot. The space within that distance
is called a yard.
(A) The front setback is measured from the lot line paralleling a public street to the principal building. Corner lots have two (2) front yards.
(B) The rear setback is measured from the rear lot line to the principal building. The rear lot line is parallel, or more or less parallel, to the street. Corner
lots have two (2) rear yards, but may treat either as a side yard for the purposes of this title.
(C) The side setback is measured from the side lot line to the principal building.
SIGN: Any object or structure used to identify, advertise, or in any way attract or direct attention to any use, building, person, or product by any means,
including, but not limited to, the use of lettering, words, pictures, and other graphic depictions or symbols. Specific types of signs are defined in
appendix A, section 11-17-1 of this title.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A detached structure designed for occupancy by one family. Also includes, as required by Idaho Code sections 67-6530
through 67-6532, "any home in which eight or fewer unrelated mentally and/or physically handicapped persons reside; and which is supervised".
Includes both conventional dwellings and manufactured homes that:
(A) Comply with the national manufactured home construction and safety standards act (40 USC 5401) or the international building and energy codes and
was constructed after June 15, 1976, and is certified as meeting the mobile home construction and safety standards of the U.S. department of housing
and urban development or has been rehabilitated to meet requirements of Idaho Code section 44-2503.
(B) Have all hitches, wheels, chassis, and other running gear removed and are attached to apermanent foundation.
(C) Are permanently connected to city utilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 142/151
(D) Recreational vehicles and travel trailers shall not be used as single-family dwellings, except that a recreational vehicle or travel trailer may be used as
a temporary dwelling to replace a home destroyed by fire or other catastrophe for a period of up to one year.
SITE PLAN: A site plan illustrates all those details of a proposed development needed to demonstrate compliance with this title, including the location
of existing and proposed property lines, easements, buildings, parking areas and points of access to streets, sidewalks, buffers and other measures
designed to mitigate potential nuisances, signs, and other features of the site.
SKETCH PLAN: A general or conceptual site plan of a development. It must include the approximate location of all lot lines and streets, the
approximate location and exterior dimensions of all structures, the approximate location, size, and circulation pattern of all parking areas, and the
approximate location and dimensions of all landscaped buffers.
SOLID WASTE: Material being stored, packaged, or processed for ultimate disposal or recycling.
STANDARD LAND USE CODE (Abbreviated SLUC): A method of classifying land uses adapted from the standard land use coding manual, U.S.
department of transportation, federal highway administration, as reprinted in March 1977. The SLUC is a hierarchical system that includes all uses,
whether specifically mentioned in the manual or not. A summary of the SLUC codes appears in table 11-16-I at the end of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION: Division of a parcel into more than two (2) lots or parcels of less than twenty (20) acres for the purpose of sale, lease, rental, or
development. A minor subdivision includes ten (10) or fewer lots and involves no dedication of public ways. Certain land divisions are exempt from the
permit requirements of this title. See section 11-2-3 of this title.
VARIANCE: According to Idaho Code section 67-6516, "A variance is a modification of the requirements of the ordinance as to lot size, lot coverage,
width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard setbacks, parking space, height of buildings, or other provisions of this title affecting the size or shape of
structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots". Land use cannot, by definition, be varied. (1992 Development Code; amd. Ord.
469, 11-17-1993; Ord. 491, 11-1-1995; Ord. 540, 12-15-1999; Ord. 563, 4-16-2003)
11-16-3: TABLE OF CATEGORIES AND CODE NUMBERS:
TABLE 11-16-I
STANDARD SYSTEM FOR IDENTIFYING AND CODING
LAND USE ACTIVITIES; ONE AND TWO DIGIT LEVELS
NEC = Not elsewhere coded
Code
Category Code
Category
1 Residential 11 Household units
12 Group quarters
13 Residential hotels
14 Mobile home parks or courts
15 Transient lodgings
19 Other residential, NEC
2 Manufacturing 21 Food and kindred products - manufacturing
22 Textile mill products - manufacturing
23 Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather, and similar materials -
manufacturing
24 Lumber and wood products (except furniture) - manufacturing
25 Furniture and fixtures - manufacturing
26 Paper and allied products - manufacturing
27 Printing, publishing, and allied industries
28 Chemicals and allied products - manufacturing
29 Petroleum refining and related industries
3 Manufacturing (continued) 31 Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products - manufacturing
32 Stone clay, and glass products - manufacturing
33 Primary metal industries
34 Fabricated metal products - manufacturing
35 Professional scientific and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and
clocks - manufacturing
39 Miscellaneous manufacturing, NEC
4 Transportation, communication, and
utilities
41 Railroad, rapid rail transit, and street railway transportation
42 Motor vehicle transportation
43 Aircraft transportation
44 Marine craft transportation
45 Highway and street right of way
46 Automobile parking
47 Communication
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 143/151
48 Utilities
49 Other transportation communication and utilities, NEC
5 Trade 51 Wholesale trade
52 Retail trade - building materials, hardware, and farm equipment
53 Retail trade - general merchandise
54 Retail trade - food
55 Retail trade - automotive, marine craft, aircraft, and accessories
56 Retail trade - apparel and accessories
57 Retail trade - furniture, home furnishings, and equipment
58 Retail trade - eating and drinking
59 Other retail trade, NEC
6 Services 61 Finance insurance and real estate services
62 Personal services
63 Business services
64 Repair services
65 Professional services
66 Contract construction services
67 Governmental services
68 Educational services
69 Miscellaneous services
7 Cultural, entertainment and
recreational
71 Cultural activities and nature exhibitions
72 Public assembly
73 Amusements
74 Recreational activities
75 Resorts and group camps
76 Parks
79 Other cultural, entertainment and recreational, NEC
8 Resource production and extraction
81 Agriculture
82 Agricultural related activities
83 Forestry activities and related services
84 Fishing activities and related services
85 Mining activities and related services
89 Other resource production and extraction, NEC
9 Undeveloped land and water areas 91 Undeveloped and unused land area (excluding noncommercial forest development)
92 Noncommercial forest development
93 Water areas
94 Vacant floor area
95 Under construction
99 Other undeveloped land and water areas, NEC
(1992 Development Code)
Chapter 17
APPENDICES; DETAILED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
11-17-1: APPENDIX A, SIGNS:
1.Purpose: This appendix establishes regulations for the location, type, and size of signs permitted. Any sign not expressly permitted by this appendix shall
require a special use permit. (Ord. 473, 6-9-1994)
Division I. Permit Requirements
2.Permit Required: A development permit shall be required for the placement or installation of any sign, including the replacement of any existing sign,
except as provided in subsection 3 of this section. The location, type, and size of all proposed signs shall be included in applications for special use
permits. Special permit uses are approved exactly as proposed; a new special use permit will be required to add signs.
3.Exceptions To Permit Requirement: The signs listed here are not exempt from any requirement of this title, except the requirement for a permit. No
permit shall be required for the placement or installation of:
a. Residential nameplates;
b. Temporary signs; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 144/151
c. Traffic control signs or public notices placed by public agencies.
Division II. Performance Standards
4.Placement Of Signs: No sign shall be placed:
a. In or over any public right of way, except as provided in subsection 5 of this section;
b. On any tree, cliff, or other natural feature; or on a utility pole;
c. On a vehicle or trailer parked in a visible locationfor the primary purpose of displaying the sign; or
d. Where it creates a traffic safety hazard by obscuring traffic control signs or signals, or obstructing vision at intersections or driveways.
5.Signs In Public Rights Of Way: No sign shall be permitted in any public right of way, except traffic control signs and public notices placed by public
agencies. No sign shall extend over a public right of way, except that awnings and projecting signs may extend up to seven feet (7') over a public sidewalk
(measured from the face of the supporting building), but shall not extend to within more than two feet (2') of the near curb line. Suspended signs may
extend over a public sidewalk that is covered by an arcade or canopy. Any awning or sign extending over a public sidewalk shall have a minimum
clearance of eight feet (8').
6.Permitted Signs; RA And RB Zoning Districts: The following signs shall be permitted in the RA and RB zoning districts:
a. Traffic control signs or public notices placed by public agencies;
b. One nameplate of no more than three (3) square feet for each dwelling;
c. One real estate sign, of no more than three (3) square feet, for each lot or building currently offered for sale, lease, or rent;
d. Political signs totaling no more than three (3) square feet; provided, that such signs are placed no more than sixty (60) days before the election to which
they relate and removed within ten (10) days after the election; and
e. Home occupation signs, as permitted by appendix B, section 11-17-2 of this chapter.
f. Any dwelling may also display two (2) temporary signs, of no more than six (6) square feet each, announcing the short term sale of used household
goods (a garage or yard sale), provided those signs are placed no more than two (2) days before the sale and removed within one day after the sale, that
the sale lasts no longer than three (3) days, and that no more than two (2) such sales are conducted at any one dwelling within any twelve (12) month
period.
g. Special permit uses may display a single nameplate of no more than twelve (12) square feet and necessary on site directional and traffic control signs of
no more than four (4) square feet each.
7.Permitted Signs; CC Zoning District:
a. Traffic control signs or public notices placed by public agencies;
b. Necessary on site directional and traffic control signs of no more than four (4) square feet each;
c. Any combination of the following kinds of signs; provided, that the total sign area does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building facade
facing the street frontage, or for buildings on corner lots, sixteen percent (16%) of the combined facades: 1) wall signs; 2) projecting signs with no more
than sixteen (16) square feet per side; 3) temporary signs; and
d. Awnings may display the name or the logo of the owner or operator.
e. Buildings with canopies or arcades may use one suspended sign of no more than four (4) square feet for each use or occupancy with access from the
canopied area or arcade.
8.Permitted Signs; HC, LI, And HI Zoning Districts:
a. Traffic control signs or public notices placed by public agencies;
b. Necessary on site directional and traffic control signs of no more than four (4) square feet each; (1992 Development Code)
c. Any combination of the following kinds of signs; provided, that the total sign area does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building facade
facing a street frontage, or for buildings on corner lots, sixteen percent (16%) of the combined facades:
(1) Wall signs;
(2) Projecting signs with no more than sixteen (16) square feet per side;
(3) One ground or pole sign for each road frontage of no more than twenty five feet (25') in height and with no more than thirty two (32) square feet per
side;
(4) Temporary signs. (Ord. 511, 9-3-1997)
d. Awnings may display the name or logo of the owner or operator.
e. Buildings with canopies or arcades may use one suspended sign of no more than four (4) square feet for each use or occupancy with access from the
canopied areaor arcade.
9.Illuminated Signs: Signs with a constant source of illumination shall be permitted for commercial uses. No flashing, blinking, or moving signs are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 145/151
permitted. Spotlights or other fixtures used for the illumination of a sign shall be placed in compliance with the provisions of this title prohibiting light or
glare that constitutes a nuisance and shall not constitute a traffic hazard.
10.Identification Of Signs: All permanent signs shall bear a weatherproof label identifying the owner, including the owner's name, mailing address, and
telephone number. Identification labels may be attached to the sign or its supporting structure.
11.Maintenance Of Signs: All signs and their supporting structures shall be maintained so as not to create a health or safety hazard.
12.Abandoned Signs: Abandoned signs shall be removed within sixty (60) days of the adoption of this title, or within sixty (60) days of the abandonment of
the use to which the sign is appurtenant. Abandonment shall not be a matter of the owner's intent, but shall be considered to occur whenever a use
ceases operation for more than twelve (12) months. Any sign that is not structurally sound or that no longer serves to inform or attract the public shall be
considered abandoned and its removal required.
Division III. Sign Definitions
13.Awning: A fabric shelter supported by a noncombustible rigid framework attached to a building.
14.Area: The area of a sign shall be measured as the area of the smallest straight sided geometric figure that can be defined by and include the extreme
limits of the copy or message (including graphics as well as text) on the sign. Contrasting frames or borders shall be measured as part of the copy or
message.
15.Directional Sign: On site directional signs are used to identify points of access, the direction of travel, and handicapped parking spaces, and to perform
similar functions in off street parking and loading areas. They include no advertising or promotional copy, but may include a logo. Off site directional signs
identify and provide directions to an off highway use. They include no advertising or promotional copy, but may include a logo.
16.Ground Sign: A freestanding sign that does not exceed eight feet (8') in height above grade.
17.Home Occupation Sign: See appendix B, section 11-17-2 ofthis chapter.
18.Logo: A "logo" is a simple graphic symbol used to identify a use or product.
19.Nameplate: A wall sign that identifies the occupants and address of a building.
20.Pole Sign: Freestanding signs that exceed eight feet (8') in height above grade.
21.Projecting Sign: A "projecting sign" is attached to the wall of a building and projects away from that wall. Projecting signs may extend no more than
seven feet (7') from the building wall, and may not extend to within two feet (2') of the near curb line. Projecting signs do not extend more than three feet
(3') above the roofline of the building to which they are attached.
22.Replacement: For the purposes of this appendix, the term "replacement" does not include the temporary removal of an existing sign for repair or
refurbishment.
23.Sign: Defined in chapter 16 of this title.
24.Suspended Sign: Suspended signs are attached to the ceiling of an arcade or canopy and hang over a sidewalk with a vertical clearance of at least
eight feet (8').
25.Traffic Control Sign: Standard regulatory signs, including stop and yield signs, speed limit signs, etc.
26.Temporary Signs: Include: a) construction signs; b) political signs placed no more than sixty (60) days before the election to which they relate and
removed within ten (10) days after that election; c) real estate signs; d) window signs; and e) other temporary signs displayed by commercial or industrial
uses. All temporary signs displayed in commercial or industrial zoning districts must fit within the sign size permitted by subsection 7c or 8c of this section.
A construction sign is a ground or wall sign that identifies a building under construction. Construction signs include no advertising or promotional copy, but
identify the building's planned use, owners or operators, designers, construction contractors, and financiers. Construction signs shall be permitted for all
nonresidential construction, but shall not exceed six (6) square feet in the RA and RB zoning districts. A political sign promotes the election of a candidate
or support for a political party or position. Political signs may be of any type, but are subject to the time and size limitations of subsection 6d of this section
in the RA and RB zoning districts. Real estate signs are wall, ground, or window signs which indicate that the property on which they are placed is for sale,
lease, or rent. Real estate signs are subject to thelimitations of subsection 6c of this section in the RA and RB zoning districts.
27.Wall Sign: Wall signs are either painted directly on the wall of a building or attached to the wall of a building, and parallel with the wall to which they are
attached. Attached wall signs extend no more than one foot (1') from the building to which they are attached. Wall signs do not extend above the roofline of
the building to which they are attached.
28.Window Sign: Window signs appear within the frame of and are affixed directly to a window. Window displays of merchandise are not signs; provided,
that no part of the display is affixed to the window. (1992 Development Code)
11-17-2: APPENDIX B, HOME OCCUPATIONS:
1.Purpose: These performance standards permit limited commercial activity in residential zoning districts, while ensuring that such activity does not
diminish the residential character of the neighborhood. Approval of a home occupation does not change any requirement of this title that is applicable to
the dwelling of which that home occupation is accessory.
2.Employees: No home occupation shall have employees who are not members of the resident family.
3.Floor Areas: Home occupations may be located within dwellings or accessory buildings, but no home occupation shall occupy a floor area larger than
fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the residence to which it is accessory.
4.Parking: Home occupations shall not generate traffic sufficient to deny neighboring properties the use of adjoining on street parking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 146/151
5.Storage: The storage of any vehicles, materials, products, or solid wastes associated with a home occupation shall be entirely screened from public
view, or the view of neighboring properties, by enclosure in the residence or an accessory building.
6.Signs: Home occupations may display a single nameplate of no more than three (3) square feet in size.
7.Other Performance Standards: Home occupations are also subject to all applicable performance standards of chapter 12 of this title.
8.Daycare: "Family daycare home" and "group daycare facility" as defined by Idaho Code section 39-1102(9) are permitted home occupations, but shall
comply with all ofthe performance standards of this appendix. (Ord. 469, 11-19-1993)
11-17-3: APPENDIX C, OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
1.Purpose: These performance standards are intended to prevent traffic congestion on public streets by requiring provision of adequate off street parking
and loading areas.
2.Off Street Parking Required: All buildings and uses shall provide the minimum number of off street parking spaces required by table C.1 in this section.
Parking spaces shall have graded and drained gravel or paved surfaces.
3.Off Street Parking Requirements For Uses Not Listed: The classification of uses and the off street parking requirements for uses not listed in table C.1 in
this section shall be determined by the administrator. Any person who disputes a decision of the administrator may request a review of that decision using
the appeals procedure of section 11-2-14 of this title.
4.Location Of Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided on the same lot and under the same ownership as the use it serves, except that two
(2) or more uses may share a parking area where:
a. The total number of spaces provided is not less than the sum of the parking spaces required for all buildings or uses served; and
b. A contract providing for shared parking for a period of ten (10) or more years is executed before approval of a permit and recorded before issuance of a
certificate of compliance.
c. Required off street parking spaces shall be within six hundred feet (600') of a main entrance of the building or use being served, except for spaces
serving a dwelling, which shall be within one hundred feet (100') of the dwelling unit served.
5.Passenger Loading Areas: Daycare centers, preschools, public schools, and places for public assembly located on arterial streets shall provide at least
one safe off street passenger loading area. Such areas shall be located where there is adequate visibility for their safe use and shall:
a. Be divided from the street by a curbed barrier of at least four feet (4') in width;
b. Be at least sixty feet (60') in length and twelve feet (12') wide;
c. Accommodate one-way traffic only;
d. Include a depressed curb section for handicapped access; and
e. Be marked by pedestrian crossing signs facing both traffic lanes.
6.Off Street Loading Areas: All commercial and industrial buildings and uses shall provide one safe, properly signed off street loading area for each ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area. Off street loading areas shall be on the same lot and under the same ownership as the building or use
they serve, shall be designed to accommodate the largest vehicle that may reasonably be anticipated for use on the site, and have the following minimum
dimensions:
a. Vertical clearance: Fourteen feet (14');
b. Width: Twelve feet (12'); and
c. Depth or length: Thirty five feet (35').
No vehicle parked in a required off street loading space shall extend into a public right of way.
7.Access To Off Street Parking And Loading Area: Graded and drained gravel or paved access driveways shall be provided for safe access to all off street
parking and loading areas.
a. No parking area, except those serving single-family dwellings, shall be designed or constructed to create a situation in which vehicles are required to
back onto a public street.
TABLE C.1
MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
FOR RESIDENTIAL, RETAIL AND SERVICE USES
Land Use Parking Spaces
Dwellings (SLUC 11, 14) 2 per unit
Lodging places (SLUC 15) 1 per unit plus 1
Theaters and similar places of assembly (including SLUC 72) 0.33 per seat
Elementary and junior high schools 1 per classroom plus 1
(auditoriums used for public
events are places of assembly)
Hospitals, rest homes, and similar uses (SLUC 6513, 6516) 2 per bed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 147/151
Land Use
Parking Spaces Per 1,000
Feet Of Gross Floor Area
Building materials, farm equipment, and furniture (SLUC 5211_5240, 5252, 57) 1
Hardware, apparel, and miscel-laneous retail uses (SLUC 5251, 56, 59) 3
General merchandise, groceries, bakeries (SLUC 53, 54) 4
Retail automotive, marine (SLUC 55) 5
Eating and drinking places (SLUC 58) 15
Financial, real estate, and insurance services (SLUC 61) 3
Beauty and barber services (SLUC 623) 6
Other personal services, miscellaneous services (SLUC 62, 69) 3
Health services, except hospitals (SLUC 51) 5
Professional services (SLUC 65) 3
Shopping centers 4
Mixed office uses 3
Note: Other uses (transportation, communications, and utilities; wholesale trade; and industrial) shall provide one parking space for each anticipated
employee, plus one, and one parking space for each anticipated company vehicle, plus one. Where a place of assembly does not have fixed seating, one
space shall be provided for each 25 square feet of assembly area. Off street parking requirements for different uses in the same building shall be
calculated separately.
b. Parking and loading areas shall be sited and designed to minimize the number of access points to arterial roads.
c. No access driveway to a local street shall be within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or alley, or within ten feet (10') of another access driveway. The
distance from an access driveway to an intersection is measured from the junction of the corner lot lines at the intersection, to the nearest side of the
driveway.
d. No access driveway to an arterial street shall be within forty feet (40') of its intersection with any local street, or sixty feet (60') of its intersection with
another arterial.
e. Clear vision triangles shall be provided for all access driveways.
f. Access driveways for single-family dwellings shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide, with a curb radius of five feet (5'). Access driveways for other
uses shall be designed to accommodate the reasonably anticipated level of use.
g. Where required for drainage, access driveways shall be constructed over a minimum twelve inch (12") culvert capable of supporting a load of forty
thousand (40,000) pounds.
8.Circulation Within Off Street Parking Areas: The pattern of circulation within parking areas shall be designed to provide safe and efficient access to
individual parking spaces, protect pedestrians moving through the parking area, and facilitate safe access to public streets.
a. Minimum aisle widths shall be: 1) for two-way circulation and/or ninety degree (90o) parking: twenty four feet (24'); 2) for one-way circulation and sixty
degree (60o) angle parking: eighteen feet (18'); 3) for one-way circulation and forty five degree (45o) angle parking: fifteen feet (15'); and 4) for one-way
circulation and thirty degree (30o) angle parking: thirteen feet (13').
b. Where one-way circulation is used, directional signs shall be installed at all access points to the parking area.
c. No parking area shall be designed so that circulation from one portion of the area to another relies on a public street.
9.Protecting Pedestrians In Off Street Parking And Loading Areas: There shall be safe pedestrian access around or through all parking and loading areas.
(1992 Development Code)
11-17-4: APPENDIX D, BUFFERING:
1.Purpose: Landscaping requirements are an essential element in mitigating potential land use conflicts and enhancing the visual appeal of the city. The
purpose of this appendix is to assure that the landscaped buffers required by these regulations effectively accomplish those goals.
2.Minimum Buffer Requirements: The width of required buffers shall vary with the nature of the uses being separated, the height of the buildings being
buffered, and the construction of the buffer. Table 11-12-II (in section 11-12-15 of this title) shows the width required where the buffer consists of a level or
gently sloping area of sod or ground cover and at least four (4) major trees per hundred linear feet of buffer. That table also shows where a security fence
and/or a solid fence, wall, or berm is required as part of a buffer.
3.Height Adjustment: The basic buffer width shall be increased by the height adjustment factor, where one is established. The height adjustment factor is a
ratio expressing the number of feet that must be added to the basic buffer width for each foot in height over twenty five feet (25') of the building being
buffered.
4.Buffer Width Reduction; Berms: The basic buffer width requirements of table 11-12-II (in section 11-12-15 of this title) may be reduced where a berm is
includedin the buffer. The width reduction shall be twice the height of the berm, but the maximum permitted reduction shall be ten feet (10'). No berm shall
have a slope of more than three to one (3:1), except where a retaining wall is incorporated into the berm. Such walls may be used only on the side
opposite the use or public way being buffered.
5.Buffer Width Reduction; Additional Plantings: The basic width requirements may be reduced where a greater density and diversity of plantings is
included in the buffer. The buffer width reductions permitted in this appendix are cumulative and may result in a total reduction of up to thirty percent
(30%). The buffer width reductions permitted by subsection 5c of this section are also cumulative with those permitted herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 148/151
a. Major Trees: The required buffer width shall be reduced by ten percent (10%) where five (5) or more major trees per hundred linear feet are planted or
retained.
b. Understory Trees: The required buffer width shall be reduced by ten percent (10%) where five (5) or more understory trees per hundred linear feet are
planted or retained.
c. Shrubs: The required buffer width shall be reduced by ten percent (10%) where twenty (20) or more shrubs per hundred linear feet are planted or
retained.
6.Minimum Buffer Width: No required buffer shall be less than one-half (1/2) the basic buffer width or less than ten feet (10') in width, regardless of any
reductions permitted by subsections 4 and 5 of this section.
7.Buffer Crossings/Inclusions: Buffers may be crossed by access driveways, utility lines, sidewalks, and pedestrian trails. A sidewalk or pedestrian trail
may run along the length of a buffer, with its width, up to a maximum five feet (5'), being included in the required buffer width. Buffers may also include
permitted signs.
8.Plant Materials Specifications: Plant materials installed in required buffers shall be warranted for one year. Plant materials shall meet the following
specifications:
a. All trees, major and understory, shall be containerized or bagged and burlapped stock in good condition with a caliper of at least one and one-half
inches (1.5") (measured 1 foot above grade) for deciduous trees and a height of at least six feet (6') for coniferous trees; and
b. All shrubs shall be minimum one gallon containerized stock in good condition.
9.Maintenance: Perpetual maintenance of required buffers is required by section 11-15-12 of this title. (1992 Development Code)
11-17-5: APPENDIX E, STREETS:
1.Purpose: The purpose of this appendix is to provide standards for the construction or reconstruction of streets. These standards are for public and
private streets in low to medium density residential and light commercial areas. Standards for the extension or reconstruction of arterial streets shall be
provided by the city.
2.Large Scale Development: Any requirement of this appendix may be altered by a large scale development study required by section 11-12-16 of this title.
Large scale development studies may require wider rights of way, heavier pavement, and other improvements needed to accommodate larger volumes of
traffic.
3.Road Layout: The design of street systems in new developments shall respect the terrain, minimizing grades and erosion hazards by following contours
and avoiding stream crossings and wetlands. Where roads cross slopes, all cut and fill surfaces shall be stabilized by plantings or structures, and drainage
shall be controlled to prevent soil erosion and downslope flooding.
4.Right Of Way And Surface Width:
a. All new street rights of way shall be sixty feet (60') in width, except where a new right of way extends an existing street with a wider right of way, in which
case it shall match the width of the street being extended. (1992 Development Code)
b. The paved surface of all new streets shall be a minimum of forty two feet (42'). (Ord. 575, 7-6-2005)
5.Surface Construction: Street surfaces shall be laid over a properly compacted subgrade and consist of: a) subbase: minimum six inches (6") of coarse
aggregate; and b) base: minimum two inches (2") of bituminous asphalt pavement.
6.Drainage: Street surfaces shall be crowned so as to slope away from the centerline at a grade of two percent (2%). Curbing and gutters shall be
provided, with proper provision made for the collection and disposal of storm or melt water runoff.
7.Maximum Grade: The maximum grade of any street shall be eight percent (8%), except at intersections, where the maximum grade at and within fifty
feet (50') along both approaches shall be three percent (3%). (1992 Development Code)
8.Culs-De-Sac:
a. The minimum cul-de-sac radius right of way shall be sixty feet (60') with a minimum surface radius of fifty one feet (51') back of curb to back of curb in
residentially zoned districts.
In all other zoned districts, other than residentially zoned districts, the minimum cul-de-sac radius shall be a minimum of seventy feet (70') of right of way
with a minimum paved surface radius of sixty feet (60') back of curb to back of curb. (Ord. 584, 9-20-2006)
b. The maximum number of lots or dwelling units served by a cul-de-sac shall be sixteen (16).
9.Dead End Streets: Dead end streets shall be prohibited, except where temporarily permitted by a subdivision phasing plan, or to provide for future
connections between developments. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be provided wherever a temporary dead end street serves four (4) or more lots.
10.Alignment Of Intersection: All intersections shall be at a ninety degree (90), plus or minus five degree (5) angle, with the approaching roads running
at ninety degrees (90), plus or minus five degrees (5) for at least fifty feet (50') before the intersection.
11.Minimum Centerline Offset Of Intersections: The minimum centerline offset of intersections shall be one hundred twenty five feet (125'), except for
intersections with arterials, where it shall be two hundred feet (200').
12.Signs: The developer shall install stop signs at all intersections with arterial streets. The developer shall also install all other signs required for safe
traffic and pedestrian movement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 149/151
13.Culverts And Bridges: All culverts and bridges shall be designed by a professional engineer. Bridges and culverts are subject to the stream corridor and
floodplain requirements of this title.
a. All bridges and culverts on natural watercourses shall be designed to pass a 100-year flood without damage to the bridge or its approaches, without
diverting floodwaters onto neighboring properties, and without increasing the level of the base flood downstream.
b. Culverts not included in subsection 13a of this section shall be designed to pass the runoff from the 10-year, 6-hour storm.
c. The minimum gross vehicle load supported by any bridge or culvert shall be forty thousand (40,000) pounds.
d. There shall be a minimum fifty foot (50'), ninety degree (90) approach to all bridges. (1992 Development Code)
14.Sidewalks: Sidewalks of at least five feet (5') in width shall be provided along all streets. (Ord. 559, 5-15-2002)
15.Illumination: The developer shall provide streetlights as directed by the city.
16.Construction Specifications: Construction specifications for streets shall be as provided by the "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction", unless
otherwise indicated by the city. (1992 Development Code)
11-17-6: APPENDIX F, PLATTING OF LOT SPLITS AND SUBDIVISIONS:
1.Purpose: This appendix establishes technical standards for the form and content of subdivision plats. The requirements it imposes are in addition to the
requirements of state law.
Division I. Preliminary Plats
2.Preliminary Plat Part Of Application: A preliminary plat is one part of the application for a permit to subdivide and shall be accompanied by the official
application form and all other materials required for a complete application.
3.Preliminary Plats To Be Comprehensive: Preliminary plats shall cover the entire area to be developed by one owner or a group of related or associated
owners, even when it is anticipated that development will be phased or occur in the form of multiple subdivisions over several years. An application for a
subdivision permit may be rejected solely because it covers insufficient area.
4.Contents Of Preliminary Plats: Preliminary plats shall include:
a. A title block showing the name of the proposed subdivision and its location by quarter-quarter section, section, township, range, principal meridian, city,
county, and state.
b. The name, address, and registration number of the engineer or land surveyor who prepared the preliminary plat.
c. A north point and both graphic and written scales.
d. A vicinity map that locates the proposed subdivision within the section and shows major roads and watercourses adjacent to or near the subdivision;
and the boundaries of and recorded names of all adjacent or nearby subdivisions.
e. The location, nature, and boundaries of all existing public ways and public or private easements in or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, including the
county book and page number references to the instruments establishing those ways or easements.
f. The location and size of all existing utility lines in or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
g. The exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
h. The location, exterior dimensions, and number of proposed lots and blocks, or other parcels created by the subdivision.
i. The acreage of each proposed lot, and a table showing the total acreage of the area proposed for subdivision, the total acreage in lots, the total acreage
in streets, and the total acreage of parcels proposed for dedication to public use or to be held in common by the lot owners.
j. The names of all proposed streets and widths and boundaries of all proposed street rights of way and utility easements. (1992 Development Code)
Title 12
RESERVED
Title 13
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 1
ESTABLISHMENT OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUNDS
13-1-1: SANITATION DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND ESTABLISHED:
There is established a sanitation department capital improvements fund hereunder. (Ord. 455, 8-7-1991)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 150/151
13-1-2: FUND SOURCE FOR SANITATION DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND:
The city may annually budget a specified amount and/or a portion of each fee collected for sanitation department services will be deposited to this fund to
be utilized for the purposes hereinafter authorized. (Ord. 455, 8-7-1991)
13-1-3: USES AND LIMITATIONS OF SANITATION DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND:
Monies deposited to this fund shall be used upon resolution of the city council exclusively for:
(A) Replacement of trucks or major equipment utilized by the sanitation department;
(B) The share of the costs attributable to planning and providing buildings, facilities, office space and equipment for the sanitation department plan. (Ord.
455, 8-7-1991)
13-1-4: WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND ESTABLISHED:
There is established a water and sewer department capital improvements fund hereunder. (Ord. 455, 8-7-1991)
13-1-5: FUND SOURCE FOR WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND:
The city may annually budget a specific amount to be deposited to this fund; and/or a portion of each fee collected for water and sewer services will be
deposited to this fund to be utilized for the purposes hereinafter authorized. (Ord. 455, 8-7-1991)
13-1-6: USES AND LIMITATIONS OF WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND:
Monies deposited to this fund shall be used upon resolution of the city council exclusively for:
(A) Replacement of major equipment utilized by the water and sewer department;
(B) For replacement of parts of existing systems;
(C) For major extensions of the existing water and sewer system;
(D) For engineering, consulting and planning fees necessary in the design of, or improvement of, a water and sewer system;
(E) The share of the costs attributable to planning and providing the buildings, facilities, office space and equipment for the water and sewer department.
(Ord. 455, 8-7-1991)
Chapter 2
STREET DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND
13-2-1: STREET DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND ESTABLISHED:
There is established a street department capital improvements fund hereunder. (Ord. 572, 9-15-2004)
13-2-2: FUND SOURCE FOR STREET DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND:
The city may annually budget a specified amount and/or a portion of each fee collected for street department services will be deposited to this fund to be
utilized for the purposes hereinafter authorized. (Ord. 572, 9-15-2004)
13-2-3: USES AND LIMITATIONS OF STREET DEPARTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND:
Monies deposited to this fund shall be used upon resolution of the city council exclusively for:
(A) Replacement of major equipment utilized by the street department.
(B) For replacement or construction of streets, alleys, curbs, gutters or sidewalks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=458 151/151
(C) For major repairs of the existing street system.
(D) For engineering, consulting and planning fees necessary in the design of, or improvement of, a street system.
(E) The share of the costs attributable to planning and providing the buildings, facilities, office space and equipment for the street department. (Ord. 572,
9-15-2004)