6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 1/336
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to
the left, have been passed, but have not been incorporated in
the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there
are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary
from the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the
official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 707
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODING, IDAHO, PROVIDING FOR AN OFFICIAL
NEWSPAPER AND REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 664; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE
DATE.
WHEREAS, Idaho Code §50-213, provides that cities are required to designate an official
newspaper.
THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
GOODING, IDAHO AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1: That Gooding City Ordinance No. 664 is hereby repealed in its entirety.
Section 2: That the Courier News, a weekly newspaper with general circulation within the
City, is designated and constituted the official newspaper of the City of Gooding, Idaho. All
such writings as are required by virtue of a state statute or the governing body of the City shall
be published in said newspaper.
Section 3: All provisions of the current Municipal Code of the City of Gooding that conflicts
with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 4: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
publication as provided by law.
Passed and approved by the City Council and approved by the Mayor of the City of Gooding,
County of Gooding, State of Idaho, this 3rd day of December, 2018.
CITY OF GOODING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 2/336
By: /c/ Vern France
Vern France – Council President
ATTEST:
/c/ Hollye Lierman
Hollye Lierman – City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary
from the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the
official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 708
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODING, STATEOF IDAHO, A MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION, REPEALING CITYORDINANCE NUMBER 670, AND REPEALING CITY
ORDINANCE NUMBER 475; CREATING AND ESTABLISHING A COMMISSION TO BE KNOWN
AS THE GOODING AIRPORT COMMISSION; PROVIDING FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF
MEMBERSTO THE COMMISSION; FIXING AND DETERMINING THE NUMBER OF MEMBERS;
PROVIDING FOR THE ORGANIZATION THEREOF; FIXING AND DESCRIBING THE DUTIES
AND AUTHORITY OF SAID COMMISSION; REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; AND
PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
NOW, THEREFORE, be ordained by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Gooding,
State of Idaho as follows:
Section 1: That Gooding CityOrdinance Number 670 and GoodingCity Ordinance Number
475 be repealed in their entirety.
Section 2: The Gooding Airport Commission is hereby created and established.
Section 3: The Mayor with the consent of the Council may appoint a Gooding Airport
Commission consisting of five members. Members should include at least two active pilots and
three members representing business interests suchas agriculture, medical,banking, manufacturing
or any other business. Such members shall hold their office for three years from the date of their
appointment, and until their successors are appointed, but upon their first appointment they shall
divide themselves at their firstmeeting by lot,into three classes:Two members shallform the first
class and shall servefor one year;Two members shall form the second classand shall servefor two
years; One member shallform the thirdclass and shallserve for threeyears. No compensation shall
be paid or allowed any member of the Commission, but actual and necessary expense may be
allowed with prior approval of the City Council.
Section 4: The duties of the Commission shall be advisory and shall include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 3/336
A. Annual reviewof operations and maintenance functions with
emphasis on safetyand compliance with FAA regulations.
B. Annual review of the Airport Capital Improvement Plan.
C. Recommend and promote compatible development of the Gooding
Airport.
Report to the Mayor and Council at a regularly scheduled Council meetingon a quarterly basis or more
oftenas needed or appropriate.
Section5: All Ordinances, Resolutions, and parts thereof,in conflict with the provisions of this
Ordinance, to the extent of such conflict, are hereby repealed.
Section 6: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
publication.
Passed by the City Councilof the City of Gooding,County of Gooding,State of Idaho, this 4th
day of February, 2019.
CITY OF GOODING
By: /s/ Jeff Brekke
ATTEST:
/s/ Hollye Lierman
PREFACE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 4/336
This City Code of the City of Gooding, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
ordinance 703, passed April 3, 2017. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede
the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult
the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
The Gooding City Code has been kept current by regular supplementation. In 2005, Sterling Codifiers
began providing supplement service for the City Code.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 437
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE REVISING, COMPILING AND CODIFYING OF THE
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF GOODING AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF
SUCH REVISION.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Gooding, Gooding County, Idaho:
Section 1: That all ordinances of a general nature now in force in the City of Gooding, Gooding
County, Idaho, as revised, codified and compiled and hereinafter set forth, be, and they are hereby
adopted, passed, published and declared to be the compiled ordinances of the City of Gooding,
pursuant to Chapter 9 of Title 50 of the Idaho Code, empowering any city to revise, codify and compile
its ordinances.
Section 2: That this Ordinance and all said Ordinances of a general nature compiled and codified as
above stated, shall be in full force and effect upon the passage, approval and publication of this
Ordinance in one issue of the official newspaper of the City.
PASSED and APPROVED this 6th day of July, 1970.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 5/336
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council of the City of Gooding, this City Code, is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the City of Gooding. Any reference made to the
number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by title in any legal document.
(1970 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof
in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the City of a general
and permanent effect. (1970 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the
section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the
said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City
Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each copy of
the City Code within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1970 Code)
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number is used in
describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall
be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
B. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the
singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as
well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any section of this City Code which contains any express
provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant
thereto. (1970 Code)
1-1-5: INTERPRETATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 6/336
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this Code the following rules shall be
observed:
A. Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it
shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person.
B. Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section of this City Code prohibits
the commission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the
directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the
said person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. (1970 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adopting date of this City Code are hereby
repealed, except such as referred to herein as being still in force or are by necessary implication
herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following section), from
which are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: sales and use tax
ordinances; tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations, contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City, and all special
ordinances. (1970 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating
to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of
this City Code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this City Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect of such provision only. (1970 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance
or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way. whatever to affect any such offense or act
so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 7/336
or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter
shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable.
B. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provision may be by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after
the new ordinance takes effect.
C. This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal
is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
D. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or
by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person,
firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. (1970 Code)
1-2-4: HEADLINES:
The headlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part
of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the headlines, are amended or reenacted. (1970 Code)
1-2-5: AMENDMENTS:
Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed as ordinances amending this Code, and
which indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the Code shall be understood as including them.
(1970 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code they shall have the meanings herein
ascribed to them, unless the content makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The City of Gooding, in the County of Gooding, State of Idaho, except as otherwise provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 8/336
CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated shall mean this City Code.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is Sunday or a legal
holiday, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a
holiday or a Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Gooding, Idaho.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words "of the City of Gooding".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
GENDER: Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
KNOWINGLY: A word importing only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission
within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act
or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this Code which is a lesser
offense than a felony or an infraction as defined by State law.
NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent" as well as "neglect", "negligence", and "negligently" imports a want
of such attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man
ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the City; or
any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of
another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any
part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the
provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words "of the City of Gooding".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: This term shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any
person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any other form of association or organization.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence
of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property
is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right
or interest therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 9/336
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be understood to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities sold direct to the consumer.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the
adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and
sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part
of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The words "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code, unless
otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose
or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to
violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The words "written" or "in writing" may include printing and any other mode
of presenting words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any
official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in proper handwriting of such person, or in
case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. (1970 Code)
Chapter 4
PENALTY
1-4-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code shall be fined in a sum not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any one offense and such person may be confined in the City jail
for a period of not more than six (6) months. (Ord. 528, 12-15-1980)
1-4-2: DEFAULT:
Any person in default of payment of any fine imposed shall be imprisoned in the City jail for a period of
one day for each five dollars ($5.00) of such fine. (1970 Code)
1-4-3: DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED:
(Rep. by Ord. 528, 12-15-1980)
1-4-4: LABOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 10/336
Any person imprisoned under the provisions of this Chapter may be put to work for the benefit of the
City for the term of his imprisonment.
No female prisoner shall be required to work in public, nor shall any prisoner be required to work on
Sunday. (1970 Code)
1-4-5: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this Code, any license previously issued to
him by the City may be revoked by the court or by the governing body of the City. (1970 Code)
1-4-6: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as
though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any
section of this Code, where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of
a continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. (1970 Code)
1-4-7: RECKLESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly, carelessly or heedlessly or without due caution and
circumspection or in a manner so as to endanger or to be likely to endanger any person or property,
ride any horse or other animal, or any bicycle or motorcycle, or drive any automobile, motor vehicle or
other vehicle in whatsoever manner propelled, upon any street, alley or sidewalk of the City. (Ord.
365, 11-21-1955)
Chapter 5
MAYOR
1-5-1: ELECTION; DUTIES:
A. Election: The Mayor shall be elected for a period of four (4) years, and he shall take office at the
time and in the manner provided for installation of Councilmen and shall have the qualifications as
prescribed by the laws of the State of Idaho.
B. Duties: The Mayor shall be the chief administrative official of the City, preside over the meetings of
the City Council and determine the order of business subject to such rules as the Council may
prescribe, have a vote only when the Council is equally divided, have the superintending control of
all the officers and affairs of the City, preserve order and take care that the provisions of this Code
are complied with and enforced. (Ord. 432, 8-4-1969)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 11/336
1-5-2: CONTRACT:
The Mayor is authorized and empowered to sign his name officially for and in behalf of the
Municipality on all contracts, documents and papers to which the Municipality is a party, and to require
that the conditions in any instrument are faithfully performed. He may borrow money on the credit of
the Municipality when so authorized by the Council. (1970 Code)
1-5-3: REWARD:
The Mayor, whenever he deems it expedient, is hereby empowered to offer a reward not exceeding
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the arrest and conviction of any person charged with violating any of
the provisions of this Code. (1970 Code)
1-5-4: PARDONS:
The Mayor is empowered to grant a pardon to any person imprisoned for a violation of any of the
provisions of this Code, and to remit so much of any fine or forfeiture as in his judgment he may deem
just and reasonable, and he shall report such remittance or pardon to the Council at its next meeting.
(1970 Code)
1-5-5: VETO POWER:
The Mayor shall have power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by the Council; provided, that any
ordinance vetoed by the Mayor may be passed over his veto by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
members of the Council, and should the Mayor neglect or refuse to sign any ordinance, the same shall
become law without his signature after the next regular meeting of the Council. (1970 Code)
1-5-6: ACCOUNTS OF OFFICERS:
The Mayor shall have the power to require any officer of the Municipality to exhibit his accounts or
other papers and to make reports to the Council in writing on any subject or matter pertaining to the
office. (1970 Code)
1-5-7: POLICE POWER:
The Mayor shall have jurisdiction over all places within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the
Municipality for the enforcement of any health or quarantine ordinance and regulation and shall have
jurisdiction in all matters, excepting taxation, within one-half ('/2) mile of the corporate limits of the
Municipality. (1970 Code)
1-5-8: MAY REQUIRE AID:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 12/336
The Mayor is hereby authorized to call on every male inhabitant of the Municipality over the age of
eighteen (18) and under the age of fifty (50) years to aid in enforcing the law. (1970 Code)
1-5-9: OTHER POWERS:
The Mayor shall have all other powers provided by State statute or by specific provisions of this Code.
(1970 Code)
Chapter 6
COUNCIL
1-6-1: ELECTION:
The legislative authority of the City shall be vested in a Council consisting of four (4) members, onehalf
(1/2) of whom shall be elected at each general City election and which said Councilmen shall be
elected at large and shall have the qualifications as prescribed by the laws of the State of Idaho and
each such Councilman shall hold office for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected
and qualified. (Ord. 432, 8-4-1969)
1-6-2: VACANCIES:
In the event an office of Councilman shall become vacant through death, removal of residence, or for
any other cause, the Mayor shall appoint with the approval of the Council, a resident of the City to fill
the unexpired portion of the term to serve until the next general election, at which time the unexpired
term shall be filled by regular election. (1970 Code)
1-6-3: TIME AND PLACE OF MEETING:
The Council shall hold regular sessions in the Municipal Hall on the first and third Monday of each
month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. (Ord. 593, 11-21-1994)
1-6-4: HOW TO CONDUCT COUNCIL MEETINGS:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the conduct of
Council meetings, the book entitled "How to Conduct a Municipal Council Meeting" prepared by the
Idaho Municipal League and published by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., three (3) copies of which shall be on
file in the office of the Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein. (1970 Code)
1-6-5: ELECT PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 13/336
At the time of taking office, the Council shall elect one of its members President of the Council who
shall preside at all meetings of the Council and perform all other duties of the Mayor in the absence of
the Mayor; and, in the absence of the President of the Council shall elect one of their members to
occupy his place temporarily, who shall be styled Acting President of the Council, and the President
and Acting President, when occupying the place of Mayor, shall have the same privileges as other
members of the Council and all actions of the President and Acting President, while so acting, shall be
binding upon the Council and the Municipality as if performed by the Mayor. (1970 Code)
Chapter 7
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
1-7-1: APPOINTMENTS:
The Mayor shall appoint, subject to approval of the Council, a Clerk, Attorney, Engineer, Police Chief,
Fire Chief, Treasurer and Superintendent. The Mayor may appoint, subject to approval by the Council
such other officers as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the business of the City.
(1970 Code)
1-7-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
All appointments shall be made for a specified term. (1970 Code)
1-7-3: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Any appointed officer may be removed from office by the same authority and in the same manner as
he was originally appointed. (1970 Code)
1-7-4: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
Certain officers shall give bonds in favor of the Municipality with two (2) or more sureties, or surety
bonds may be furnished in lieu of personal bonds as follows:
Clerk $25,000.00
Treasurer 5,000.00
Deputy Clerk 25,000.00
Chief of Police 1,000.00
(Ord. 494, 2-22-1977; amd. Ord. 497, 7-18-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 14/336
Chapter 8
CLERK
1-8-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall hold office
for the duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the
Council. (1970 Code)
1-8-2: DUTIES:
In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office, the Clerk shall
have supervision, control and responsibility of all of the records of the Municipality. He shall serve as
Clerk of the governing body and perform such other duties of a like nature as shall be required by that
body. (1970 Code)
1-8-3: RECORDS OF THE GOVERNING BODY:
The Clerk shall be responsible for the recording, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of
the governing body and shall have published all proceedings, legal notices, ordinances and
resolutions that are required to be published by this Code or by State statute. (1970 Code)
1-8-4: ORDINANCES:
The Clerk shall record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and shall authenticate the
same. (1970 Code)
1-8-5: ELECTION RECORDS:
The Clerk shall keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in
connection with elections. (1970 Code)
1-8-6: NOTIFY OF TERM EXPIRATIONS:
The Clerk shall notify the appointing authority of the impending expiration of the term of office of a
member of any board or commission at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of said term. (1970
Code)
1-8-7: OFFICIAL SEAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 15/336
The Clerk shall be the custodian of the official seal of the Municipality1. (1970 Code)
1-8-8: COPIES OF RECORDS:
The Clerk shall furnish to any member of the governing body a certified copy of any record or
document in his custody and he may furnish such a copy to any other person upon payment of a fee
to be determined by the governing body. (1970 Code)
1-8-9: COLLECTIONS TO TREASURER:
Within ten (10) days after the first day of each month the Clerk shall turn over to the Treasurer all
funds collected by him during the preceding month. (1970 Code)
1-8-10: LICENSES:
In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office, the Clerk shall
issue all licenses in accordance with the provisions of this Code. A record of all licenses issued,
including the name of the person to whom issued, the amount of the license fee and the purpose of
the license shall be kept by the Clerk. (1970 Code)
1-8-11: BONDS:
The Clerk shall keep a complete record of all out-standing bonds of the Municipality and report such
record regularly to the governing body. (1970 Code)
1-8-12: WARRANTS:
The Clerk shall countersign all warrants and keep a "Warrant Register and Abstract of Expenditures"
showing the number and amount of warrants issued and the person to whom issued, the date
redeemed, the interest paid and the several funds against which each of said warrants is drawn. (1970
Code)
1-8-13: CLAIMS:
All claims against the Municipality must be filed in writing with the Clerk. Claims must present a full
account of the items and must contain a verification under oath by the claimant to the effect that the
claim is correct, reasonable and just and that no part of said claim has been paid. All such claims must
be approved by the governing body before payment can be made. (1970 Code)
1-8-14: DAMAGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 16/336
All claims for damages against the Municipality must be filed with the Clerk within six (6) months after
such time as the damage is alleged to have occurred. All such claims shall specify the time, place,
character and cause of damage and no action shall be maintained against the Municipality for any
claim for damages until after sixty (60) days have elapsed after such presentation. Allowance of any
claim for damages against the Municipality shall be made only by ordinance. (1970 Code)
Chapter 9
ATTORNEY
1-9-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall hold
office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of
the Council. (1970 Code)
1-9-2: SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the
Municipality may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by,
any officer of the Municipality on behalf of the Municipality, or in the capacity of such person as an
officer of the Municipality. (1970 Code)
1-9-3: JUDGMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered
or entered in favor of the Municipality, and of all similar interlocutory orders. (1970 Code)
1-9-4: ADVICE:
The Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Municipality, and shall render advice on all legal
questions affecting the Municipality whenever requested to do so by any Municipal official. Upon
request by the Mayor or by the Council, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (1970 Code)
1-9-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and
condemnation proceedings. (1970 Code)
1-9-6: ORDINANCES AND DOCUMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 17/336
It shall be the duty of the Attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease or other
documents or instruments, to which the Municipality may be a party; and upon request of the Council
to draft ordinances covering any subjects within the power of the Municipality. (1970 Code)
Chapter 10
CHIEF OF POLICE
1-10-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall
hold office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with the
concurrence of the Council. (1970 Code)
1-10-2: RANK:
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and have supervision over all the
officers and members thereof. The Chief of Police may, with the approval of the Mayor, appoint such
special police as may be required from time to time; however, such appointment may not be for a
period of longer than ten (10) days and special police shall not be reappointed following the specified
ten (10) days without the consent of the Council. (1970 Code)
1-10-3: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
A. The Chief of Police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his
Department as may be required by statute or by the Mayor. He shall be responsible for the
performance of the Police Department and of its functions and all persons who are members of the
Police Department shall serve subject to his orders.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see to the enforcement of all provisions of this Code and
of all applicable statutes and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof. He shall have authority to call upon any citizen or bystander to assist him in the
execution of his duty. He shall serve all processes issued to him and enforce all orders and
judgments of the Court. (1970 Code)
1-10-4: STOLEN PROPERTY:
The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered within
the Municipality. (1970 Code)
Chapter 11
CITY ENGINEER
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 18/336
1-11-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor may appoint, with the approval of the Council, an Engineer who shall hold his office for the
duration of his appointment or until such time as he may be removed by the Mayor with the
concurrence of the Council. (1970 Code)
1-11-2: PUBLIC WORKS APPROVAL:
The Engineer shall approve all public works and all plans and specifications for public works,
construction for which the expenditure will be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or more, except that
the Engineer's direct supervision and approval must be obtained on all work where the public health or
safety is involved. (1970 Code)
1-11-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Any person appointed as Engineer shall be a competent engineer and surveyor and shall be duly
licensed as such by the State of Idaho. (1970 Code)
Chapter 12
TREASURER
1-12-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall hold
office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of
the Council. (1970 Code)
1-12-2: DUTIES:
In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office, the Treasurer
shall act to promote, secure and preserve the financial and property interest of the Municipality. He
shall safely keep in designated depositories all funds belonging to the Municipality and all other
securities in safety deposit boxes of an approved institution designated by the Council. (1970 Code)
1-12-3: ACCOUNTS:
The Treasurer shall keep in proper books a full and accurate account of all the monies received and
disbursed by him in behalf of the Municipality, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement, from
whom received and to whom disbursed, and on what account received and disbursed, and how paid.
(1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 19/336
1-12-4: MONIES:
The Treasurer shall receive and have custody of all monies paid to the Municipality and shall disburse
monies upon the official warrant or check of the Municipality when so ordered by the Council. (1970
Code)
1-12-5: COLLECTIONS:
The Treasurer shall demand and receive all monies and fees owning to the Municipality whenever any
person is indebted to the Municipality in any manner, and the means of collection of such debt is not
otherwise provided for by law. When any claim shall not be collectible by other means, he shall report
the same to the Attorney for prosecution. (1970 Code)
1-12-6: WARRANTS:
Warrants shall be paid by the Treasurer from funds available in the order in which the warrants are
presented for payment. When a warrant is presented for payment and no funds are available, the
Treasurer shall plainly mark the warrant "Not Paid for Want of Funds" and enter the same in a book
maintained for such purpose which shall be known as the "Warrant Register". Such warrants shall
bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the date of presentation until paid.
Warrants shall be called for payment in the order in which they were presented whenever sufficient
funds are available to the Treasurer to make such payment. (1970 Code)
1-12-7: CANCELLATION OF WARRANTS:
The Treasurer shall cancel all warrants and other evidences of debt against the Municipality,
whenever paid by him, by writing or stamping across the face thereof the words "Paid By The
Treasurer" with the date of payment written or stamped thereon. These warrants and evidences of
debt, so cancelled, shall be delivered immediately to the Clerk. (1970 Code)
1-12-8: MONTHLY REPORT:
The Treasurer shall make a detailed report to the Council during the first week of each month showing
the business of his office during the month preceding, showing the balance on hand to the credit of the
different funds, the amounts received during the month, and on what account, together with such other
information as may be required by the Council. (1970 Code)
1-12-9: QUARTERLY REPORT:
The Treasurer shall cause to be published for at least one insertion in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Municipality a full statement of the receipts and expenditures of the Municipality,
showing sources of revenue and disposition of funds. This quarterly report shall be published before
the third Monday of the months of April, July, October and January. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 20/336
1-12-10: DELIVERY TO SUCCESSOR:
The Treasurer shall deliver to his successor in office all materials, records, and resources of the office.
(1970 Code)
1-12-11: DEPOSITORY:
The First Security Bank of Idaho, N.A., Gooding Branch and the Bank of Idaho, Gooding Branch, are
hereby designated as the official depositories for the City. (1970 Code)
Chapter 13
WARDS
1-13-1: WARDS:
The city shall be divided into two (2) wards. All that part of the city being on the east side of Main
Street shall be known and designated as the first ward and all that part of the city being on the west
side of Main Street shall be known and designated as the second ward. (1947 Code § 1-201)
Chapter 14
SALARIES
1-14-1: SALARIES OF ELECTED OFFICIALS:
Commencing January 1, 2016, the salaries of the elected officials of the city shall be as follows:
Mayor $800.00 per month
Councilmen 600.00 per month
(Ord. 695, 8-17-2015)
1-14-2: SALARIES OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
The mayor, together with the approval and consent of the council, shall from time to time adopt a
schedule and fix the salaries and rates of compensation for all appointive officers and other
employees of the city. (Ord. 432, 8-4-1969)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 21/336
Chapter 15
SEAL
1-15-1: CORPORATE SEAL; DESIGN:
The Corporate Seal of the City shall be circular in form, with an inner and an outer circle. The outer
circle shall be one and seven-eighths inches (17/8") in diameter and it shall bear upon the space
between the two (2) circles the words "City of Gooding, Gooding County, Idaho", and upon the space
within the inner circle the words "Incorporated Nov. 21, 1910" and across the center of the Seal shall
be the word "Seal". (1970 Code)
1-15-2: ADOPTION OF SEAL:
The Seal herein above described is hereby adopted as the Corporate Seal of the City of Gooding,
Gooding County, Idaho. (1970 Code)
1-15-3: CUSTODIAN:
The Clerk shall be custodian of the Corporate Seal and shall affix said Seal's imprint upon all official
documents, records, licenses, warrants and/or checks. (1970 Code)
Chapter 16
CLAIMS AND WARRANTS
1-16-1: TIME FOR FILING:
Any person having claims against the city shall file the same with the clerk on the Friday before the
next regular meeting of the council. Such claims or accounts shall be verified, stating the item in detail
and for what and when the same accrued, and every claim or account shall contain all the items of
account and demands which claimant has against the city up to the time of filing the same. (1947
Code § 1-601)
1-16-2: BILLS ALLOWED:
No bill shall be allowed or warrants ordered drawn except at the first monthly meeting of the council,
unless such delay will cause service termination or cause the city to incur a penalty. (Ord. 669, 5-17-
2010)
1-16-3: TIME FOR PRESENTATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 22/336
No claim against the city will be allowed by the council unless the same is presented within six (6)
months after the same becomes due and payable. (1947 Code § 1-603)
1-16-4: WARRANTS:
All claims and accounts against the city shall be paid by a warrant on the treasurer, signed both by the
mayor and city clerk and having the seal of the city thereon. (1947 Code § 1-604)
1-16-5: PAYMENT OF WARRANTS:
All warrants shall be presented to the treasurer for payment. If there shall not be sufficient funds in the
fund or funds upon which the warrants have been drawn to pay the same, the treasurer shall register
such warrants, and they shall thereafter be paid in the order of their registration. (1947 Code § 1-605)
1-16-6: RATE OF INTEREST ON REGISTERED WARRANTS:
All warrants issued by authority of the council which are presented for payment and not paid for want
of funds shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from and after their date of
registration to ten (10) days after the date such warrants are called for payment, at which time the
interest shall cease, unless the warrants have been paid before the expiration of the said ten (10)
days. (1947 Code § 1-606)
Chapter 17
ELECTIONS
1-17-1: ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
The council shall, at its first regular meeting in October, prior to each biennial election, appoint four (4)
capable and discreet persons, possessing the qualification of electors, for each polling place as
election officers. Two (2) of such persons shall be designated as judges of election and two (2) of such
persons shall be designated as clerks of election. (1947 Code § 1-1001)
1-17-2: TERM:
Such officials shall hold office for the period of two (2) years and shall be the officials of all elections,
both general and special, during that period. (1947 Code § 1-1002)
1-17-3: NOTICE OF APPOINTMENT; DECLINATION:
The clerk shall give such appointees notice of their appointment and shall request each appointee to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 23/336
give notice of his acceptance or declination of his appointment to the clerk within ten (10) days
thereafter. (1947 Code § 1-1003)
1-17-4: VACANCIES:
Any vacancies arising in the office of election officials shall be filled by the council at any regular
meeting or at any special meeting called for that purpose. If such vacancy does not become apparent
until the time of the opening of the polls, the qualified electors present may fill such vacancies from
any electors present. (1947 Code § 1-1004)
1-17-5: POLLING PLACES:
A. Supplies: The council shall designate suitable polling places and cause the same to be provided
with suitable voting compartments, supplies, official stamps, ballot boxes and such other supplies
as county commissioners are required to provide for state elections. (1947 Code § 1-1005; amd.
Ord. 646, 9-19-2005)
B. Hours: The polls for all general and special city elections shall be open from twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon Mountain Time and remain open until eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Mountain Time. (Ord. 646, 9-
19-2005)
1-17-6: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of judges and clerks of election shall be such amounts as may be from time to time
fixed and determined by the council. (1947 Code § 1-1006)
1-17-7: PRECINCT:
The city of Gooding shall be comprised of one precinct. (Ord. 646, 9-19-2005)
Chapter 18
INSPECTORS
1-18-1: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
The Council shall have the power to appoint some person qualified and experienced in electrical work
to be Electrical Inspector who shall hold said office at the discretion of the Mayor and Council. (3-301;
1947 Code)
1-18-2: DUTIES OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 24/336
It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to attend to the enforcement of the provisions of this
Code as same shall pertain to the inspection and supervision of all electrical wiring within the limits of
the City. He shall render to the Clerk within two (2) days thereafter, a written report of each inspection
made by him, the report to be in such form as shall be prescribed by the Council. One copy of such
report shall be by him furnished to the contractor, owner or person for whom the inspection is made
(3-302. 1947 Code)
1-18-3: NONCOMPLYING INSTALLATIONS:
If the report be that the installation is not up to the established standard, the contractor or owner or
person for whom the inspection is made, shall alter the installation so that it shall comply therewith. A
reinspection shall then be asked for in the same form as a first inspection and a like report made by
the Electrical Inspector. (3-303; 1947 Code)
1-18-4: PLUMBING INSPECTOR; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of Plumbing Inspector. The Mayor by and with the approval of the
Council shall appoint a competent person to fill the office of Plumbing Inspector and he shall perform
such duties as shall be prescribed by the provisions of this Code or orders of the Mayor and Council.
(3-402; 1947 Code)
1-18-5: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
There is hereby created the office of Building Inspector. The Mayor, with the consent and approval of a
majority of the Council, shall appoint a competent person to fill the office of Building Inspector and he
shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed by the provisions of this Code, by the provisions of
the Uniform Building Code or as may be prescribed by the Mayor and Council. (1970 Code)
1-18-6: SALARIES:
All inspectors appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall receive
such compensation as may be determined by the Council and as provided in the annual appropriation
bill. (1970 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 707 - OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER . Go to
new ordinance.
Chapter 19
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 707 - OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER . Go to
new ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 25/336
1-19-1: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER DESIGNATED:
The Times-News, a daily newspaper with general circulation within the city is designated and
constituted the official newspaper of the city of Gooding, Idaho. All such writings as are required by
virtue of a state statute or the governing body of the city shall be published in said newspaper. (Ord.
664, 8-18-2008)
Chapter 20
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND
1-20-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND:
There is hereby established a capital improvements fund of the city for the purpose of the purchase of
new equipment or real property, replacement, care and maintenance of existing equipment, necessary
for the continued efficient use of the sewer system, waterworks, streets, parks, recreational and other
integral facilities of the city. (Ord. 553, 8-17-1987)
1-20-2: TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied a special tax in the amount of four (4) mills, pursuant to the provisions of
section 50-236, Idaho Code, on all taxable property within the city for the establishment of such fund,
annually, until such fund shall aggregate the sum of money which is equivalent to four tenths of one
percent (0.4%) of the market value for assessment purposes of the city. (Ord. 553, 8-17-1987)
Chapter 21
POLICE JUDGE
(Rep. by Ord. 497, 7-18-1977)
Chapter 22
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
1-22-1: CREATION OF RIGHT:
The people of this City shall have the right to enact ordinances through the initiative process, and to
repeal ordinances through the referendum process, according to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord.
511, 3-5-1979)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 26/336
1-22-2: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
To enact an ordinance by initiative or to repeal an ordinance by referendum, there shall be attached or
appended to the petition the signatures of the legal voters of the City equal to at least twenty percent
(20%) of the total number of voters registered to vote at the last general election in the City. (Ord. 511,
3-5-1979)
1-22-3: TIME FOR FILING PETITIONS:
Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures attached shall be filed with the City Clerk
not less than sixty (60) days following the final adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum.
(Ord. 511, 3-5-1979)
1-22-4: TIME FOR ELECTION:
A special election for initiative or referendum shall be provided not more than ninety (90) days
following the certification of the petition, provided that in the event a Municipal election will occur within
ninety (90) days, the initiative and referendum shall be submitted at the time of the Municipal election.
(Ord. 511, 3-5-1979)
1-22-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNATURE, VERIFICATION OF VALID PETITIONS,
PRINTING OF PETITION AND TIME LIMITS:
Referendum and initiative petitions shall conform with the requirements for signature, verification of
valid petitions, printing of petitions and time limits, except as expressly modified to meet the purposes
of initiative and referendum to be as nearly as practicable as provided in sections 34-1701 through 34-
1705, Idaho Code. (Ord. 511, 3-5-1979)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
2-1-1: ORGANIZATION; MEMBERS:
There shall be a Board of Adjustment consisting of the members of the Council and Mayor each of
whom shall have an equal vote. The Board of Adjustment shall appoint a Building Inspector who shall
serve at the pleasure of the Board. (Ord. 417, 11-8-1966)
2-1-2: DUTIES AND POWERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 27/336
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the
provisions of Title 11, Zoning, of this Code. Meetings shall be held at such times as may be necessary.
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question. Such Board shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the Building Inspector under the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 388, 6-20-
1960)
2-1-3: VOTING:
The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector or to effect any variance
provided by this Code. (Ord. 388, 6-20-1960)
2-1-4: SPECIAL PERMITS; FEES:
Application for a special permit shall be filed with the Building Inspector in writing, together with all
facts bearing on the proposed occupancy or variance. The applicant shall pay to the Building
Inspector a filing fee of ten dollars ($10.00), except that in all cases where it is necessary to have an
ownership or radius plat prepared, when the value of any construction connected therewith exceeds
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the applicant shall pay the Building Inspector a filing
fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the secretary of
the Board all papers with reference to the proposal. The Board shall cause a public hearing to be held
before such permit is acted upon. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in
the official paper of the City, one time at least fifteen (15) days before such hearing; provided,
however, the holding of a public hearing shall be within the discretion of the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 388, 6-20-1960; amd. Ord. 417, 11-8-1966)
2-1-5: SPECIFIC CASES:
When in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served or the
appropriate use of neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, or when there
are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the carrying out the strict letter of the zoning
provisions of this Code, the Board of Adjustment may, in specific cases, after public notice and
hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, determine and vary the application of
the regulations established in Title 11, Zoning, of this Code in harmony with their general purpose and
intent. (Ord. 388, 6-20-1960)
2-1-6: APPEALS:
Any decision of the Building Inspector or his duly authorized representative made in the enforcement
of the zoning provisions of this Code may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment by any person
affected by such decision. The appellant shall file with the secretary of the Board a notice of appeal,
specifying the ground thereof and a copy of such notice with the Building Inspector, together with a
filing fee of ten dollars ($10.00). The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is taken. The Board shall fix a reasonable time
for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide the same within a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 28/336
reasonable time. Upon hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination, if,
in its opinion such changes ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the power
of the Building Inspector. (Ord. 388, 6-20-1960)
Chapter 2
LIBRARY BOARD
2-2-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
The Mayor with the consent of the Council may appoint a Library Board consisting of five (5)
members, one of which shall be a member of the Council and one a nonvoting, ex-officio member,
who may, at the time of appointment be under twenty one (21) years of age. Such members shall hold
their office for five (5) years from the date of appointment, and until their successors are appointed. No
compensation shall be paid or allowed to any member of the Library Board in any manner whatsoever.
The youth member shall be appointed for a term up to one year and may be reappointed up to four (4)
successive terms. (Ord. 614, 5-15-2000)
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION AND POWERS:
Said Board shall, immediately after their appointment meet, and organize by the election of one of
their number President, and by the election of such other officers as they may deem necessary. They
shall make and adopt such rules and regulations as may be expedient. They shall have exclusive
control of the expenditure of all monies collected and the supervision, care and custody of all buildings
used for library purposes. They may appoint a librarian and assistants and prescribe rules for their
conduct. (1970 Code)
2-2-3: DAMAGING OR RETAINING LIBRARY PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or intentionally cut, tear, deface, break, injure or destroy
any book, map, chart or other property belonging to the public library.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully retain any property belonging to the public library for more
than thirty (30) days after notice in writing to return the same given after the expiration of the time
within which, by the rules of such library, such article or property may be kept. (1970 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 708 - AIRPORT COMMISSION. Go to
new ordinance.
Chapter 3
GOODING AIRPORT COMMISSION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 29/336
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 708 - AIRPORT COMMISSION. Go to
new ordinance.
2-3-1: GOODING AIRPORT COMMISSION:
Pursuant to the provisions of the Idaho Code and particularly, section 50-210, Idaho Code, the
Gooding Airport Commission is hereby created and established. (Ord 475, 4-7-1975)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 708 - AIRPORT COMMISSION. Go to
new ordinance.
2-3-2: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
The Mayor with the consent of the Council may appoint a Gooding Airport Commission consisting of
six (6) members, one of which shall be a member of the Council and one of which may be at the time
of his/her appointment under twenty one (21) years of age. Such members shall hold their office for
three (3) years from the date of appointment, and until their successors are appointed, but upon their
first appointment they shall divide themselves at their first meeting by lot, into three (3) classes: Two
(2) members shall form the first class and shall serve for one year; two (2) members shall form the
second class and shall serve for two (2) years; and one member shall form the third class and shall
serve for three (3) years. The youth member shall be appointed to a term of one year and may be
reappointed up to four (4) successive terms. No compensation shall be paid or allowed any member of
the said Commission, but actual and necessary expenses may be allowed with prior approval by the
Council. (Ord 614, 5-15-2000)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 708 - AIRPORT COMMISSION. Go to
new ordinance.
2-3-3: ORGANIZATION:
Said Commission shall, immediately after their appointment meet, and organize by the election of one
of their number as chairman and by the election of such other officers as they may deem necessary.
They shall make and adopt such rules and regulations as may be expedient. They shall keep and
maintain a record of their acts and proceedings. (Ord 475, 4-7-1975)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 708 - AIRPORT COMMISSION. Go to
new ordinance.
2-3-4: DUTIES:
The duties of the commission shall be advisory in nature and shall include:
A. Review of the annual budget, to include:
1. Capital improvement program.
2. Operations and maintenance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 30/336
B. Review operations and maintenance functions, to include:
1. Recommendation and review of airport specific regulations.
2. Conduct periodic safety inspections of the airport.
3. Receive credentials, establish qualifications, evaluate, and recommend hiring of airport
manager.
C. Review long range plan for airport development, to include:
1. Capital improvement program including federal-state-local funding anticipated.
2. Operations and maintenance plans.
3. Recommendation to local planning and zoning authority for protection of the airport through
zoning for obstructions and compatible land use.
4. Recommend and promote orderly but compatible development of adjacent land to its maximum
revenue generating capacity.
D. Provide liaison between airport users and city council. (Ord. 670, 7-6-2010)
Chapter 4
GOODING CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
2-4-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created and established a commission to be known as the "Gooding city planning
commission". (Ord. 464, 3-18-1974)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE:
A. Membership: The planning commission shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the
mayor with the consent and approval of the council. One member may, at the time of appointment
be under twenty one (21) years of age.
B. Term Of Office: The term of office for the first appointive members appointed to such commission
shall be two (2), four (4) and six (6) years, to be determined by lot. Thereafter the term of office for
such appointed commission member shall be six (6) years. The youth member shall be appointed
to a term of up to one year and may be reappointed to up to four (4) successive terms. (Ord. 680,
6-19-2013)
2-4-3: VACANCY; REMOVAL; COMPENSATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 31/336
A. Vacancies: Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled by the
mayor and confirmed by the council.
B. Removal: Members may be removed by a majority vote of the body confirming the original
appointment.
C. Compensation: Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and may receive
such mileage and per diem compensation not to exceed ten cents ($0.10) per mile and ten dollars
($10.00) per day as may from time to time be determined by the council of the city. (Ord. 464, 3-
18-1974)
2-4-4: ORGANIZATION; RULES:
The commission shall elect its own chairman, and may create and fill such other offices as it may
determine necessary. (Ord. 464, 3-18-1974)
2-4-5: MEETINGS:
A. Meetings: The commission shall hold one regular meeting each month for not less than nine (9)
months of each year. A majority of the appointive members of the commission shall be necessary
to constitute a quorum at any meeting.
B. Rules And Regulations: Written rules consistent with the laws of the state of Idaho shall be adopted
for the transaction of business and a written record of business, resolutions, findings and
determinations shall be kept. All meetings and records shall be open to the public. (Ord. 464, 3-18-
1974)
2-4-6: POWERS; DUTIES:
A. Powers: It shall be the duty of the commission to recommend and make suggestions to the city
council for the adoption of a long range comprehensive plan for the physical development of the
city; for the formation of zoning districts; to make suggestions concerning the laying out, widening,
extending and locating of streets, roads and highways for the relief of traffic, to make suggestions
concerning density of population and development of land within the jurisdiction of the city; to make
suggestions concerning the future growth, development and beautification of the city in respect to
its public buildings, streets, parks, grounds and lands consistent with the future growth and
development of the city in order to promote the public health, morals, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants thereof; and to do all such other things and acts as may be provided by title 50, chapter
11 of the Idaho Code and amendments and additions thereto.
B. Duties: The Commission may cooperate with other and like commissions for the purposes as
herein set forth and set forth in the statutes of the State of Idaho. (Ord. 464, 3-18-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 32/336
2-4-7: AREA OF CITY IMPACT DESIGNATED:
A. The designated area of City impact for the City of Gooding within the incorporated areas of the
County of Gooding, State of Idaho, shall be as follows:
Beginning at the Northeast corner of Section 32, Township 5 South, Range 15 E.B.M.;
Thence West along the North boundary of Section 32 to the Big Wood River;
Thence following the meander line of the Big Wood River westerly to its intersection with the West
boundary line of Section 31, Township 5 South, Range 15 E.B.M.;
Thence South to the Southwest corner of Section 7, Township 6 South, Range 15 E.B.M.;
Thence West to the Southeast corner of Section 8, Township 6 South, Range 15 E.B.M.;
Thence North to the Point of Beginning.
As of January 1, 1995 this area was also described by the following postal designations;
Beginning at the corner of 1700 South 2000 East, Gooding County, Idaho;
Then following the line of 1700 Southwest to the Big Wood River;
Following the Big Wood River meandering to the West to a point intersecting Gooding County
Road designate 1800 East;
Thence South on the 1800 East extended South to road designated as 2000 South;
Thence East to road designated as 2000 East;
Thence North to the Point of Beginning. (Ord 594, 4-3-1995)
B. The plan of the City Planning Commission, and all amendments thereto are hereby made
applicable to the area defined in subsection A above.
C. The Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted by
the City of Gooding shall apply to the Area of City Impact as above defined. (Ord. 485, 2-2-1976)
Title 3
DEPARTMENTS
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
3-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 33/336
There is hereby established a volunteer fire department for the City to be known as the GOODING
FIRE DEPARTMENT. (1-701; 1947 Code)
3-1-2: EQUIPMENT:
The equipment of the Fire Department shall consist of the hose, motorized equipment, and the
apparatus now owned by the City and such additional equipment which may hereafter be purchased
by the City or acquired by said Fire Department, together with the fire station and equipment in the
nature of fire plugs and fire hydrants. (1-702; 1947 Code)
3-1-3: MEMBERS; QUALIFICATIONS:
The number of active members of such Fire Department shall be such number, as from time to time,
may be fixed and determined by the Council. (Ord. 477,4-21-1975)
3-1-4: APPOINTMENTS:
The Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall each be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent
of the Council, and shall hold office until the expiration of the term of the appointing power, unless
sooner removed by the Mayor. (1-704; 1947 Code)
3-1-5: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering upon the duties of said offices, said officers shall take and subscribe an oath to
support the Constitution and laws of the State of Idaho and the provisions of this Code, and to
faithfully perform the duties of their respective offices according to the best of their ability. (1-705; 1947
Code)
3-1-6: FIRE CHIEF IN CHARGE:
The Fire Chief shall have absolute control of the Department at all times, shall call meetings of the
members and shall direct or cause to be directed all improvements of the several companies and shall
see to it that they keep the apparatus and machinery under their care in proper order and ready at all
times for active duty, and he shall supervise and direct said Department in fighting fires, or prevention
of fires, and do all things required to be done to safeguard the City against loss by fire. (1-706; 1947
Code)
3-1-7: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to inspect or cause to be inspected by the Fire Department, its
officers or members, as often as may be necessary, but not less than twice a year in the outlying
districts, and four (4) times a year in closely built portions of the City, all buildings, premises and public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 34/336
thoroughfares, except interior of private dwellings, for the purposes of ascertaining any conditions
liable to cause fire, or any violations of regulations promulgated by the City for the purpose of reducing
fire hazards. (1-707; 1947 Code)
3-1-8: COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief and any police officer who shall find in any building or upon any
premises any combustible or explosive matter, dangerous accumulations, rubbish, waste paper,
boxes, shavings, unnecessary accumulations or other inflammable material especially liable to fire, to
order and require the removal of such objectionable material without delay. (1-708; 1947 Code)
3-1-9: ASSISTANT IN CHARGE:
It shall be the duty of the Assistant Fire Chief to attend upon the Fire Chief and assist him in the
performance of his duties and in the absence of the Fire Chief he shall perform the duties of that
office. (1-709; 1947 Code)
3-1-10: POLICE AUTHORITY:
When on active duty the Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall each be invested with the authority
of police officer of the City with authority to make arrests, and shall each likewise have such police
authority for the purpose of enforcing any provision of this Code relating to matters of fire protection or
prevention. (1-710; 1947 Code)
3-1-11: POLICE SUBJECT TO FIRE CALLS:
The Chief of Police, night police and other police officials shall be subject to duty and call at all fires
and said police shall respond and assist in every way they can in getting the apparatus to the fire and
shall take charge and protect any property needing their protection, and shall keep back the people
from getting in the way or in any way interfering with the firemen in the discharge of their duties, and
each of the said police officers shall be under the orders of the Fire Chief during a fire. (1-711; 1947
Code)
3-1-12: REPORT OF FIRE CHIEF:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to submit an itemized report to the Clerk of the attendance of the
members of the Department drills and at each fire, the date and place of fire, and the amount due
each member for attending drills and for services rendered at each fire. (1-713; 1947 Code)
3-1-13: APPROACH TO FIRE LIMITED:
Whenever a fire shall occur in the City, the Fire Chief or Acting Fire Chief is hereby empowered during
the continuance of such fire, to prescribe the limits within which it shall be unlawful for any person to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 35/336
come excepting members of said Fire Department, the owners of the premises included in such limits,
and such other persons as may be specially admitted by the said Fire Chief or Acting Fire Chief. It
shall be unlawful for any person other than those above specified to enter within such limits at any
time during the progress of a fire. (1-714; 1947 Code)
3-1-14: INTERFERENCE WITH EQUIPMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than members of the Fire Department or police officers,
without permission of the Fire Chief or Acting Fire Chief to knowingly or wilfully handle, stand upon or
otherwise interfere with any fire apparatus while the same is being used to extinguish any fire or to
approach nearer than one hundred feet (100') to the building or fire. (1-715; 1947 Code)
3-1-15: REMOVAL OF EQUIPMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person unless specifically permitted so to do by the Fire Chief to remove
any fire apparatus, equipment, tools or accessories from the place where same are kept or to interfere
with any fire hydrant, either by turning the water on or off or attaching any hose, pipe or other
connections thereto or interfering therewith in any manner whatsoever. (1-716; 1947 Code)
3-1-16: FIRE HYDRANTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to obstruct the view of any fire hydrant or place any
material or vehicle in front thereof or within fifteen feet (15') of either side thereof. (1-717; 1947 Code)
3-1-17: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, driver or operator of any vehicle to drive, haul, or propel same on or
across any of the hose belonging to the Fire Department or to drive or leave such vehicle on any
street in such a manner as to interfere with or obstruct any of the fire apparatus or the workings
thereof at a fire when an alarm has been struck. (1-718; 1947 Code)
3-1-18: DUTY OF DRIVER OF VEHICLE:
The driver of any vehicle, upon the sounding of the fire alarm, shall immediately draw up said vehicle
as near as practicable to the right hand curb, remain standing still until the fire apparatus has passed.
(Ord. 385, 11-2-1959)
3-1-19: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS:
The rate of compensation for participating in fire drills and the rate of compensation for each fire
attended shall be fixed and determined by the Council and shall be in the form of a schedule, which
schedule shall be filed with the Clerk and which may be amended or altered by the Council, by
resolution, or motion, from time to time. (Ord. 477, 4-21-1975)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 36/336
Chapter 2
POLICE DEPARTMENT
3-2-1: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The chief of police under the direction of the mayor shall direct and control the police of the city. He
shall preserve the peace and good order of the city, quell all riots, arrest and bring all violators of this
code before the proper judge for trial, either with or without process, serve all processes issued by the
proper judge to him directed, and enforce all orders and judgments of said court and take such
measures as shall secure the peace and good order of all public meetings. The chief of police, in the
execution of his duty, with or without warrant, in arresting any person accused or suspected of crime
or in the suppression of any riot or unlawful assembly or in the prevention of violation of this code,
shall have the power to call upon any citizen or bystander to assist said chief in the execution of his
duty. He shall inquire into and report to the proper judge all violations of this code and criminal laws of
this state, and cause all laws of the city to be enforced. He shall take into custody with or without
process, any person found violating this code and bring such person before the proper judge to be
dealt with according to law. (1970 Code; amd. Ord. 497, 7-18-1977)
3-2-2: CHIEF OF POLICE TO KEEP RECORD:
The chief of police shall keep a record in a book provided for that purpose, of all monies belonging to
the city which may come into his hands from whatever source, stating from whom and on what
account received and pay the same into the treasury. He shall also record the name, if known, of
every person arrested, the date and cause of arrest, and such other facts as may be deemed
important and report an abstract thereof to the council monthly or more often if required. (1970 Code)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
4-1-1: DETERMINATION OF DANGER:
Whenever it shall come to the attention of the Council that any tree, building or structure within the
City, because of neglect or decay or any other cause, is so dilapidated, dangerous or in such condition
as to menace the public health or the safety of persons, passers-by or adjacent property, or is in such
condition as to constitute an unreasonable fire hazard or an obstruction of public travel and rights or is
in such condition as to be subversive of public order, decency or morals, then it shall be the duty of the
Council to make an inspection and examination of said building, tree or structure and of immediate
surroundings, aided by such City officials and employees as the Council may deem advisable. (Ord.
314, 10-16-1950)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 37/336
4-1-2: HEARING:
If upon making such inspection and examination the Council shall consider that any tree, building or
structure within said City, because of neglect or decay or any other cause, is so dilapidated,
dangerous or in such condition so as to menace the public health or the safety of persons, passers-by
or adjacent property, or is in such condition as to constitute an unreasonable fire hazard or an
obstruction of public travel and rights or is in such condition as to be subversive of public order,
decency or morals, then the Council shall hold a hearing relative to said tree, building or structure and
shall cause a notice to be served upon the person holding, owning or maintaining such building, tree
or structure, specifying a time and place when and where a hearing will be had relative thereto before
the Mayor and Council. The time for such hearing shall be not less than ten (10) days from the date of
the notice. If the building or property be vacant and the owner absent from the City, such notice may
be served by posting a copy thereof on the front door of said premises and by mailing a copy thereof
to the owner at the address of such owner as shown on such records. At such hearing witnesses may
be heard and evidence received on behalf of the City or the person owning, holding or maintaining
such tree, building or structure, and the hearing will be conducted as nearly as practicable in the
manner prevailing in courts of law. (Ord. 314, 10-16-1950)
4-1-3: ORDER OF REMOVAL:
If after such hearing the Council officially determines that the tree, building or structure, because of
neglect or decay or any other cause, is so dilapidated, dangerous or in such condition as to menace
the public health or the safety of persons, passers-by or adjacent property, or is in such condition as to
constitute an unreasonable fire hazard or an obstruction of public travel and right or is in such
condition as to be subversive of public order, decency or morals, then the Council may declare such
tree, building or structure to be a nuisance and thereupon the Council shall cause an order to be
entered and served upon the person holding, owning or maintaining such tree, building or structure,
advising of such official determination and directing that unless the objectionable conditions which
shall be specified in the order are remedied to the reasonable satisfaction of the Council within such
reasonable time as may be fixed in the order, which shall be not less than fifteen (15) days, the
Council will cause the tree, building or structure to be repaired, destroyed or removed. Such order
shall be served in the manner provided for the service of the notice in the Idaho Statutes. (Ord. 314,
10-16-1950)
4-1-4: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
If the person owning, holding or maintaining such tree, building or structure does not comply with the
provisions of such order within the time therein specified, the Council may cause the repair,
destruction or removal of such tree, building or structure at the expense of the person holding, owning
or maintaining the same, and may levy a special assessment on the land or premises whereon the
nuisance is situated to defray the cost or to reimburse the City for the cost of repair, destruction or
removal of said tree, building or structure so declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 314, 10-16-1950)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 38/336
4-2-1: CODES ADOPTED:
The approved editions of the following nationally recognized codes, as adopted by the State of Idaho
or the Idaho Building Code Board, are adopted as the official building codes of the City of Gooding,
State of Idaho, except as provided in subsection B of this section:
International Building Code B;
International Building Code, parts I - IV and IX;
International Energy Conservation Code.
A. The adopted versions of the foregoing codes shall be deemed superseded by successive versions
of such codes as they are adopted or approved by the Idaho Building Code Board, or the State of
Idaho, effective on the date any such codes are made effective by the Idaho Building Code Board
or Idaho legislation.
B. At this time there will be no exceptions to the codes as adopted.
C. Agricultural buildings are exempt from the building codes adopted herein but shall remain subject to
placement requirements established by zoning regulations. (Ord. 628, 12-16-2002)
4-2-2: VALUATION AND PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE ADOPTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 631, 6-16-2003)
4-2-3: AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
All the regulations, provisions, penalties and conditions of the Uniform Building Code shall apply and
be enforced by the City in the area of City impact, as now described in section 2-4-7 of this Code and
as described in ordinance 20 of the ordinances of Gooding County, or as said area may hereafter be
fixed and described. (Ord. 537, 3-15-1982)
4-2-4: FENCE PERMIT1:
Prior to the erection of any fence, by any person, corporation or other entity upon any land located
within the City boundaries, the person or entity constructing the same shall first obtain a fence permit
from the City building inspector. The Gooding City Council is authorized to establish, by resolution, the
fee for such fence permit. (Ord. 650, 1-17-2006)
Chapter 3
PLUMBING CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 39/336
4-3-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The Uniform Plumbing Code of the City,establishing rules and regulations for the installation of
plumbing, shall be and consist of a "Uniform Plumbing Code" published by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and as it shall be amended, revised, compiled and
published from time to time, three (3) copies of which shall be on file in the office of the Clerk for the
use and examination by the public. (Ord. 510, 3-5-1979)
Chapter 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
4-4-1: CODE ADOPTED:
All installation of electrical wiring and apparatus shall meet the specifications and requirements for
such wiring and installation of apparatus set forth and in conformity with the provisions of the National
Electrical Code of 1971, as approved by the American Standards Institute, together with all
amendments, supplements and revisions thereof. Such National Electrical Code of 1971, together with
all amendments, supplements and revisions thereof, is hereby adopted as the "Electrical Code" of the
City under and by virtue of the provisions of Idaho State law. Three (3) copies of said National
Electrical Code of 1971 shall be on file in the office of the Clerk and properly identified as being the
officially adopted Electrical Code of the City. Reference to such Codes so on file with the Clerk may be
had by any person during business hours. (Ord. 512, 3-19-1979)
Chapter 5
GAS FITTING CONTRACTORS
4-5-1: DEFINITION OF GAS:
The word "gas" as used in this Chapter shall be construed to mean natural gas, manufactured gas,
hydrocarbon gas or any mixture of gases produced, transmitted, distributed or furnished by any gas
utility or agency, except liquefied petroleum gas as defined and regulated under Chapter 39 Idaho
Session Laws of 1945. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-2: GAS INSTALLATIONS:
The term "gas installations" as used in this Chapter shall be construed to mean the installation of all
facilities for producing, transmitting and distributing gas and all accessory equipment, appurtenances
and appliances necessary for the control and utilization of gas. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-3: GAS PRODUCTION FACILITIES:
Any and all equipment or facilities used for the total or partial production of a gas supply for a piped
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 40/336
system shall be proposed in conformance with the requirements of Section 1 of State of Idaho Public
Utility Commission General Order No. 98, and shall be constructed in accordance therewith only after
approval and acceptance as to need and location by the public authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. 372,
1-7-1957)
4-5-4: CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The minimum standards applying to transmission and distribution facilities shall be as stipulated in
ASA B31.1.8-1955 of the American Standards Association, with the exceptions and additions as
provided under Rules 3 and 4, Section 11 of Idaho Public Utilities Order No. 98. Work and permits
related to alignment, right of way, easements, trenching and backfilling and repair of streets and
pavements shall be performed in accordance with existing statutes and provisions of this Code
applicable to such work. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY INSPECTOR:
The City Building Inspector and his assistants are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to
inspect and supervise the installation, construction, reconstruction and repair of all gas house piping,
gas appliances, fixtures and apparatus now or hereafter to be placed in or in any manner directly
attached to any building or structure within the City. The Building Inspector and his assistants shall be
subject to the orders and directions of the Mayor and Council and are hereby vested with full authority
to enter any building or premises at any time in the discharge of their duties herein imposed, after
having presented the proper identification. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-6: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
Any person legally entitled to receive a permit shall make application at the Building Inspector's office
on the form provided. A description of the work proposed to be done, location, ownership, occupancy
and use of the premises shall be given. The Building Inspector may require plans and specifications
and such other information as may be deemed necessary and pertinent for examination before
granting the permit. When it has been determined that the information furnished by the applicant is in
compliance with this Chapter, the permit shall be issued upon payment of the required fees as
hereinafter fixed.
No gas house piping shall be installed, constructed, reconstructed or repaired until a permit to do such
work shall have first been obtained from the Building Inspector. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-7: BOND REQUIRED:
Every gas fitting contractor, before securing a license as provided for in this Chapter, must furnish a
suitable bond to the City in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned to indemnify and
save harmless said City from all loss or damage that may arise through carelessness, neglect or the
violation of any of the provisions of this Code; and must further post a certificate of insurance with the
City evidencing the insurance of the gas fitting contractor against property damage in an amount not
less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); and bodily injury with limits of not less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) per person and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) total for each occurrence.
(Ord. 375, 9-16-1957)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 41/336
4-5-8: WORK NOT REQUIRING PERMITS:
A permit shall not be required for the clearing of stoppages or repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or
fixtures when such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of pipes, valves
or fixtures. It shall be required that work of this nature be performed by persons qualified under this
Chapter as competent to do such work. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-9: COST OF PERMIT:
The applicant shall pay to the Clerk for each permit issued at the time of issuance a permit fee of one
dollar ($1.00) plus an inspection fee in accordance with the following schedule:
For service line to building (if not furnished by Gas Co.
as part of distribution system) and piping system in
building $1.00
For each installed domestic gas range .50
For each installed gas fired incinerator $ .50
For each installed gas water heater .50
For each installed gas fired room heater .50
For each installed central heating gas appliance 1.00
Miscellaneous counter appliances, each .25
Capped outlets for future connection, each .50
For each installed refrigerator using gas fuel .50
For each installed gas fired duct furnace 1.00
For each installed gas plate or laundry stove .50
For each installed gas fired clothes dryer .50
For each installed hotel or restaurant range or unit broiler 1.00
For each installed hotel or restaurant deep fat fryer .50
For each installed hotel or restaurant gas bake or roast oven 1.00
For each installed conversion burner 1.00
For each installed gas engine 1.00
For each installed industrial boiler installation 1.00
(Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-10: INSPECTION BY GAS SUPPLIER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 42/336
The right is reserved for entry to the premises by the Gas Company or Utility, after having presented
the proper identification, and it shall be required that said supplier make its own inspection of all
facilities before connecting the meter and admitting gas to the system. The Gas Company or Utility
shall make a second inspection of all facilities after gas is admitted to the system to assure in the
presence of the permit holder the proper functioning of the system and all appliances. (Ord. 372, 1-7-
1957)
4-5-11: QUALIFIED INSTALLING AGENCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the work or business of making gas installations in the
City unless such person or responsible person representing the firm or corporation as hereinafter
prescribed has successfully passed an examination conducted by the Board of Examiners and has
issued to him a Certificate of Competency by said Board in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-12: CLASSIFICATIONS OF QUALIFIED AGENCIES:
There shall be three (3) classifications of competency as herein defined:
A. Gas Fitting Contractor: A gas fitting contractor shall be any person skilled in the planning and
supervision of the installation of gas piping, venting and equipment, and who is familiar with the
laws, rules and regulations covering the same and who is competent to assume work on a contract
basis and to direct the work of qualified employees.
A gas fitting contractor who in person does gas fitting work shall also be qualified as a journeyman
gas fitter, or have in his employ on all gas fitting work, a qualified journeyman gas fitter.
B. Journeyman Gas Fitter: A journeyman gas fitter shall be any person who as part of his principal
occupation is engaged in the practical installation of gas piping and equipment, and who is familiar
with the Code requirements governing the same, and who works under the direction of a gas fitting
contractor.
C. Apprentice Gas Fitter: An apprentice gas fitter is any person other than a journeyman, who as a
part of his principal occupation is engaged in learning and assisting in the installation of gas piping
and equipment. Apprentices shall not perform gas installation work except under the supervision of
a licensed journeyman gas fitter. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-13: LICENSES REQUIRED:
Before any person shall carry on or engage in the work or business of making gas installations, he
shall procure a license applicable to the classification in which he proposes to work and pay the
annual license fee imposed on such classification. The license shall not be transferable. Every
applicant for license shall present a Certificate of Competency as proof that he has been approved by
the Board of Examiners as competent for the classification sought. If the applicant be a partnership,
firm or corporation, the application shall be made by a bona fide member or agent thereof, who shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 43/336
at all times be in actual charge of the applicant's gas installation business. When any person is
designated and authorized to be or act as an agent for the applicant, such authorization shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant and the person designated, one copy of which shall be filed with the
Examining Board and one copy filed in the office of the Building Inspector or the Clerk. (Ord. 372, 1-7-
1957)
4-5-14: LICENSE FEES:
Before any license is issued, the applicant shall pay to the Clerk a license fee in accordance with the
following schedule:
Gas Fitting Contractor $25.00
Journeyman Gas Fitter 2.00
Apprentice Gas Fitter No fee
Upon payment of the above fee and presentation of a valid Certificate of Competency, the Clerk shall
issue a License Certificate, indicating clearly thereon the name of the holder, classification and year
for which it is valid. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-15: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
Gas fitter licenses shall expire on December 31 each year unless sooner revoked and shall be
renewed not later than the following January 15 upon payment of five dollars ($5.00) for gas fitting
contractor and two dollars ($2.00) for journeyman gas fitter. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-16: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any person holding a license shall not lend such license to any other person or allow any other person
to do gas installation work under his license except licensed journeymen in his employ. Violation of
this provision shall be cause for revocation of license in addition to other penalties provided hereafter.
(Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-17: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
All persons holding a valid gas fitting contractor license shall display for public view such license
certificate in their place of business. All journeymen and apprentice gas fitters holding a valid license
shall have available on his person during working hours his certificate of competency card with his
current license number endorsed thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person to display evidence of
license or competency unless so qualified under this Chapter. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-18: DISPOSITION OF LICENSE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 44/336
All money derived from gas fitter licenses shall be placed in the General Fund. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-19: EXAMINING BOARD:
A board to be known as the "Gas Fitters Examining Board" shall be appointed by the Mayor. It shall
consist of three (3) members selected from nominees recommended by an organized and generally
recognized association of responsible firms or individuals engaged in the gas fitting or related pipe
fitting industry and who shall qualify as hereinafter prescribed. The members of the first Board shall be
appointed within sixty (60) days after the adoption hereof and shall serve for the following terms: One
member for one year, one member for two (2) years and one member for three (3) years. Thereafter
upon the expiration of each term the Board members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years.
All Board members shall be subject to removal by the Mayor for malfeasance in office, neglect of duty
or incapacity to serve. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-20: QUALIFICATIONS OF BOARD MEMBERS:
All members of the Board shall be United States citizens, residents of the State of Idaho for not less
than one year, engaged in a responsible capacity in the gas fitting business prior to appointment and
during the term of office and qualified by integrity, knowledge and experience to judge the competency
of applicants for gas fitters certificates. Not less than one member of the Board shall have had five (5)
years or more experience as a gas fitting contractor, or gas fitting journeyman, or as an engineer
experienced in the design, construction and operation of gas systems. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-21: DUTIES AND POWERS OF EXAMINING BOARD:
The Board shall conduct examinations for the purpose of determining the competency of applicants
who are required to have a license under this Chapter and to issue certificates of competency to such
persons as may be entitled thereto. The Board shall elect a chairman from its members who shall be
the executive officer and preside at all meetings and a secretary who shall keep such records as are
proper for efficient discharge of the Board's duties, which records pertaining to an applicant's
qualifications shall be kept intact and available in the event of dispute for a period of not less than one
year following the date of issuance of the certificate of competency. The Board shall determine the
character and extent of the examination based on the requirements of this Code, and shall grade and
pass or reject the applicant on the basis of equaling or exceeding, or failing to equal a minimum
percentage grade of seventy percent (70%). The Board shall issue certificates of competency to
successful applicants and shall have the power to revoke such certificates under conditions
hereinafter prescribed. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-22: APPLICATION FOR EXAMINATION:
Any person required by this Chapter to be licensed shall make application on the form provided to the
Clerk, acting for the Board, for the examination for a certificate of competency and pay the
examination fee. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-23: EXAMINATION FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 45/336
The applicant shall pay to the Clerk at the time of making application an examination fee in
accordance with the following schedule:
Examination for journeyman gas fitter certificate $15.00
Apprentice gas fitters shall not be required to be examined but shall be registered with the Board and
shall maintain their certificate cards showing classification. The Board shall notify the Clerk of this
registration. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-24: TIME OF EXAMINATION:
The Board shall so schedule its meetings to examine a single applicant, or as many applicants at one
time, as circumstances dictate, but in no case shall an applicant be required to delay his examination
more than sixty (60) days from the date the application is accepted. Each applicant shall be notified by
the Board of the time and place for examination not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to
examination time. Notification by registered letter directed to the address given on the application shall
be considered notification. Failure of the applicant to appear for examination does not entitle him to a
refund of the examination fee. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-25: RE-EXAMINATION:
Any person who for sufficient cause in the judgment of the Board was unable to appear for
examination at the stated time, may apply and be given an examination after thirty (30) days for the
original fee payment. Any person who fails to pass the examination may apply for re-examination after
a period of thirty (30) days upon payment of the examination fee. Should any person fail to pass the
examination the second time, the Board may refuse the application until the expiration of six (6)
months. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-26: CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY:
Upon successful completion of an examination, the Board shall issue to the applicant a certificate of
competency in the form of a card, providing thereon the applicant's name, classification, year which
current, space for the applicant's signature and license number, and the signature of the Chairman of
the Board of Examiners. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-27: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
A certificate of competency may be revoked by the Board if it has good and sufficient evidence that
such certificate was obtained by fraud, or if the holder demonstrates lack of knowledge or
incompetency in matters relevant to such certificate. In such cases the Board may order reexamination
or may refuse application for re-examination as conditions may dictate. (Ord. 372, 1-7-
1957)
4-5-28: COMPENSATION OF BOARD MEMBERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 46/336
The members of the Examining Board shall each receive from the City as the only compensation for
their services the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for each journeyman fitter examined. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-29: DISPOSITION OF EXAMINATION AND RENEWAL FEES:
All monies derived from the payment of examination fees shall be placed in the General Fund. (Ord.
372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-30: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. The piping shall be constructed and installed so as to be durable, substantial and gas tied.
B. Piping shall be of a size and so installed as to provide a supply of gas sufficient to meet the
maximum demand without undue loss of pressure between the point of supply at the meter and the
appliance or appliances.
C. The building structure shall not be weakened by the installation of the piping.
D. Piping containing gas under pressure shall not be cut into or opened.
E. No flame or fire in any form shall be used in attempting to locate a gas leak or where there is an
odor of gas present. Checking for a gas leak with a soap and water solution is recommended.
F. All gas piping or gas appliance installation shall be performed with the gas turned off to eliminate
hazards from leakage of gas.
G. When working on piping which contains or has contained gas, smoking shall not be permitted.
H. When interruptions in work occur, the system shall be left in a safe and satisfactory condition. (Ord.
372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-31: HOUSE PIPING PRACTICE:
A. The Building Inspector may require a plan of a proposed gas piping job which shall be subject to his
approval consistent with the requirements of this Chapter. Adequate consideration should be given
to future demands and provisions made for added gas service. When an additional appliance is to
be served through an extension of present piping, capacity of the existing lines shall be verified.
B. The size of pipe to be used in piping buildings and structures shall be governed by the following
factors:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 47/336
1. The length of pipe and number of fittings.
2. The maximum gas consumption to be provided for.
3. Allowable loss in pressure from meter to appliance (shall not exceed 0.3 inch water column at
the maximum probable gas demand).
4. Diversity factor.
C. For accuracy, the manufacturer's BTU rating appearing on name plate of appliances shall be used.
In the absence of such information, the following table showing maximum demand required for
some common gas appliances may be used.
TABLE 1
APPLIANCE BTU PER HOUR
Domestic gas range (four burner top) 1 oven 62,500
Domestic gas range (four burner top) 2 ovens 82,500
Domestic gas range (six burner top) 2 ovens 107,500
Domestic circulating water heater 25,000 - 37,500
Domestic hot plate or laundry stove (per burner) 9,000
Gas steam radiator (per section) 2,000
Domestic room heaters - radiant heater
(per single radiant)
2,000
Domestic room heaters - radiant heater
(per double radiant)
4,000
Automatic instantaneous water heaters
Capacity:
(4 gallons per min. 150,000
(6 gallons per min. 225,000
(8 gallons per min. 300,000
Automatic storage water heaters
(slow recovery)
2,500 10,000
Automatic storage water heaters
(quick recovery)
15,000 70,000
Refrigerator 2.500
Floor furnaces 15,000 80,000
Recessed wall heaters 25,000 85,000
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 48/336
Conversion burners, unit heaters, warm air furnaces and gas boilers: Rating on the appliance
name plate or rating shown in manufacturer's catalog shall be used.
D. Size and length of pipe for average, domestic conditions:
1. The diameter of the supply line from the meter shall not be less than one and one-fourth inch
(1'/4"), in any case, and may be governed by the following specifications for minimum size of
house piping from meter to kitchen in houses, flats and apartments:
a. Less than six (6) rooms - 11/4 inch diameter.
b. Six (6) to nine (9) rooms - 11/2 inch diameter.
c. Nine (9) to twelve (12) rooms - 2 inches diameter.
d. For houses containing twelve (12) rooms or more, for commercial and industrial buildings and
installations, and where conditions are unusual, consult the Building Inspector or the Gas
Company for specifications.
2. Outlets to appliances should be of a diameter not less than the diameter of the inlet connection
on the appliance. The outlet to serve the kitchen range should not be less than three-fourths inch
(3/4") in diameter.
3. Capacity of Pipe: Capacities of different sizes and lengths of pipe in cubic feet per hour with a
pressure drop of 9.3 inch of water column for gas of 0.60 sp. gr. are shown in Table 2. In using
this table, no allowance for an ordinary number of fittings is necessary.
TABLE 2
Length of
Pipe Iron Pipe Size (IPS) Inches
(Ft.) 1/2 3/4 1 11/4 11/2 2 3 4 6 8
15 76 172 345 750 1,220 2,480 6,500 13,880 38,700 79,000
30 52 120 241 535 850 1,780 4,700 9,700 27,370 55,850
45 43 99 199 435 700 1,475 3,900 7,900 23,350 45,600
60 38 86 173 380 610 1,290 3,450 6,800 19,330 39,500
75 77 155 345 545 1,120 3,000 6,000 17,310 35,300
90 70 141 310 490 1,000 2,700 15,800 15,800 32,250
105 65 131 285 450 920 2,450 5,100 14,620 29,850
120 120 270 420 860 2,300 4,800 13,680 27,920
150 109 242 380 780 2,090 4,350 12,240 25,000
180 100 225 350 720 1,950 4,000 11,160 22,800
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 49/336
210 92 205 320 660 1,780 3,700 10,330 21,100
240 190 300 620 1,680 3,490 9,600 19,740
270 178 285 530 1,580 3,250 9,000 18,610
300 170 270 545 1,490 3,000 8,500 17,660
450 140 226 456 1,230 2,500 7,000 14,420
600 119 192 390 1,030 2,130 6,000 12,480
4. Diversity Factor: The diversity factor is the percentage of the total connected load in use at any
one time. For single-family dwelling units it is not necessary to consider this factor. However, it
may be an important factor in determining the correct pipe size to be used in multi-family
dwellings served from one gas meter. It is dependent upon the number and kinds of gas
appliances being installed. Where applicable, consult the Building Inspector for the diversity
factor to be used.
5. Extensions: Extensions to existing piping shall conform to Table 2. Existing piping shall be
converted to the proper size of pipe where necessary. In no case shall extensions be made to
existing pipe which is smaller than permitted by Table 2.
E. Size And Length Of Pipe For Special Conditions: For conditions not covered in Table 2, such as
longer runs or larger sizes of pipe, greater gas demands, application of a diversity factor when
piping multiple-family dwellings, pressures higher than fifteen inches (15") or lower than four
inches (4") of water column pressures, or specific gravity that does not fall within the range of 0.55
to 0.75, the size and lengths of piping required shall be calculated in a manner satisfactory to both
the Building Inspector and the Gas Company.
F. Pipe And Fittings:
1. All the pipe and fittings used for gas house piping shall be commercially perfect material, clear
and free from cutter burrs and defects in structure and threading. Wrought-iron or wrought-steel
pipe that complies with the American Standard for wrought-iron and wrought-steel pipe, ASA
B36.10-1950 or its latest revision, shall be considered as compliance with this requirement. All
pipe fittings (except stop cocks or valves) shall be malleable iron or steel when used with
wrought-iron or steel pipe, except that in size of four inches (4") and larger, cast iron may be
used.
2. Pipe and fitting threads shall comply with the American Standard for Pipe Threads, ASA B2.1-
1945. Pipe with threads which are stripped, chipped, corroded or otherwise damaged shall not
be used.
3. In no case shall it be permissible to repair defects in pipe or fittings, but having been located, the
defective pipe or fitting must be removed and replaced.
G. Concealed Piping:
1. No pipe smaller than standard one-half inch ('/2") iron pipe size shall be used in any concealed
location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 50/336
2. Concealed piping shall be located in hollow rather than solid partitions and must have a suitable
protective coating if in contact with corrosive material.
3. Piping in solids, such as concrete, shall be laid in channels in the floors suitably covered to
permit access to the piping with a minimum of damage to the building.
4. Piping shall not be installed in chimneys, flues or ventilating ducts or shafts.
5. No unions, running threads, right and left couplings, and swing joints made by combinations of
fittings, shall be used in a concealed location. When necessary to insert fittings in piping which
has been installed in a concealed location, the piping may be reconnected by use of a ground
joint union with the nut "center punched" to prevent loosening by vibration.
6. The unthreaded portion of concealed piping, and other house piping, shall extend at least one
inch (1") through finished ceilings and walls, and not less than two inches (2") above floors.
Concealed piping must be securely supported.
H. Pipe bending must be minimized, and where the same is necessary, extreme care must be
exercised in making such bends. Bends when approved shall be free from kinks, and shall not be
less than the radius below:
Size of Pipe (Inches) Min. Radius of Bend (Inches)
3/8 10
1/2 12
3/4 14
1 16
11/4 18
11/2 20
2 24
I. White lead or other joint compound or dope shall be used sparingly applied to male pipe threads
only. In the case of gas connections for liquefied petroleum gases (propane, butane or butane-air
gases) the compound used in making joints shall be resistant to the action of such gases.
J. No device shall be inserted into gas piping that will reduce the cross sectional area or otherwise
obstruct the free flow of gas.
K. Gas pipes running from one building to another shall be placed underground, and shall be sized
according to Table 2, but in no case shall pipe smaller than one-half inch ('/2") be used.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 51/336
Underground piping shall be protected against corrosion with one coat of Sherwin-Williams Ebonol
or equal paint.
L. All branch outlet pipes shall be taken from the top or sides of horizontal lines and not from the
bottom. Where a branch outlet is placed on a main supply line before it is known what size of pipe
will be connected to it, the outlet shall be of the same size as the line which supplies it.
M. An individual control valve shall be provided for each separate house line in buildings arranged
with more than one house line. Every gas cock or valve must be readily accessible for operation or
repair. Piping systems that are supplied by separate meters shall not be inter-connected. Three (3)
way valves are not permissible in any case.
N. When connecting two (2) sizes of pipe, a reducing fitting shall be used. Gas shall not be supplied
from a smaller pipe to a larger pipe. When extensions to house piping systems are made, all
provisions hereof shall be complied with.
O. All house piping shall be secured and fastened to the building with pipe straps or pipe hooks. The
maximum spacing of supports shall be:
1/2" pipe 6 feet 11/4 inch and larger 10 feet
3/4" and 1" pipe 8 feet vertical risers each floor
Beams or joists shall not be notched or cut without approval of the proper administrative authority.
In the absence of established rules by the administrative authority, where it is necessary to notch
beams or joists, the piping should not be more than twenty four inches (24") from the wall or
support under the beam, such notching shall not exceed one-fifth (1/5) of the depth of the timber.
P. No gas piping shall be run closer than six inches (6") to knob and tube or nonmetallic cable. No gas
piping shall be placed underground closer than two feet (2') from a sewer or eight inches (8") from
a water pipe. When gas pipes enter the foundation walls of a building, the hole must be securely
sealed around the pipe.
Q. Each outlet, including a valve or cock outlet, shall be securely closed gas tight with a threaded iron
plug or cap immediately after installation and shall be left closed until an appliance or piping is
connected thereto. Likewise, when an appliance is removed from an outlet and the outlet is not to
be used again immediately, it shall be securely closed gas tight. In no case shall an outlet be
closed with tin caps, wooden plugs, corks and the like.
R. It shall be unlawful for a consumer or property owner to maintain simultaneously in a single building
or structure a system of piping for natural gas with either a system of piping in which liquefied
petroleum gas or wet gas is used or a system of piping connected to a liquified petroleum gas plant
or apparatus, whether such systems are physically interconnected or not. No distributor of natural
gas shall be required to turn natural gas into a building or structure where:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 52/336
1. A system of piping exists in which liquefied petroleum gas or wet gas is used.
2. A system of piping is connected to a liquefied petroleum gas plant or apparatus or connected to
a system of piping using wet gas.
3. A liquefied gas plant or apparatus is maintained.
S. Underground extensions of house piping to outdoor appliances shall be properly sized, but shall not
be less than one-half inch (1/2") iron pipe size and shall be protected against corrosion.
T. Underground gas piping shall not be installed under houses or buildings which are built on a
concrete slab foundation. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-32: GAS METERS:
A. The Gas Company will specify the location of the meter. Meters shall be placed where readily
accessible to Gas Company employees. Consumer or builder will bring piping to meter location
and provide necessary fittings for connecting the outlet side of the meter. Piping shall not
necessitate the placing of a meter under steps, under a window, in any unventilated closet, near a
furnace or boiler, or in any location where it will be subject to damage or excessive corrosion.
B. Where two (2) or more meters are installed on the same premises, but supply separate customers,
the piping system shall not be interconnected on the outlet side of the meters. The Gas Company
may serve a multiple meter installation through one service line. House piping to multiple meter
installation should terminate at the meter location selected by the Gas Company. Piping to multiple
meter installation shall be plainly marked by a metal tag installed by the plumber; designating the
part of the building being supplied.
C. Each dwelling unit or commercial building shall be served as an individually metered customer,
where such units or structures are on individual lots.
Customer's gas line shall not cross streets, alleys or adjacent property lines for the purpose of
serving multiple dwelling units from a single meter installation.
D. The meter installation shall be of adequate strength to support meters therein and other
appurtenances. Bottom of meter shall be placed not less than six inches (6") above finished grade.
E. No person unless an employee of the Gas Company or having permission from the Gas Company
shall repair, alter, open or make connection to the service pipe, or do any other work on the parts
of the gas supply system up to and including the meter. Likewise, no person unless an employee
of the Gas Company or having permission from the Gas Company shall disconnect the inlet of the
meter nor move the meter. A plumber may disconnect the outlet of a meter from the house piping
only when necessary. He shall remake the joint at the meter outlet and shall leave the meter turned
off. In case any work done by a plumber discloses the need for repairs or alterations by the Gas
Company on any part of the supply system containing unmeasured gas, the Gas Company shall
be notified promptly of this fact. If gas is leaking from any part of the gas supply system containing
unmeasured gas, a plumber not in the employ of the Gas Company may make necessary
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 53/336
temporary repairs and shall promptly notify the Gas Company to make permanent repairs. This
Section shall not apply to acts done in case of emergency. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-33: APPLIANCE INSTALLATION; GENERAL:
A. Appliance Design: All gas appliances installed shall be of a design to meet the American Standard
Approval or Listing Requirements as to safety and efficiency of operation and durability of
construction, except such apparatus as is not covered by said requirements. An appliance bearing
the seal of a nationally recognized testing agency, such as the American Gas Association, Inc.,
Laboratories and Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be considered as complying with this
Chapter. In the absence of such laboratory approval, the Building Inspector shall have the power to
approve equipment, provided it is demonstrated as meeting existing American Standard
Association requirements, or, in the absence of such requirements, will meet generally accepted
safe practices. Used appliances may be reinstalled when, in the opinion of the said Inspector, they
may be used without danger of life or property.
1. It shall be determined that the appliance has been designed for use with the gas to which it will
be connected. No attempt shall be made to convert the appliance from the gas specified on the
rating plate for use with a different gas without consulting the Building Inspector.
2. All gas appliances, and their flue or vent connectors, shall be installed so that continued or
intermittent operation will not create a hazard to persons or property. (See American Standard
for Installation of Gas Piping and Gas Appliance in Buildings, ASA Z21.30-1954, or the latest
revision thereof.)
3. Appliances shall be adequately supported and so connected to the piping as not to exert undue
strain on the connection.
4. Appliances shall be installed in a location in which the facilities for ventilation permit satisfactory
combustion of gas and proper venting, under normal conditions of use. While all forms of
building construction cannot be covered in detail, this requirement may usually be met by
application of one of the following methods in ordinary building construction.
a. In buildings of conventional frame, brick or stone construction, without enclosed appliance
rooms, basement storm windows or tight stair doors, infiltration is normally adequate to
provide air for combustion and draft hood dilution.
b. Where appliances are installed in a confined space within a building not having adequate air
infiltration, provisions shall be made for supplying this space with air for combustion and
ventilation. This may be accomplished by two (2) permanent openings freely communicating
with interior areas of adequate infiltration, each to provide the equivalent of one square inch
free area for each one thousand (1,000) BTU per hour of appliance input. Registers must not
be blocked by drapes or other furnishings. Each opening shall comply with the above
specifications; one opening shall be located at the top portion of the room inlet and one at the
bottom portion thereof. If necessary, continuous ducts having cross-sectional areas equal to
the opening shall be utilized to communicate with the source of air supply. The minimum
dimension for a rectangular air duct shall not be less than three inches (3").
c. Where appliances are installed in a confined space within a building of an unusual type
construction, air for combustion and ventilation must be obtained from outdoors or from
spaces (crawl or attic) freely communicating with the outdoors. Under these conditions, two (2)
openings having a combined area of not less than one square inch per one thousand (1,000)
BTU per hour of input rating will be provided. One opening shall be near the top of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 54/336
enclosure and one near the bottom. These openings shall be of approximately equal area and
shall communicate with the selected source or sources of adequate air supply, by ducts.
Where ducts are required, they shall be continuous and of the same cross-sectional area as
the openings to which they connect. The minimum dimension of rectangular air ducts shall be
not less than three inches (3"). Any duct from the top openings must be horizontal or pitched
upward.
d. Where appliances are installed in unconfined spaces, such as in full basements, within a
building of unusually tight construction, air for combustion and ventilation must be obtained
from outdoors or from spaces freely communicating with the outdoors. Under these conditions
a permanent opening or openings having a total free area of not less than one square inch per
one thousand (1,000) BTU per hour of input rating shall be provided. Where ducts are
required, they shall be of the same cross-sectional area as the openings to which they
connect. The minimum dimension of rectangular air ducts shall be not less than three inches
(3").
e. Operation of exhaust fans, kitchen ventilating systems or fireplaces may create conditions
requiring special attention to avoid unsatisfactory appliance operation.
5. Such nonportable appliances as central heating, water heating and similar equipment, shall be
connected to the gas piping with rigid pipe or by listed semi-rigid tubing not more than two feet
(2') in length. Domestic gas ranges, hot plates, refrigerators, and similar equipment shall be
connected to the gas piping with rigid pipe, listed semi-rigid tubing or listed appliance connectors
of flexible metal tubing and fittings. When a semi-rigid tubing connector or a connector of flexible
metal tubing and fittings is used, it shall be connected to an outlet in the same room as the
appliance. The length of the connector shall not exceed six feet (6'). The connector shall be
installed so as to be protected against physical damage.
6. The connection of an appliance with any type of gas hose is prohibited, except when used with
laboratory, shop or ironing equipment that requires mobility during operation. Such connections
shall have the shut-off or stop cock installed at the connection to the building piping. Where gas
hose is used, it shall be of the minimum practical length, but not to exceed six feet (6'), and shall
not extend from one room to another or pass through any walls, partitions, ceilings or floors.
Under no circumstances shall gas hose be concealed from view or used in a concealed location.
Only listed gas hose shall be used. Listed gas hose shall be used only in accordance with the
terms of its listing. Gas hose shall not be used where it is likely to be subject to excessive
temperatures (above 125 degrees F.).
7. When air or oxygen under pressure is used in connection with the gas supply, effective means
shall be provided to prevent the air or oxygen from going back into the gas piping.
8. Appliances and their connections shall be installed and tested and found gas tight after the gas
is turned on.
9. Every appliance shall be properly adjusted after being installed and the customer shall be
instructed as to its safe operation.
10. All electrical connections between gas appliances and building wiring shall conform to the
National Electrical Code, ASA C1-1953, or the latest revision thereof. The gas piping shall not be
used for an electrical ground nor shall electric circuits utilize gas piping, casing of controls,
panels, or other metal parts in lieu of wiring. No devices employing or depending upon on
electrical current shall be used to control or ignite a gas supply if of such character that failure of
the electrical current could result in the escape of unburned gas or in failure to reduce the supply
of gas under conditions which would normally result in its reduction unless other means are
provided to prevent the development of dangerous temperatures, pressures or the escape of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 55/336
gas. This provision shall not apply to low voltage control and ignition circuits or to electronic
flame detection device circuits incorporated as part of the appliance. The electrical circuit
employed for operating the main gas control valve, automatic pilot, room temperature
thermostat, limit control or other electrical devices used with the gas appliances, shall be in
accordance with the wiring diagram supplied with the appliance. All gas appliances using
electrical controls shall have the controls connected to a permanently live electric circuit, i.e.,
one that is not controlled by a light switch. Central hearing gas appliances for domestic use shall
be provided with a separate electric circuit.
11. Gas appliance pressure regulators requiring access to the atmosphere for successful operation
shall be equipped with a vent pipe leading to the outer air or into the combustion chamber
adjacent to a constantly burning pilot, unless construction is such as to limit the escape of gas
from the vent opening in the event of diaphragm failure to not more than 1.0 cubic feet per hour
of a 0.6 specific gravity gas at seven inches (7") water column pressure. In case of vents leading
to the outer air, means shall be employed to prevent water from entering this pipe and also to
prevent stoppage by insects and foreign matter. In case of vents entering the combustion
chamber, the vents shall be located so that the escaping gas will be readily ignited by the pilot
flame and the heat liberated will not adversely affect the operation of the thermal element. The
terminus of the vent shall be securely held in a fixed position relative to the pilot flame.
12. Where the meter shut-off valve is not readily accessible from the appliance location, an
individual control valve shall be provided at the appliance ahead of the union connection.
B. Installation Of Water Heaters:
1. Water heaters shall not be installed in bathrooms, bedrooms, or in any occupied rooms normally
kept closed. Water heaters shall be located as close as practicable to the flue or vent. They
should be so located as to provide short runs of piping to fixtures. Water heaters shall be
installed in compliance with the clearances given in their listing requirements. Water heaters
shall be connected in a manner to permit observation, maintenance and servicing. Unlisted
water heaters shall be installed with a clearance of twelve inches (12") on all sides and rear.
Combustible floors under unlisted water heaters shall be protected in an approved manner.
2. No water heater shall be installed in a closed system of water piping unless an approved water
pressure relief valve is provided. The installation and adjustment of temperature, pressure and
vacuum relief valves or combinations thereof, and automatic gas shutoff valves, shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the Building Inspector or with the manufacturer's
instructions accompanying such devices.
3. The gas line shall be a separate line direct from the meter to the appliance, unless existing gas
line is of ample capacity. Any contemplated use of existing gas piping shall be verified with the
pipe capacity chart herein.
C. Installation Of Ranges:
1. The location of a domestic gas range shall be such as not to constitute a hazard to persons or
property. In the application of this requirement, appropriate consideration shall be given to the
design and construction of the range and the combustibility of the floor, wall or partition. Ranges
when installed on combustible floors shall be set on their own bases or legs. Ranges listed as
flush-to-wall models may be installed flush on all sides; others may be installed in compliance
with the clearance requirements of their listing. Unlisted domestic gas ranges shall be installed
with et least six inch (6") clearance from back and sides. Combustible floors under unlisted
appliances shall be protected. Domestic gas ranges shall have a vertical clearance above the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 56/336
cooking top of not less than thirty six inches (36") to combustible construction. When the
underside of such combustible construction is protected with asbestos millboard, at least onequarter
inch ('/4") thick, covered with sheet metal of not less than No. 28 U.S. gauge, the
distance shall be not less than twenty four inches (24"). The projection shall extend nine inches
(9") beyond the sides of the range. All gas ranges shall be installed so that the cooking top and
oven racks are level.
2. Listed hotel and restaurant ranges, deep fat fryers and unit boilers, when set on their own bases
or legs, may be installed on unprotected combustible floors unless marked "For use only in
fireproof locations". Hotel and restaurant ranges, deep fat fryers, and unit boilers which are not
listed for mounting on combustible floors, shall be installed with at least six inch (6") clearance
from back and sides. Combustible floors under unlisted appliances shall be protected.
D. Installation Of Heating Equipment:
1. Room Or Space Heater: A room or space heater shall be placed so as not to cause a hazard to
walls, floors, curtains, furniture, doors when open, etc., and to the free movement of persons
within the room. Appliances designed and marked "For use in incombustible fire-resistive
fireplace only", shall not be installed elsewhere. Listed room or space heaters shall be installed
with clearance in compliance with their listing requirements. Unlisted room or space heaters
shall be installed with clearances from combustible construction not less than the following:
a. Circulating Type: Room heaters having an outer jacket surrounding the combustion chamber,
air circulates between the inner and outer jacket and without openings in the outer jacket to
permit direct radiation shall have clearances at side and rear of not less than twelve inches
(12").
b. Radiating Type: Room heaters other than those described above as of circulating type shall
have clearances at sides and rear of not less than eighteen inches (18"); except that heaters
which make use of metal, asbestos or ceramic material to direct radiation to the front of the
appliance shall have a clearance of thirty six inches (36") in front, and if constructed with a
double back of metal or ceramic may be installed with a clearance of eighteen inches (18") at
sides and twelve inches (12") at rear.
Combustible floors under unlisted room or space heaters shall be protected in an approved
manner. In no case shall the clearances be such as to interfere with the requirements for
combustion air and accessibility.
a. Wall Type Room Heaters: Wall type room or space heaters shall not be installed in walls of
combustible construction unless listed for such installation.
b. Venting: Room or space heaters shall be vented as specified in the venting requirements
herein. Room or space heaters installed in all sleeping quarters or rooms generally kept
closed shall be connected to an effective flue or vent and equipped with an automatic pilot.
2. Central Heating Boilers And Furnaces - Installation Or Conversion: The gas line shall be a
separate line direct from the meter to the boiler or furnace, unless the existing gas line is of
ample capacity. Where a complete shut-off type automatic pilot system is not utilized, a manual
main shut-off valve shall be provided ahead of all controls except the manual pilot gas valve.
When a complete shut-off type automatic system is utilized, a manual main shut-off valve shall
be provided ahead of all the controls. A suitable manual valve shall be provided for shutting off
the main gas burner independently of the pilot gas. A union connection shall be provided
downstream from the manual main shut-off valve to permit removal of the controls. Listed central
heating boilers and furnaces shall be installed with clearances not less than those specified in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 57/336
their listing requirements. Unlisted central heating boilers and furnaces shall be installed with
clearances from combustible construction of not less than eighteen inches (18") above the
appliance and at sides, front and rear, and nine inches (9") from projecting flue box or draft
hood, except that the clearance above and at the sides and rear may be six inches (6") for
appliances of the following types:
a. Mechanical warm air furnaces which are automatically fired and equipped with a fan to
circulate the air and with approved automatic temperature limit controls that cannot be set
higher than two hundred fifty degrees (250?) Fahrenheit.
b. Steam boilers operating at not over fifteen (15) pounds gauge pressure and hot water boilers
operating at not in excess of two hundred fifty degrees (250?) Fahrenheit of the water-wall
type or having a jacket or lining of masonry or other satisfactory insulating material.
In no case shall the clearance be such as to interfere with the requirements for combustion air
and accessibility.
A central heating boiler or furnace shall be erected in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and shall be installed on a firm, level, fireproof foundation unless listed for
installation on a combustible floor. The installation of central heating boilers and furnaces shall
be such as to make them accessible for cleaning of heating surfaces, removal of burners,
replacement of sections, motors, controls, filters, draft hoods, and other working parts, and for
adjustment and lubrication of parts requiring such attention. Steam and hot water boilers shall be
provided with approved automatic devices to shut down the burners in the event of undue
pressure or low water in a steam boiler or overheating in a hot water boiler. Steam and hot water
boilers shall also be provided with a drain valve, by means of which the boiler may be flushed or
drained, and a direct connection to a water supply through an individual control valve.
The method of connecting the flow and return pipes on steam and hot water boilers shall
facilitate a rapid circulation of steam or water. For common piping systems, reference may be
made to the American Society of Heating and Air Conditioning Engineers' Heating, Ventilating,
Air Conditioning Guide, and to the Institute of Boiler and Radiator Manufacturers' (IBR) Guides.
A plenum chamber when not a part of a furnace shall be constructed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. The method of connecting supply and return ducts shall facilitate
proper circulation of air. Reference may be made to the Standards of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters for the Installation of Air Conditioning, Warm Air Heating, Air Cooling and
Ventilating System, NBFU Pamphlet No. 90, and to the Design and Installation Manuals of the
National Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Association. Where the furnace is installed
within a confined space, the air circulated by the furnace shall be handled by ducts which are
sealed to the furnace casing and are entirely separate from the means provided for supply
combustion and ventilation air. In residential forced warm air central heating installations, a total
free area to the suction of the fan (return air and outside air) shall be provided so that the free
area of grilles or the minimum cross-sectional area of ducts shall be not less than two (2) square
inches for each one thousand (1,000) BTU of rated input.
3. Recessed Heaters: Listed recessed heaters may be installed in combustible construction.
Unlisted recessed heaters shall not be installed in combustible construction. Because of the
necessity for closely correlating the installation of recessed heaters with the building
construction, the Building Inspector shall be consulted for the proper installation methods to be
followed. Recessed heaters shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions.
Recessed heaters shall be located so as not to cause a hazard to walls, floors, curtains,
furniture, doors, etc. Recessed heaters installed between a bathroom and adjoining room shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 58/336
not circulate air from the bathroom to other parts of the building. The gas line shall be a separate
line direct from the meter to the recessed heater, unless the existing gas line is of ample
capacity. A manual main shut-off valve shall be installed ahead of all controls including the pilot
gas valve. All parts of recessed heaters shall be easily accessible for cleaning and maintenance.
Panels, grilles, and access doors which must be removed for normal servicing operations shall
not be attached to the building construction. Adequate combustion and circulating air shall be
provided.
4. Floor Furnaces: Listed floor furnaces may be installed in combustible floors. Unlisted floor
furnaces shall not be installed in combustible floors. A separate manual main shut-off valve shall
be provided ahead of all controls and a union connection shall be provided downstream from this
valve to permit removal of the controls or the floor furnace.
Fixed ventilation by means of a duct or grille arranged to supply air from a permanently
ventilated attic or under floor space shall be provided to any confined space which encloses the
floor furnace.
The duct or grille shall be screened and have a free area of at least twice the area of the vent
collar, or one square inch per one thousand (1,000) BTU per hour of gas input, whichever is the
greater, and shall be installed in such a manner as to insure proper combustion. The following
are requirements that will serve in properly placing the furnace or furnaces to serve one story:
a. Floor Furnaces: No floor furnace shall be installed in the floor of any aisle or passageway of
any auditorium, public hall, or place of assembly, or in any exitway from any such room or
space.
b. Walls And Corners: With the exception of wall register models, a floor furnace shall not be
placed closer than six inches (6") to the nearest wall, and wall register models shall not be
placed closer than six inches (6") to a corner.
c. Draperies: The furnace shall be so placed that drapery or similar object cannot be nearer than
twelve inches (12") to any portion of the register of the floor furnace. No door shall open over
register of furnace.
d. Support: Floor around the furnace shall be braced and headed with a framework of material
not lighter than the joist. Means shall be provided to support the furnace when the floor grille is
removed.
e. Clearance: The lowest portion of the floor furnace shall have at least a six inch (6") clearance
from the general ground level, except where the lower six inch (6") portion of the floor furnace
is sealed by the manufacturer to prevent entrance of water, the clearance may be reduced to
not less than two inches (2"). Where these clearances are not present, the ground below and
to the side shall be excavated to form a "basin-like" pit under the furnace so that the required
clearance is provided beneath the lowest portion of the furnace. A twelve inch (12") clearance
shall be provided on all sides except the control side, which shall have on eighteen inch (18")
clearance.
f. Access: Provisions shall be made for access to the floor furnace by means of an opening in
the foundation wall of at least eighteen by twenty four inches (18" x 24") or through a trap door
of at least twenty four by twenty four inches (24" x 24"), located at some convenient point, and
a clear and unobstructed passageway to the floor furnace of at least eighteen inches high by
twenty four inches (18" x 24") wide. The Building Inspector should be consulted with reference
to the access facilities for service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 59/336
g. Upper Floor Installation: Listed gas floor furnaces may be installed in an upper floor provided
that the furnace assembly projects below into a utility room, closet, garage or similar
nonhabitable space. The Building Inspector should be consulted prior to making such an
installation.
5. Duct Furnaces: The gas line shall be a separate line direct from the meter to the duct furnace,
unless the existing gas line is of ample capacity. Listed gas-fired duct furnaces shall be installed
with clearances of at least six inches (6") between adjacent walls, ceiling and floors of
combustible construction and the appliance, projecting flue box or draft hood except that duct
furnaces listed for installation at lesser clearances may be installed in accordance with their
listing. In no case shall the clearance be such as to interfere with the requirements for
combustion air and accessibility.
A duct furnace shall be accessible for cleaning and repair, and shall be firmly supported in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The ducts connected to or enclosing duct
furnaces shall have removal access panels on both the upstream and downstream side of the
furnace. The controls and draft hoods shall be located in the same enclosure from which
combustion air is taken. Circulating air shall not be taken from the same enclosure in which the
furnace is located.
Duct furnaces when used in conjunction with a refrigeration system shall not be located
downstream from the evaporator coil.
6. Gas Fired Unit Heaters: Suspended type gas-fired unit heaters shall be safely and adequately
supported with due consideration given to their weight and vibration characteristics. Listed gasfired
unit heaters shall be installed with minimum clearances from combustible construction of
six inches (6") between the appliance, projecting flue box or draft hood and not less than
eighteen inches (18") at the sides and bottom unless listed for installation at lesser clearances.
The location of any unit heater or the duct work attached thereto shall be such that a negative
pressure will not be created in the room in which the unit heater is located. A unit heater shall
not be attached to a warm air duct system unless listed for such installation.
Unit heaters installed in garages for more than three (3) motor vehicles or in airplane hangars
shall be of a type listed for such use and shall be installed at least eight feet (8') above the floor.
E. Installation Of Gas-Fired Clothes Dryers: Listed clothes dryers shall be installed with a minimum
clearance of six inches (6") from adjacent combustible construction, except that clothes dryers
listed for installation at lesser clearances may be installed in accordance with their listing.
Moisture exhaust ducts shall be installed with clearances for high temperature duct systems in
accordance with the Standards for the Installation of Air Conditioning, Warm Air Heating, Air
Cooling and Ventilating Systems, NFPA-NBFU pamphlet No. 90 or the latest revision thereof.
A minimum clearance of eighteen inches (18") shall be provided between the lower surface of any
combustible material located above the dryer and the top of any other vent outlet not protected by
a two hundred fifty degrees (250?) Fahrenheit or lower limit control.
Gas-fired clothes dryers installed for multiple-family use shall be equipped with approved
automatic pilots.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 60/336
F. Installation Of Gas Refrigerators: Gas refrigerators shall be provided with adequate clearances for
ventilation at the top and back. They shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions. If such instructions are not available, at least two inches (2") shall be provided
between the back of the refrigerator and the wall, and at least a twelve inch (12") clearance above
the top.
G. Installation Of Gas-Fired Incinerators: Listed gas-fired incinerators shall be installed as close as
practicable to a chimney with at least twelve inches (12") clearance between sides and
combustible construction except that appliances listed for installation at lesser clearances may be
installed in accordance with their listing. In no case shall the clearance to combustible construction
be less than three inches (3") or be such as to interfere with the requirements for combustion air
and accessibility. The clarence above a charging door shall be not less than forty eight inches
(48"). Incinerators of wall type shall be installed in a non-combustible wall communicating directly
with a chimney flue.
No draft hood shall be connected into the flue pipe of an incinerator. Where conditions permit, it is
preferable to have the flue pipe connected to a separate chimney flue. Smoke pipes shall have at
least eighteen inches (18") clearance from combustible construction unless guarded by a
ventilated thimble twelve inches (12") larger in diameter than the flue or the vent connector.
H. Installation Of Gas Equipment In Large Boilers: These requirements shall be applicable to unlisted
steam or hot water boilers that have inputs in excess of four hundred thousand (400,000) BTU per
hour and which have a working pressure of not over fifteen (15) pounds per square inch, and
furnish steam, hot water or both, for either heating, processing or power purposes.
1. Combustion Air: In absence of the manufacturer's instructions, if combustion air is taken from
the space in which the boiler is located, an opening to the outside air shall be provided having an
area of 0.5 square feet or more for each one million (1,000,000) BTU per hour of gas burned.
2. Flues And Vent Connectors: Adequate means for limiting draft shall be installed for each boiler.
When a manually operated damper is used to limit draft, positive means shall be provided to lock
the damper in position. The manually operated damper shall be installed between the boiler and
any application of automatic or modulating draft limiting devices. Adjustable (modulating)
dampers, where used for fuel-air ratio control, shall be equipped with suitable located minimum
and maximum operating stops. The minimum operating stops for such dampers shall be located
to obtain sufficient air for complete combustion at the minimum burner input. These dampers
shall be counter-balanced to open in the event of breakage or failure of their operating means.
Automatically operated dampers where used on automatically lighted boilers shall be interlocked
with the burner input control to prevent lighting the burner unless the damper is open.
3. Burners: The main burner or burners and their component parts shall be installed according to
the manufacturer's instructions and shall be properly and firmly secured in place to maintain
correct alignment in normal use and shall be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The
burner or burners shall be so installed and adjusted that there will be no injurious flame
impingement on walls or heating surfaces in a manner that will cause incomplete combustion or
damage to boiler ports. Burners shall maintain complete and stable combustion at the minimum
rate of firing or during any sudden change in the gas-firing rate between maximum and minimum
rates.
4. Air Intakes: Air openings shall be provided of sufficient area to supply an adequate amount of air
for complete combustion under the specified draft conditions and at the maximum rate of firing.
The air shall be introduced in a manner so as to assure thorough mixing of the gas and air in
order to complete the combustion within the space provided. The continued safe combustion or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 61/336
cut-off of the gas supply shall be assured for boilers having forced or induced draft, or both, in
the event of draft failure. For forced or induced draft installations, a mechanical timer shall be
used to require a fifteen (15) second purge period or the purging of three (3) times the volume of
combustion space and gas passages containing combustion gases up to the blower or damper,
whichever requires the largest volume of air, prior to pilot ignition after shut down. No spark or
ignition shall be allowed to occur in the fire box during the purging cycle. If the firing rate is
automatically changed, the gas-air ratio shall be automatically maintained to produce stable
combustion at all firing rates.
5. Pilots: An adequate gas pilot or pilots shall be used to assure ignition of the burner or burners.
For all automatically lighted boilers, an automatic pilot device or flame-safe guard so constructed
and installed that no gas can flow to the main burner or burner group unless satisfactory ignition
is assured shall be employed at each burner or group of burners operating as a unit. Gas to
main burners and to intermittent or ignition pilots shall be automatically shut off in case of flame
failure at point of supervision. The response time of the flame safeguard to de-energize the gas
shutoff device on flame failure shall not exceed five (5) seconds for boilers having inputs in
excess of two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) BTU per hour. Pilots supervision by
such flame safeguard shall be only at the point where the flame will effectively ignite the gas at
the main burner or burners. Electric ignition systems shall ignite only a pilot. The input to the pilot
shall not exceed three percent (3%) of the maximum input to the main burner as fired. If ignition
of the pilot is not obtained within fifteen (15) seconds, the gas shall be turned off automatically.
Means shall be provided to permit ready observation of all pilot burners, flame safeguard units
and the main burner or burners while firing. Pilot burners shall be placed so that they can be
safely lighted manually, if required. The gas supply pressure to the pilot or group of pilots shall
be regulated independently of the main burner supply.
6. Manual Shut-Off Valves: Pilot lines shall be connected to vertical main as supply pipes or to the
sides or top of horizontal pipes upstream from all gas control valves and they shall be
independently controlled by a manually operated pilot shut-off valve. In multiple installations, a
manually operated pilot firing valve downstream from the pilot shut-off valve shall be provided for
each pilot. Each boiler burner assembly shall have a lubricated plug type main burner shut-off
valve with handle permanently attached which will shut off the gas to the burner and control
valve assembly. Each burner shall have a separate firing valve designed for the maximum
operating gas pressure on the burner.
7. Control Valves: All boiler input control valves and safety shut-off valves shall be installed
downstream from the main burner shut-off valves. For manually lighted boilers, reopening the
safety shut-off valve after it has closed shall require a manual operation. No wiring or control
shall be subjected to heat from the burner unless specifically designed to withstand such
temperatures. Automatically operated main burner input control valve assemblies on boilers
having inputs in excess of two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) BTU per hour shall
provide for the firing rate during turn on to be more or less uniformly increased from minimum to
maximum in not less than five (5) seconds and shall provide for the firing rate during turn-off to
be more or less uniformly decreased from maximum to minimum in not less than three (3)
seconds. It is not intended that this time limitation apply to emergency safety shut-off valves
used in conjunction with a modulating control valve.
8. Gas Pressure Regulators: Where gas supply pressure is higher than that at which the burners
are designed to operate, a gas pressure regulator shall be employed. In no case shall a weight
and lever type of regulator be used. A gas pressure regulator, except a zero regulator used in
connection with air-gas mixers, requiring access to atmosphere for successful operation, shall
be vented to a safe location.
9. Limiting Devices: Automatically lighted boilers shall be equipped with safety devices arranged to
prevent excessive steam pressures of water temperatures and to prevent firing a dry boiler or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 62/336
one in which the water is dangerously low by shutting off the gas. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-34: FLUE CONNECTIONS:
A. Appliances of the following types must be connected to an effective flue or vent:
1. Central heating appliances including steam and hot water boilers, warm air furnaces, floor
furnaces and vented recessed heaters.
2. Unit heaters, duct furnaces and gas-fired incinerators.
3. Water heaters with inputs in excess of five thousand (5,000) BTU per hour.
4. Room heaters listed for vented use only. This includes the, space heating section of gas ranges.
5. Room heaters installed in sleeping quarters for use of transients or in institutions such as homes
for the aged, sanitariums, convalescent homes, orphanages, etc. Such heaters must be
equipped with an automatic pilot.
6. Appliances equipped with gas conversion burners.
7. Appliances which have draft hoods supplied by the appliance manufacturer except room heaters
listed for either vented or unvented use.
B. The following listed appliances are not required to be vented except when any or all of the
appliances below are installed so that the total input rating exceeds thirty (30) BTU per hour per
cubic foot of room space in which located.
1. Gas ranges, hot plates, laundry stoves.
C. Every vented appliance, except incinerators, dual oven type combination ranges, and units
designed for power burners or for forced venting, shall have a draft hood. If the draft hood is not a
part of the appliance or supplied by the appliance manufacturer, it shall be supplied by the installer.
Where the draft hood is part of the appliance or is supplied by the appliance manufacturer, it shall
be installed without alterations in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. In the absence
of manufacturer's instructions, the draft hood shall be attached to the flue collar of the appliance or
as near to the appliance as conditions permit. In no case shall a draft hood be installed in a false
ceiling, in a different room or in any manner that will permit a difference in pressure between the
draft hood relief opening and the combustion air supply.
D. The flue or vent to which the flue or vent connector is connected shall be of a size that is equal to
the size indicated by the vent collar of the appliance, but in no case shall the area of the vent be
less than the area of a three inch (3") diameter pipe. When more than one appliance vents into a
flue or vent, the flue or vent area shall not be less than the area of the largest flue or vent
connector plus fifty percent (50%) of the areas of the additional flue or vent connectors. An
elliptical flue or vent may be used provided its flue gas venting capacity is equal to the capacity of
round pipe for which it is substituted.
E. Automatic gas appliances shall not be connected to the same flue serving equipment for solid or
liquid fuel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 63/336
F. The material used for vent pipe shall be of noncombustible, corrosion resistant, and of sufficient
thickness, cross-sectional area, and heat insulating quality to avoid excessive temperature on
adjacent combustible material, and certified by a nationally recognized testing agency. The manner
in which vents are run and passed through walls, partitions, attics, etc., shall meet the
specifications set by the American Standard Installation of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances in
Buildings, ASA Z21.30-1954, Part V, Venting, or the latest revision thereof.
G. The vent shall extend high enough above the building or other neighboring obstructions so that
wind from any direction will not strike the vent from an angle above horizontal. Unless the
obstruction is of great magnitude, it is the usual experience that a vent extended at least two feet
(2') above flat roofs or two feet (2') above the highest part of a wall parapets and peak roofs within
thirty feet (30') will be reasonably free from down drafts.
H. No manually operated damper shall be placed in any vent connector of any appliance having a
draft hood furnished by the manufacturer. Fixed baffles at the head of draft hoods are not classified
as dampers.
I. Before connecting a vent or vent connector, the installation shall be examined to ascertain that it is
properly constructed, clear, and will freely conduct the products of combustion to the outer air.
(Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-35: TESTS, INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION:
A. When gas house piping has been installed in a building or structure, whether the same be new
construction, repairs or extensions, the same must be inspected and tested in the presence of the
Building Inspector or one of his assistants. After satisfactory test and inspection, an inspection tag
shall be attached to such piping.
B. Before any system of gas house piping is finally put in service, it shall be carefully tested to insure
that it is gas tight. Where any part of the system is to be enclosed or concealed, this test shall
precede the work of closing in. The piping must stand a pressure of air equal to that exerted by a
column of mercury six inches (6") high for a period of ten (10) minutes without showing any
pressure drop.
1. If the house piping will operate a pressure higher than one psig, the test pressure shall be at
least twice the pressure to which the piping will be subjected in operation.
2. No fire-test or water-test shall be permitted, and a water-tested gas piping shall be condemned
as faulty. In no case shall oxygen ever by used to test gas piping. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-36: DUTIES OF THE GAS COMPANY:
A. It shall be unlawful for the Gas Company to turn gas into any new or altered or repaired system of
gas piping until a certificate of inspection has been provided, but when the Building Inspector has
certified to the inspection herein provided, no further inspection by the Gas Company shall be
required; however, the Gas Company may elect to perform shut-in tests.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 64/336
B. Before turning gas under pressure into any piping, the person turning on the gas shall assure
himself that there are no openings from which the gas can escape.
C. Before leaving the premises, all air must be purged from piping and appliances.
D. Every person learning of a leak or defect in any gas piping or appliance shall forthwith report all
facts in connection therewith by phone to the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall
thereupon inspect all gas equipment at location named in such report, and if he finds leaks or
defects, he may order the Gas Company to turn off the gas, and it shall be unlawful thereafter for
the Gas Company to turn the gas on again until the Building Inspector has certified that such leak
or defect has been repaired or removed. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-37: DEFINITION OF TERMS:
When used in this Chapter, these terms shall have the following meaning:
APPLIANCE: A gas appliance which utilizes gas fuel to produce light, heat or power.
AUTOMATICALLY CONTROLLED: Appliances equipped with an automatic device which:
A. Accomplishes complete turn-on or shut-off gas to the main burner or burners or
B.Graduates the gas supply to the burner or burners, but does not effect complete shut-off of the
gas.
BTU: The abbreviation for British Thermal Unit. The quantity of heat required to raise the temperature
of one pound of water one degree Fahrenheit.
CENTRAL HEATING APPLIANCE: A gas appliance normally used as the primary means of heating
premises, including gas boilers, warm-air furnaces, and floor furnaces, but not unit heaters, space
heaters, or industrial boilers.
DIVERSITY FACTOR: The ratio of the maximum probable demand to the maximum possible demand.
DRAFT HOOD: A device placed in and made a part of the flue pipe or the appliance itself, which is
designed to:
A. Insure the ready escape of the products of combustion in the event of no draft, back draft or
stoppage beyond the draft hood;
B. Prevent a back draft from entering the appliance and
C. Neutralize the effect of stack action or draft of the chimney flue upon the operation of the
appliances.
FLEXIBLE TUBING: A gas conduit which depends for tightness on joint packing or on any wall
structure other than that formed by a continuous one piece metallic tubing member.
FLUE: The general term for the passages and conduits through which flue gases pass from the
combustion chamber to the outer air.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 65/336
GAS UNDER PRESSURE: Gas in piping or appliance which is under pressure imparted from the
source of the gas supply.
HEATING VALUE TOTAL: The number of British Thermal Units produced by the combustion, at
constant pressure, of one cubic foot of gas when the products of combustion are cooled to the initial
temperature of the gas and air, when the water vapor formed during combustion is condensed, and
when all the necessary corrections have been applied.
HOUSE PIPING: The gas piping beyond the outlet of the meter and extending to the appliance or the
appliance connector.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS: A liquid containing certain combination of hydrocarbons consisting of
butane, propane and mixtures thereof which may be liquefied at atmospheric temperatures without
excessive pressure and will completely vaporize upon release at atmospheric pressure.
LISTED APPLIANCES AND ACCESSORIES: The word "listed" used in connection with appliances
and accessories throughout this Chapter refers to appliances and accessories which are shown in a
list published by an approved nationally recognized testing agency (The American Gas Association,
Inc., Laboratories and Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., are such nation-ally recognized testing
agencies), qualified and equipped for experimental testing, and maintaining an adequate periodic
inspection of current production of listed models and whose listing states either that the appliance or
accessory complies with nationally recognized safety requirements or has been tested and found safe
for use in a specified manner.
METER: The instrument installed to measure the volume of gas delivered through it.
PILOT: A small flame which is utilized to ignite the gas at the main burner or burners.
PROTECTIVE COATING: Iron and steel pipe which has been thoroughly cleaned, primed, painted
with asphalt or coal tar, and wrapped with asbestos or coal tar, shall be considered pipe with
protective coating.
REGULATOR: A device for controlling and maintaining a uniform gas supply pressure.
RIGID CONNECTION: Any wrought iron or steel pipe and/or fitting which complies with the American
Standards Association standard B36.10-1950, or its latest revision, used to connect gas burning
equipment.
SEMI-RIGID A gas conduit having semi-flexible metallic wall TUBING: structure.
SERVICE PIPE: The pipe which brings the gas from the gas main to the meter.
WET GAS: Raw, casinghead gas, residue gas or any gas not conforming to standards of the
distribution of gas or gas not suitable for use in the gas distributor's equipment for maintaining uniform
pressure, desired heating content, or proper ordorization.
In addition to the provisions of this Chapter, the regulations of the State of Idaho General Order No. 98
and the provisions of the National Board of Fire Underwriters are to be fulfilled in any gas installation.
Such regulations and provisions take precedence over the provisions of this Chapter in the event of
conflict. (Ord. 372, 1-7-1957)
4-5-38: VIOLATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 66/336
Any person who violates, causes or permits any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed guilty of an offense and subject to the punishment as prescribed in this Code. Each such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during which any violation of any
provision of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable
therefor as provided herein.
A. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or
construed to be a permit for or an approval of any violation of any provision of this Chapter. No
permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Chapter shall be valid,
except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful.
B. The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the Building Inspector
from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specification or from preventing
construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this Chapter or of any
other provision of this Code.
C. Every permit issued by the Building Inspector under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within
sixty (60) days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended
or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such
work can be recommenced a new permit shall be first obtained to do so.
D. Exception: When work has to be suspended on account of abnormal weather conditions, acute
shortage of labor and/or materials, strikes or public emergency beyond the control of the permittee,
the Building Inspector may grant such an extension of time as he deems necessary. Any request
for an extension of time must be made in writing by the permittee and filed office of the Building
Inspector. (Ord. 372; 1-7-1957)
Chapter 6
UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
4-6-1: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM HOUSING CODE:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction,
alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings
and structures, that certain Housing Code known as the Uniform Housing Code, copyrighted by the
International Conference of Building Officials, being particularly the 1964 Edition thereof, of which not
less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Clerk, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall
be controlling in the construction of all buildings and other structures. (1970 Code)
Chapter 7
AWNINGS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 67/336
4-7-1: HEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, have, keep, maintain or place an awning on buildings
and structures abutting on the streets in any manner so that any part of such awning attached to said
building and structure shall be less than seven feet (7') above the top surface of the sidewalk. (Ord.
360, 7-18-1955)
Chapter 8
BILLBOARDS
4-8-1: BILLBOARDS TO BE KEPT ORDERLY:
All persons engaged in the business or occupation of bill posting, bill distributing, sign tacking, sign,
wall or bulletin painting, shall keep all billboards, sign or bulletin boards or outdoor advertising
contrivances or devices, free and clean of loose paper or other rubbish and not suffer or permit any
paper or any other material from any such billboard, sign or bulletin board or outdoor advertising
contrivance or device to become scattered, blown or deposited in or about any street or alley or other
public place. (3-605; 1947 Code)
4-8-2: THROWING ADVERTISING PROHIBITED:
The throwing of any form of advertising matter, such as dodgers, handbills, circulars, samples or like
matter on any lawn or parking is strictly prohibited. All such advertising matter must be placed inside
the screen or immediately under the door, or in the jamb of the door or in a receptacle provided for the
receipt of such advertising matter. (3-606; 1947 Code)
4-8-3: NONCOMPLYING BILLBOARDS:
If the inspecting officer shall find that any billboard, sign or bulletin board or other structure for
advertising now or hereafter erected is erected or maintained in an unsafe, unsecured or
unsatisfactory manner, he may order the same repaired and if not so repaired within ten (10) days
from the date of said order he must report such facts to the Council who shall, if it finds the report of
the inspecting officer correct, order the permit of the person owning or operating such unsafe,
unsecure or unsatisfactory or unsightly billboard, sign or bulletin board or other contrivance for
advertising purposes revoked. All such billboards, signs or bulletin boards or other contrivances for
outdoor advertising purposes, must have placed and maintained on the top of each, the name of the
person owning same, or who is in possession or control thereof. (3-607; 1947 Code)
4-8-4: ADVERTISING SIGNS:
No sign, tags, sheet display or bulletin painting shall be placed on any walls, fences, roofs or buildings
or other structures other than billboards, sign or bulletin boards constructed and erected according to
the provisions of Section 4-8-5 of this Chapter, provided that nothing in this Chapter shall be construed
to apply to the posting of regular notices by public officers, nor the right of any newspaper of regular
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 68/336
issue to distribute its papers throughout the City, nor to any merchant advertising his own business by
the distribution of circulars, nor the placing as required by law of wood, lettered, painted, metal or
electric signs over, upon or in front of business buildings, offices, houses, etc., for advertising the
name or business of any person occupying same, or the goods sold therein or the signs of real estate
firms, advertising the property on which said signs are located for sale or rent. (3-608; 1947 Code)
4-8-5: BILLBOARDS; SPECIFICATIONS:
All billboards, signs or bulletin boards shall not exceed eleven feet (11') in height, clear posting
painting or display surface, and shall be constructed in a good substantial and workmanlike manner,
and kept and maintained in a safe and secure condition at all times. All billboards, sign or bulletin
boards hereafter erected shall be constructed of galvanized iron or some other equally
noncombustible material, except that the stringers, uprights and braces may be of Oregon fir or some
other equally strong or durable material, and all such billboards, signs or bulletin boards shall be
wholly within the property lines. No billboard, sign or bulletin board shall hereafter be placed, affixed to
nor upon the roof of any building except such as are constructed of well braced iron or steel and
properly equipped with electric lights in a manner directed by the Building Inspector or some other
designated person. (3-604; 1947 Code)
Chapter 9
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES; REGULATIONS
4-9-1: DUST CONTROL:
Every person, engaged in the construction of buildings and other improvements shall use such means
and methods, as may be necessary, so as to lay any dust and prevent the same from arising from
such premises.
A violation of Section 4-9-1 shall be and constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
provided by Section 1-4-6 of the City Code. (Ord. 518, 7-19-1979)
Chapter 10
FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS
4-10-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state has in title 50, chapter 3 and title 67, chapter 65, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 592, 10-3-1994)
4-10-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 69/336
A. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and government services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood
hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage
uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from
flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 592, 10-3-1994)
4-10-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at
the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone
and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of
special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their
actions. (Ord. 592, 10-3-1994)
4-10-4: METHOD OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 70/336
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, streams, channels and natural protective barriers,
which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters
or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 592, 10-3-1994)
4-10-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable
application.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year, which are designated on maps as Zone
A or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equalled or exceeded in any
given year.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
FLOOD or FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map issued by the Federal Insurance
Administration where the areas of special flood hazard have been designated Zone A or V.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking vehicles, building access or storage, in an area
other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure
is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this Chapter found at subsection 4-10-8B1.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure that is transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 71/336
not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building or mobile home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either before the
improvement or repair is started or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not
the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary
or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
B. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places. (Ord. 592, 10-3-1994)
4-10-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands Affected: This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction
of the City.
B. Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard identified
by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Gooding", dated December 14, 1984, with accompanying flood
insurance maps is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. The
flood insurance study is now on file at City Hall, 308 5th Avenue West, Gooding, Idaho.
C. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter and another
ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
D. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit or repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
E. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 72/336
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made
or natural causes. This Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood dam-ages. This Chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord 592, 10-3-1994)
4-10-7: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Development Permit:
1. Permit Required: A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection 4-10-6B. The permit
shall be for all structures, including manufactured homes, as set forth in Section 4-10-5 of this
Chapter and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in Section 4-
10-5 of this Chapter.
2. Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Building Inspector and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and evaluations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, fill storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the
foregoing. Specifically, the flooding information required is:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods
for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 4-10-882; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
B. Designation Of Administrator: The Building Inspector is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this Chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with
its provisions.
C. Duties And Responsibilities Of Administrator: Duties of the Building Inspector shall include, but not
be limited to:
1. Permit Review:
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this Chapter
have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained
from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is
required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 73/336
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the
floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of subsection 4-
10-8C1 are met.
(1) If it is determined that there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted
consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) If it is determined that there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation measures
shall be made a condition of the permit.
2. Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood evaluation data has not been provided in
accordance with subsection 4-10-6B "Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard",
the Building Inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood evaluation and
floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer subsection
4-10-8B, "Specific Standards" and subsection 4-10-8C, "Floodways".
3. Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
a. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study or required as
in subsection 4-10-7C2 herein, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure
has been floodproofed;
(2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection 4-10-7Alc.
c. Maintain for public inspection, all records pertaining to the provisions of this Chapter.
4. Alteration Of Watercourses:
a. Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Resources prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
5. Interpretation Of FHBM Boundaries: Make interpretations where needed as to the exact location
of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be
a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field condition). Such appeal shall be granted
to the person contesting and shall be consistent with standards as outlined in section 60.6 of
"Rules and Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program - 44 - C.F.R. 59-76". (Ord. 592,
10-3-1994)
4-10-8: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
1. Anchoring:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 74/336
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
b. All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors.
2. Construction Materials And Methods:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
3. Utilities:
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system;
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters;
and
c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
4. Subdivision Proposals:
a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and all
of such proposals shall conform to the provisions of Section 12-6-4 "Flood Plains" of the
Gooding City Code.
b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
d. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
5. Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available, either through the Flood
Insurance Study or from another authoritative source (subsection 4-10-7C2), applications for
building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe
from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data,
high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least
two feet (2') above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 75/336
B. Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in subsection 4-10-6B, "Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood
Hazard" or subsection 4-10-7C2, "Use Of Other Base Flood Data", the following provisions are
required:
1. Residential Construction:
a. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
b. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for
the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
(3) Opening may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with an attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
a. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of
this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design,
specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection 4-10-7C2 of this chapter.
d. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards
for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection B1b of this section.
e. Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance
premiums will be based on rates that are one foot (1') below the floodproofed level (e.g., a
building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as 1 foot below that level).
3. Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes shall be placed or substantially improved within
zones A1-30, AH, and AE and shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of
subsection A1b of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 76/336
C. Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 4-10-6B of this
chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the
following provisions apply:
1. Prohibit encroachment, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating the encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. If subsection C1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. (Ord. 592, 10-3-
1994)
4-10-9: CRAWL SPACES:
The city of Gooding hereby adopts "Technical Bulletin 11-01" of the national flood insurance program
interim guidance setting forth the technical construction requirements for crawl spaces located in
special flood hazard areas. A copy of "Technical Bulletin 11-01" is attached to the ordinance codified
herein, and by this reference made a part hereof as if set forth in full, including adopting the provisions
that allow for, and set forth the requirements necessary to construct, below grade crawl space
foundations. Copies of the technical bulletin shall be available upon request at the city clerk's office.
(Ord. 655, 3-5-2007)
Chapter 11
FENCES
4-11-1: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to construct a fence in the City of Gooding except as allowed by this chapter. (Ord.
703, 4-3-2017)
4-11-2: DEFINITION:
The word "fence" shall include fences, hedges, walls, berms, or any other structures designed to
separate or isolate an open area or building. (Ord. 703, 4-3-2017)
4-11-3: CONSTRUCTION:
A. No fence shall be constructed which would interfere with the free movement of vehicles or
pedestrian traffic along public ways.
B. Fences shall not be constructed of discarded plastic material, fiber glass panels, wood paneling,
pallets, wood or metal panels, barbed wire, electric fence wire, rayon wire, concertina wire, or any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 77/336
single wire or any hazardous or dangerous material. (Ord. 703, 4-3-2017)
4-11-4: RESIDENTIAL FENCING:
Fences in a residential district adjacent to a front yard shall not exceed four feet (4') in height. Fences
in residential districts not adjacent to a front yard shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. For purposes
of this section, corner lots of two (2) intersecting streets shall be deemed as front yards. (Ord. 703, 4-
3-2017)
4-11-5: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL FENCING:
Unless otherwise provided fences located within the property boundaries of commercial or industrial
districts shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. In the case of security fences, when a barbed wire top
is utilized, the six foot (6') maximum height limitation may be exceeded by up to thirty inches (30") only
by the barbed wire security top section. In no instance shall barbed wire be used below the height of
six feet (6'). Fences adjacent to residential areas must be sight obscuring and shall not be allowed the
use of barbed wire security top. Property which is zoned as commercial or industrial, but is currently
being used for residential purposes, shall adhere to the fencing restrictions as outlined in subsection
4-11-3B and section 4-11-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 703, 4-3-2017)
4-11-6: SIDEWALKS; VISIBILITY:
In addition to adhering to other requirements of this chapter, no fence shall:
A. Cross a public sidewalk;
B. Interfere with motor vehicle operator's visibility along a street, intersection, or private drive, public
roadway, or create a blind spot. (Ord. 703, 4-3-2017)
4-11-7: MAINTENANCE; PERMIT:
A. All fences permitted by this chapter shall be kept in good order and repair and shall not be allowed
to become rundown or in such a state of disrepair as to constitute a private or public nuisance. No
fence shall be built until a permit is first obtained from the City Clerk or his/her designee.
B. All fences permitted by this chapter shall be kept free of weeds and grass exceeding eight inches
(8") in height. (Ord. 703, 4-3-2017)
4-11-8: WATER METER ACCESS:
In the event a fence interferes with direct and unrestricted access to a water meter, the landowner, at
the landowner's expense, shall provide a "man" gate. In an instance that "man" gate is provided it
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 78/336
shall be clearly marked indicating the presence of animals. In addition, no fence shall be built within
forty inches (40") of a fire hydrant. (Ord. 703, 4-3-2017)
4-11-9: VIOLATIONS:
Any fence which is constructed in such a manner as to be in violation of this chapter, or any fence
which is allowed to become in violation after construction, shall be subject to removal in accordance
with the following terms:
A. Any fence which is being constructed in such a manner so that, upon completion, the fence would
violate this chapter, shall be subject to injunctive action and immediate removal by the City.
B. Any fence which is constructed in violation of this chapter is a nuisance per se and if after ten (10)
working days' notice sent registered mail return receipt to either the landowner, a tenant, or
occupant of the premises, the violation has not been eliminated or the fence removed, shall be
subject to immediate removal by the City.
C. Any fence which shall fall into a state of disrepair so as to constitute a public or private nuisance
and, if ten (10) days after notice has been mailed to the landowner, a tenant, or occupant of the
premises, the violation has not been eliminated or the fence removed, shall be subject to repair or
removal by the City.
D. Any fence which has been constructed in such a manner so that it obstructs the ability of a driver at
an intersection or roadway shall be subject to immediate removal, without notice of any kind. (Ord.
703, 4-3-2017)
4-11-10: ENFORCEMENT COST:
Should it be necessary to enforce any provision of this chapter all costs shall be borne by the property
owner, tenant, or occupant, joint and severally. Costs shall include costs of notice, removal, repair,
cleaning, court costs, and attorney's fees. The costs and expenses shall then be assessed against
property with the owner of the property responsible therefor. (Ord. 703, 4-3-2017)
Title 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
AUCTION SALES
5-1-1: SALES UNLAWFUL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 79/336
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public auction or cause or
permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction any gold, silver or plated wear,
precious stones or semi-precious stones, watches, clocks or other jewelry, whether the same shall be
their own property or whether they shall sell the same as agents or employees of others. (2-501; 1947
Code)
5-1-2: PERMIT:
The inhibitions contained in this Chapter shall not apply to sales made at public auction of the stock on
hand of any person that shall for the period of one year next preceding such sale have been
continually in business in the City as a retail or wholesale merchant of gold, silver, plated wear,
precious stones, semi-precious stones, watches, clocks or other jewelry; provided that before any
auction sales may be conducted under the exceptions contained in this Section, such person desiring
to conduct the same must first obtain a permit from the City, which permit shall be applied for and
issued in the following manner: Said applicant shall not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30)
days previous to conducting such sale make a written application therefor under oath to the Council
specifying the name and address of the applicant, the location and purpose of the sale and its
expected duration, and itemizing in detail the quality, quantity or grade of each item of goods, wares
and articles desired to be sold, the wholesale market value thereof and the name of the auctioneer
who shall conduct the sale; such application shall then be investigated by the Chief of Police or such
officials as may be designated by the Council and a report made thereon by such officials to the
Council as to the character of the applicant and the auctioneer, as well as the bona fide nature of the
proposed sale, and whether the place where it is proposed to carry on such sale is a proper place.
The Council must be furnished also with satisfactory evidence that the jewelry proposed to be sold is
in fact a part of the applicant's stock in trade, and not secured, purchased or brought into said place of
business for or in anticipation of said sale. In the event such application be granted the auction sales
shall be held on successive days, Sundays and holidays excepted, and shall not continue for more
than thirty (30) days from the commencement of the sale and shall be permitted only in cases where
applicant is in fact and in good faith disposing of his stock for the purpose of retiring from business
and such auction sales shall be conducted during the daytime only and between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (Ord. 330; 9-17-1951)
5-1-3: "CAPPERS" PROHIBITED:
At such sales no person shall act as bidder or by-bidder, or what is commonly known as a "capper",
"Booster" or "shiller" or offer or make any false bid, or offer any false bid or buy or pretend to buy any
article sold or offered for sale at such auctions. No such auction sales shall be licensed or permitted
except that they be at the regularly established place of business where the applicant has heretofore
been conducting his business. (2-503; 1947 Code)
5-1-4: INVENTORY:
During any such sale by auction, no additions whatsoever shall be made to the stock of merchandise
set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license, and nothing shall be offered for sale or
sold at any such sale by auction which is in addition to the stock of merchandise described in said
inventory, or which has been added to the applicant's stock within a period of forty (40) days prior to
the date the applicant files application for license. (Ord. 330; 9-17-1951)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 80/336
5-1-5: SALES LIMITED:
No license shall be granted for any such sale by auction if it appears that the applicant or any agent or
affiliate or assignee of other person for him, has within the period of two (2) years prior to the
application conducted a similar sale by auction, either in the same place of business or at any other
place. Provided, however, that this Chapter shall not apply to a duly licensed auctioneer who has a
regularly established place of business. (2-505; 1947 Code)
5-1-6: MISREPRESENTATIONS PROHIBITED:
At all such sales by auction the applicant and all persons participating in the conducting of said sale by
auction must truly and correctly represent at all times to the public attending said auction the actual
facts in respect to quality of the product being offered for sale. (2-506; 1947 Code)
5-1-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
The right shall be and at all times, remain vested in the Council to revoke or cancel the license of any
person licensed hereunder for any violation of this Chapter, at a regular or a special meeting, and
upon verified complaint filed with the Council, the Council shall cause such alleged offender to appear
before said Council, and be heard upon said complaint; copy of said complaint shall be served with
said notice, and the day and hour of the hearing which shall be at least two (2) days hence, shall be
specified in such notice, and such hearing shall be had in the Clerk's office, unless a different place be
specified in such notice; and if at said hearing, upon the taking of evidence on behalf of the City and
such alleged offender, it shall appear to said Council that cause exists for the cancellation or
revocation of such license, the same may be cancelled or revoked without further process of law. (2-
507; 1947 Code)
5-1-8: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee for conducting such auction sales shall be the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day,
which license fee must be paid in cash in advance. (2-508; 1947 Code)
Chapter 2
BEER
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms shall be construed to have the meaning herein
given:
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley,
malt, and/or other ingredients in drinkable water of not more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by
weight.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 81/336
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the consumer. (1970 Code)
5-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of beer without first obtaining a proper license. (1970
Code)
5-2-3: APPLICATION:
Application for a retail beer license shall be made under oath to the Clerk and the application shall
show that the applicant possesses all of the qualifications required by this Code. Each application
shall be forwarded, after proper and adequate investigation by the Chief of Police, to the Council for
approval or disapproval. (1970 Code)
5-2-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who:
A. Is not the bona fide owner of such business, or is not a citizen of the United States, or has not been
a bona fide resident of the State of Idaho for a period of one year prior to the date of application;
provided, that if the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens, and at least one
thereof, or the actual manager therefor, shall have been such resident, and if the applicant is a
corporation, such corporation shall be qualified to do business in the State of Idaho, and the
manager of such business place shall be such citizen and shall have been such resident;
B. Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer or employee or spouse of which has, been
convicted of the violation of any laws of the State of Idaho, or of the United States regulating,
governing or prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor, or has within two (2)
years forfeited or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for his appearance to answer charges of any
such violation;
C. Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer of which has, been convicted of any felony within
five (5) years or has paid any fine or completed any sentence of confinement therefor within five
(5) years;
D. A retailer licensee must continue throughout the license period to have all of the foregoing
qualifications and none of the foregoing disqualifications, and for failure therein, upon proof thereof
to an issuer of a license, such issuer shall revoke the license issued, and in writing, sent by United
States registered mail, notify each of the other issuers of a retailer's license to such licensee,
stating sufficient facts for identification of the licensee, and the grounds and date of revocation.
(1970 Code)
5-2-5: FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 82/336
The fee for the sale of beer shall be as follows:
A. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the sale of bottled or canned beer, none of which is consumed on
the premises.
B. One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the sale of draught beer and bottled or canned beer or draught
beer only which is consumed on the premises. (Ord. 543, 12-19-1983)
5-2-6: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. of any day. (1970 Code)
5-2-7: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer beer or intoxicating liquor to any person under the age of
nineteen (19) years and it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of nineteen (19) years to
frequent, loiter in or about or patronize any beer dispensary and it shall likewise be unlawful for any
owner of such beer dispensary or his employees to permit any such person under the age of nineteen
(19) years to be in or to be employed in such dispensary. (Ord. 471, 9-16-1974)
5-2-8: REVOCATION:
The governing body shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any license for just cause.
When any license is revoked, the licensee shall have the privilege of appearing before the governing
body to appeal such revocation. Any conduct or act on the part of the licensee which may be sufficient
cause for revocation of the license must be brought to the attention of the governing body. (1970
Code)
5-2-9: TRANSFER OF BEER LICENSES:
No license transferred by process of law or otherwise shall authorize the transferee, including any
executor, administrator or trustee in bankruptcy of the estate of the licensee, to retail beer thereunder
until the transferee shall have filed under oath applications therefor containing substantially the same
information required of an applicant for a license, and if the transferee possesses the qualifications
and none of the disqualifications for a license as herein provided, the City shall approve such transfer
and amend the licenses so to show. Such transferee shall accompany each such application for
transfer with and shall pay, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 601, 11-20-1995)
5-2-10: LICENSE; FEE; PERIOD:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 83/336
A. All licenses shall be granted by the Mayor and Council for a period of one year beginning January 1
and ending December 31. A full year's license fee shall be collected after January 1. The City
Council shall grant or deny the application within thirty (30) days of the time it is filed with the City
Clerk. Prior to any revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing according to
section 23-1016, Idaho Code. Whenever the Mayor and City Council denies an application, they
shall specify in writing:
1. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reason for the denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal
thereof.
B. In all cases where the City Council is considering applications for licenses, transfers or renewals
thereof, a transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be made. If the applicant for a
license, transfer or renewal is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be
kept for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on the matter. Upon written
request and within the time period provided for retention of the record, any person may have the
record transcribed at his expense. The City Council shall also provide for the keeping of the
minutes of the proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 543, 12-19-1983)
5-2-11: LICENSE; INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS:
No license shall be granted hereunder until there has been an investigation by the Police Department
of all applications submitted hereunder. After an investigation, the applications will be forwarded to the
City Council with a recommendation from the Chief of Police. If the Chief of Police recommends that
the application be denied, he shall state in writing:
A. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
B. The reason for denial; and
C. The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof.
(Ord. 543, 12-19-1983)
Chapter 3
COAL DEALERS
5-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling coal or coke within the
corporate limits of the City without first having applied for and obtained a license to do so. (2-201;
1947 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 84/336
5-3-2: DEALER DEFINED:
Any person having secured such a license shall be known as a coal and coke dealer. (2-602; 1947
Code)
5-3-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for a dealers' license shall state the full name of the person seeking to secure such
license, shall state the location of the place where business is to be conducted under the license
applied for. No application shall be accepted unless the applicant shall first show, to the satisfaction of
the Council, a full compliance with all State and Federal laws applicable to the business for which the
license is requested. Any dealer so licensed shall be required to maintain a yard or place of business
equipped with an office, a business telephone, scales of at least ten (10) tons capacity, and building,
bins or yard facilities providing storage for not less than fifty (50) tons of coal or coke. Each dealer
shall have at his yard or office, during business hours, at least one attendant. (2-603; 1947 Code)
5-3-4: TERM OF LICENSE:
A. Each dealer's license issued hereunder shall entitle the licensee to engage in the business licensed
until December 31 of the year of its issuance. There shall be no deductions in the fee collected for
a part of the year. For each dealer's license the sum of twelve dollars ($12.00) per annum shall be
paid, which shall entitle such dealer to operate one office, one yard, one scale and appurtenant
equipment necessary to the operation of such business.
B. No license granted under the terms hereof shall be renewed at the expiration date thereof, but for
every license issued an application as hereinbefore prescribed shall be executed; no license may
be transferred from one licensee to another except with the approval of the Council.
C. Anyone not licensed under the provisions of this Chapter engaged in the hauling of coal or coke
intended for sale as fuel shall be permitted to sell and deliver such coal and coke only to the yard
or to the bins of a dealer licensed under the provisions of this Chapter. (2-604; 1947 Code)
Chapter 4
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS
5-4-1: PEDDLING OR SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
The practice of going in or upon private residences, business establishments, public buildings or
offices in the City by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of
merchandise, books, pictures, periodicals, or anything whatsoever, not having been requested or
invited so to do by the owner, manager or occupant of said private residence, business establishment,
public building or office, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise
or anything whatsoever, or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking same, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as a misdemeanor. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 85/336
5-4-2: EXCEPTIONS:
Any authorized representative of an established business firm who sells wholesale direct to the dealer
for resale by such dealer is excluded from the provisions of this Chapter. (1970 Code)
Chapter 5
LICENSES
5-5-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this Code shall be made in writing to the Clerk,
unless otherwise specifically provided by law. Each application shall state the name of the applicant,
the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid;
and each application shall contain such additional information as may be required by the issuing
official. (1970 Code)
5-5-2: PERSON SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any
business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person
or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or
partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage
therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or
occupation in the City. (1970 Code)
5-5-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits and applications therefor shall be prepared and kept on file by the
Clerk. (1970 Code)
5-5-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued, in the absence of any provision to the contrary, shall bear the
signatures of the Mayor and the Clerk. (1970 Code)
5-5-5: INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where laws of the City necessitate an
inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit or license, the Clerk shall refer such
application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make
a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 86/336
thereof. The Health Officer shall make or cause to be made on inspection in regard to such licenses in
the connection of the care and handling of food and the preventing of nuisances and the spread of
disease. For the protection of health, the Building Inspector shall make or cause to be made any such
inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations, except
where otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other officer designated by
the Mayor. (1970 Code)
5-5-6: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
A. All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year of the City where no provision to
the contrary is made.
B. The Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the City a statement of the time of expiration of the license
held by the licensee, if an annual, three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided,
that failure to send out such notice or failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the
licensee from failure to obtain a new license or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an
action for operation without a license. (1970 Code)
5-5-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall be issued for any thing
or act if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the
requirements of the City. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
performance of any act which would involve a violation of the Zoning Code of the City. (1970 Code)
5-5-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation or
of any permitted act, may be changed provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the Clerk; and
provided, the building, zoning and frontage consent requirements of this Code are complied with.
(1970 Code)
5-5-9: FRONTAGE CONSENTS:
A. Whenever the consent of the adjoining or neighboring owners is required as a prerequisite to the
conduct of any business or occupation, or the location of any establishment, such consent must be
obtained by securing the necessary signatures to a written consent petition. When signed, such
petition shall be filed with the Clerk.
B. Consents once given and filed shall not be withdrawn; and such petitions need not be renewed for
the continuous conduct of the same business, whether by the same proprietor or not.
C. It shall be unlawful to forge any name to such a petition or to represent falsely that the names
thereon have been properly placed thereon if such is not the fact.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 87/336
D. Each consent when filed shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the person securing the
signatures that each signature appearing thereon was properly secured and written on; and that
the petition contains the necessary number of signatures required by this Chapter.
E. The frontage consent requirements contained in this Chapter shall not be construed to amend or
change any zoning ordinance provision of the City; and no such provision shall be construed as
permitting the erection of a structure or building, or the conduct of a business or the commission of
any act in any location where such structure, building, business or act is prohibited by any zoning
ordinance of the City. (1970 Code)
5-5-10: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact1.
(1970 Code)
5-5-11: INSPECTIONS:
A. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed
business or occupation are provided for or required by this Code, or are reasonably necessary to
secure compliance with any Code provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose
of making the inspection any officer or employee of the City who is authorized or directed to make
such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
B. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure
conformance with any Code provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee of the City whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer
or employee of the City requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for
such analysis upon request.
C. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor may revoke the license of any
licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the City who refuses to permit any such officer or
employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection,
or take on adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee
while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection. Provided, that no license shall be
revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of
the premises, in the name of the City, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time
it sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. (1970 Code)
5-5-12: REVOCATION:
Any license or permit issued for a limited time may be revoked by the Mayor at any time during the life
of license or permit for any violation by the licensee or permittee of the Code provisions relating to the
license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the premises occupied; such
revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 88/336
5-5-13: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the City to keep his license posted
in a prominent place on the premises used for such business at all times. (1970 Code)
Chapter 6
LIQUOR
5-6-1: LICENSED LIQUOR SALE:
It shall be lawful to sell liquor by the drink as provided in title 23, chapter 9, Idaho Code, as amended,
provided a license shall first be obtained as provided in this Chapter and the rules and regulations and
provisions concerning the licensing and operation of a place of business for the sale of liquor are
adhered to as provided. (1970 Code)
5-6-2: APPLICATION:
A. Before there shall be any lawful sale of liquor by the drink an application by the proposed licensee
must be made for such license and filed with the Clerk in form and manner herein provided. Such
application shall provide for the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed business, and
such other information as may be prescribed and required by the governing body. At the time said
application is filed, the applicant shall also present a copy of an application for a State license and
also the license issued by the State for the sale of liquor by the drink at retail and no license will be
issued until a license is first obtained from the State of Idaho.
B. All applications filed with the Clerk shall be referred to the governing body for final approval. The
Clerk shall receive the license fee hereinafter provided at the time of filing of the application and
upon approval of the application by the governing body the license will be issued and delivered to
the applicant. (1970 Code)
5-6-3: REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for the sale of liquor by the drink to any person not qualified for a license
under title 23, chapter 9, Idaho Code, as amended, nor upon any premises in any neighborhood which
is predominately residential nor within three hundred feet (300') of any school, church or other place of
public worship. (1970 Code)
5-6-4: FEES:
The license fee required of an applicant for the sale of liquor by the drink shall be in the sum of three
hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) per calendar year or portion thereof payable in advance. The
first payment shall be made with said application for the balance of the calendar year in which the
license is issued. All licenses issued shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each calendar year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 89/336
Renewals may be granted upon application, if the record of the applicant is satisfactory to the Council
and in accordance with the provisions of the law and this Chapter and upon payment of three hundred
seventy five dollars ($375.00) for the ensuing year. Any operation under an expired license shall
constitute a violation of this Code for each day of operation. (1970 Code)
5-6-5: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
Any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be nontransferable and if the licensee
named in said license shall cease to personally supervise, conduct and operate said business
described in said license the same shall terminate, and no part of the fee paid shall be refunded. The
licensee may, however, with the consent of the Council, move from the place of business to some
other place which may meet the requirements of this Chapter; provided, application therefor be made
to the Council and permitted by it; and if such transfer of the place of business shall be made the fee
paid shall be operative with like effect as if no change had been made. (1970 Code)
5-6-6: LICENSES LIMITED:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be limited to not more than three (3)
according to the provisions and restrictions contained in section 23-903 Idaho Code; provided,
however, that any licenses now existing may be continuously renewed each year upon compliance
with all of the other provisions of this Chapter. (1970 Code)
5-6-7: REVOCATION AND HEARING:
If any licensee or employee of a liquor by the drink establishment violates any of the provisions of this
Chapter or is convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of chapter 9, Idaho Code, as amended,
the Council is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke the license issued to said licensee;
provided however, that in the event it is brought to the attention of the Council that a violation has
taken place, before revoking such license, the Council shall cause notice to be served upon the
licensee, setting forth in general terms the violation or violations claimed to have been committed and
such notice shall provide a time for hearing thereon by the Council which date of hearing shall not be
less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days from the date of the service of the provisions of this
Chapter or the provisions of the laws of the State of Idaho have been violated, shall revoke such
license theretofore issued and no refund of any unused portion of the license fee shall be made to the
licensee. A revocation by the Commissioner of Law Enforcement of the State of Idaho of any license
theretofore issued said licensee shall automatically revoke the license issued by the City and no
refund of any fee therefor paid shall be made. (1970 Code)
5-6-8: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
All peace officers appointed by the State of Idaho or the City or the County shall have free access at
all times to the licensed premises, and any information touching the manner and method of the
operation of said premises or the sale of said liquor may be submitted to the Council upon any
investigation made of said licensee. (1970 Code)
5-6-9: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 90/336
Every licensee must conform to all regulations and laws of the State of Idaho and the provisions of this
Chapter. Liquor by the drink shall not be sold by any person except one duly licensed. Full and
unobstructed view of the inside of the premises where said liquor by the drink is sold shall always be
maintained by said licensee and no obstructions whatever shall be placed upon the windows or the
doors that are located on said premises and no coloring shall be placed upon the glass in order that a
full view from the sidewalk or street may be had into the interior of said premises. All premises shall be
adequately lighted and subject to periodic sanitary inspection. No gambling of any kind or character
shall be operated upon said premises and no gambling devices shall be maintained thereon. (1970
Code)
5-6-10: SALE TO MINOR PROHIBITED:
No sale of liquor shall be made to any minor nor to any intoxicated person who may engage in
disorderly or improper conduct and no disorderly or improper entertainment shall be permitted upon
said premises and any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be considered and shall likewise
be grounds for the cancellation of the license. (1970 Code)
Chapter 7
TAXIS
5-7-1: "TAXICAB DEFINED:
As used in this Chapter the term "taxicab" shall include and apply to all motor propelled vehicles
transporting passengers for hire. (2-401; 1947 Code)
5-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, run or manage a taxicab without first applying for and
procuring a license so to do from the Clerk which license can only be issued in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. (2-402; 1947 Code)
5-7-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for taxicab licenses must be made in writing to the Clerk, shall be made in such
manner and form as may be prescribed by such Clerk, and shall contain, among other things: 1) name
and address of applicant; 2) if a corporation, the principal place of business of such corporation, the
amount of its capital stock and the names and addresses of its president and secretary; 3) make,
model, title number, owner, seating capacity, color, identifying marks and current license number of
vehicle proposed to be used; 4) three (3) character and business references; and 5) showing that
applicant has complied with all pertinent State laws. (2-403; 1947 Code)
5-7-4: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 91/336
No license shall be issued or renewed by the Clerk, and it shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab in the
City until the applicant shall have deposited with the Clerk, which the Clerk shall retain during the
continuance of such license, policy or policies of insurance regularly issued by some standard
insurance company authorized to do business in Idaho, approved as to sufficiency by said Clerk and
as to legality by the City Attorney, providing indemnity for or protection to the insured against loss in
the amounts provided in the succeeding Section, and agreeing to pay within the limits of the
respective amounts fixed in this Chapter to any judgment creditor who shall have filed his suit or filed
notice of a claim for such loss with said Clerk within six (6) months of the date of such injury and final
judgment rendered against the insured by reason of the liability of the insured to pay damages to
others for bodily injuries, including death at any time resulting therefrom, and for damages to or
destruction of property sustained during the term of said policies by any person other than employees
of insured, and resulting from negligent operation, maintenance or use of such licensed vehicle. All
such policies shall be valid and effective for no less a period than that for which the license is issued.
(2-404; 1947 Code)
5-7-5: EXTENT OF LIABILITY:
The extent of the liability of the insurer shall be as to any one licensed vehicle the sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) on account of injuries to or death of any one person in any one accident;
and subject to such limit as respects injury to, or death of, one person, ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) on account of any one accident resulting in injury to or death of more than one person;
and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on account of damage to property in any one accident. (2-405;
1947 Code)
5-7-6: TERM OF LICENSE; CARD:
All licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of
the year in which issued, and the same shall be evidenced by cards bearing the signature and
address of the Clerk and showing, among other things, name and address of licensee, current license
and title certificate numbers of vehicle, model and make of vehicle, and date of issue. All licensees
shall constantly carry such license cards on their persons and shall exhibit the same to any City official
upon demand. License cards shall not be transferable. (2-406; 1947 Code)
5-7-7: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for each year or fraction thereof shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) for each vehicle,
which must be paid in cash in advance to the Clerk before the license may be issued or renewed. (2-
407; 1947 Code)
5-7-8: OPERATOR'S LICENSE; TERM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab unless he shall have in his
possession an operator's license. Operator's license will be issued or renewed to individuals by said
Clerk upon the payment of one dollar ($1.00) and upon proper showing as to the good character and
physical fitness of the applicant. All such licenses shall expire at midnight of December 31 following
their issuance, and shall not be transferable. (2-408; 1947 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 92/336
5-7-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The right shall be and at all times remain vested in the Council to revoke, cancel or suspend any
vehicle or operator's license issued under the provisions of this Chapter for any violation of this or any
other section of this Code or if such licensee is guilty of any immoral or illegal conduct, or indulges in
practices dangerous to public safety, but only upon verified complaint filed with the Clerk and hearing
duly had thereon by the Mayor and Council. Such licensee must be served with a copy of such
complaint and be given at least five (5) days written notice of such hearing. Such hearing will be had
in the City offices, unless a different place be specified in the notice, and each party may present
competent, sworn evidence. If at such hearing good cause appears, the Mayor and Council may
revoke, cancel or suspend the license of the offender. (2-409; 1947 Code)
Chapter 8
THEATERS
5-8-1: SUNDAY OPENING PERMITTED; LIMITATIONS:
Pursuant to the prayer of petition of a number of the qualified electors equal to more than a majority of
the votes cast at the last general election, it is hereby ordered that theaters and moving picture shows
shall be and are hereby permitted to keep open during the hours from two o'clock (2:00) P.M. to twelve
o'clock (12:00) P.M. on Sunday. (2-901; 1947 Code)
Chapter 9
TRAILER COURTS AND TRAILER COACHES
5-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this Section:
DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: One which does not have a water closet and bathtub or shower.
INDEPENDENT COACH: One that has a water closet and a bathtub or TRAILER shower.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing communal toilet, laundry and other sanitary facilities
necessary for the health and convenience of the trailer occupants.
TRAILER COACH: A vehicle without means of self-propulsion, but licensable as a conveyance on
public streets or highways, and which is constructed to permit occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping
place for one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH SPACE: A plot of ground within a trailer court designated for the accommodation of
one trailer coach.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 93/336
TRAILER COURT: Any plot of ground upon which there is space provided for at least fifteen (15)
trailers which has been duly licensed for such purpose. (1970 Code)
5-9-2: APPLICATION; TRAILER COURT:
Applications for a trailer court license shall be filed with and issued by the Clerk. Application shall be in
writing signed by the applicant and shall contain the following:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The location and legal description of the trailer court.
C. Such further information as may requested by the Council to enable it to determine if the proposed
location will comply with legal requirements, including a sketch or plot plan designating numbered
trailer spaces.
D. No change or alteration in the plot plan shall be made without first making a written application for
such change or alteration to the Council and receiving a written permit therefrom.
E. The Council shall investigate the location and if it is found to be in compliance with all provisions of
this Chapter and all other applicable provisions or Statutes, application may be approved. (1970
Code)
5-9-3: TRAILER COURT LICENSE:
Any person who maintains or operates a trailer court must first obtain a license from the Clerk which
license must be approved by the Council. The fee for such trailer court license shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per year or portion thereof. (1970 Code)
5-9-4: REGISTER:
It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of all trailer coaches
occupying space within the court. The register shall contain the following information:
A. Name and address of each occupant in each trailer court.
B. Make, model and year of all automobiles and trailer coaches.
C. License numbers and owner of each trailer coach and automobile by which it is towed.
D. The State issuing such license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 94/336
E. The date of arrival and departure of each trailer coach and the number or other identification of the
space or spaces occupied. The court shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by
law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate
acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register records shall not be destroyed
until after a period of three (3) years following the date of registration. (1970 Code)
5-9-5: DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
No domestic animal or house pet shall be allowed to run at large or commit any nuisances within the
limits of a trailer court. (1970 Code)
5-9-6: LICENSE TRANSFER:
All licenses issued hereunder for a trailer court and trailer coach shall be personal to the licensee and
be nontransferable without the written consent of the Council first being obtained. (1970 Code)
5-9-7: APPLICATION; TRAILER COACH:
Applications for a trailer coach license shall be filed with and issued by the Clerk and shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant and shall contain the following:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The location and description where the trailer coach is to be parked.
C. Such further information as may be requested by the Council.
5-9-8: TRAILER COACH LICENSE FEE:
A trailer coach license fee shall be charged each applicant. Such fee shall be three dollars ($3.00) and
shall be paid in advance to the Clerk. (1970 Code)
5-9-9: LOCATION OF TRAILER COACHES:
The use of trailer coaches as trailers or otherwise occupied by one or more persons except in on
approved public or private trailer court shall be considered as a public nuisance unless the yards
surrounding it agree with the requirements for a dwelling as established by the zoning provisions of
this Code. Any trailer coach which is not located in a licensed trailer court is to be considered a
dwelling for the purpose of charging for water and sewer service. (1970 Code)
5-9-10: PERMIT RENEWAL; TRAILER COACH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 95/336
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a trailer coach or for any person who is the owner,
renter or lessee of any property within the City to erect or give consent for the placement and
occupancy of any trailer house within the City for more than twenty four (24) hours, except in an
approved public or private trailer court.
B. It shall be unlawful to park a trailer coach, whether occupied or not, on any public thoroughfare or
public place other than on approved trailer court for more than six (6) hours.
C. Trailer coaches may be parked on private property and occupied by a person for a period of time
not to exceed thirty (30) days but a permit for such use and occupancy must be obtained within
twenty four (24) hours after the trailer is parked. Said permit may be renewed at the end of thirty
(30) days, provided the total period of time for such location and use of the same property shall not
exceed sixty (60) days. (1970 Code)
5-9-11: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
Placement and use of trailer coaches occupied by any person on other than approved public or private
courts must be so arranged as not to interfere with the rights and privileges of adjacent property
owners, each occupied trailer coach being considered as a separate dwelling house under the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. (1970 Code)
5-9-12: REVOCATION:
The Council may revoke or suspend any license issued under this Chapter when such licensee shall
have been found guilty of a violation of this Chapter or any part of this Code. (1970 Code)
5-9-13: POSTING OF LICENSE:
A license issued under this Chapter shall be conspicuously posted on the individual trailer coach not
located within a trailer court or in the office of or on the premises of the trailer court. (1970 Code)
Chapter 10
POOL, BILLIARD HALLS, CARD ROOMS
5-10-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool or bagatelle or
pigeonhole table open to the public without having first obtained a license therefor as is herein
required. All applications for such licenses shall state thereon the intended location of the place of
business and the number of tables to be used therein. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 96/336
5-10-2: FEES:
Before a license shall be issued to any person to operate or open a billiard, pool or card hall or room,
said person shall pay to the Clerk a license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per quarter for one card
table, and five dollars ($5.00) per quarter for each additional card table; and five dollars ($5.00) per
quarter for each pool or billiard table. Said license shall expire on the last day of each quarter. The
license issued under this Chapter shall be nontransferable. (1970 Code)
5-10-3: MINORS:
Minors under the age of eighteen (18) years shall under no circumstances frequent, loiter, go or
remain in any hall licensed hereunder at any time unless it be upon some lawful errand and sent
under the direction and the consent and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other person having
lawful custody of such minor; and it shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any hall so licensed to allow
or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter or remain within the hall in violation of this Section. (1970
Code)
Chapter 11
ELECTRICAL AND PLUMBING INSTALLATIONS
5-11-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. Any person engaging in the business of installing electric wires for lighting, power, cooking or
heating purposes within the City in any building of whatever kind shall obtain a license from the
City before so engaging in such business.
B. Any person engaging in the business of plumbing within the City in any building of whatever kind,
shall obtain a license from the City. (1970 Code)
5-11-2: FEES:
The license fees shall be fixed by the Council by resolution and may be changed from time to time and
shall be granted upon terms and conditions as may be determined by the Council. (1970 Code)
5-11-3: VIOLATION:
Any person engaging in business without having first obtained a license as herein provided shall be
guilty of an offense and punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1970 Code)
Chapter 12
PUBLIC DANCES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 97/336
5-12-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this Chapter a "public dance" shall mean a dance which is open to the public
generally. (Ord. 422, 8-21-1967)
5-12-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person, society, organization or corporation who shall conduct or cause to be conducted any
public dance, as herein defined, and except for those persons exempt herefrom, shall first obtain a
permit from the City to conduct said dance. (Ord. 422, 8-21-1967)
5-12-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for the permit required herein shall provide the name of the sponsoring person, or
organization, the name of responsible persons who will personally supervise the activities, and such
other information as may be required by the City and such application shall be made upon a form to
be provided by the City. (Ord. 422, 8-21-1967)
5-12-4: PERMIT FEE:
A. Upon approval of the application for a permit by the person or persons so designated by the Mayor,
in writing, and after the payment of a permit fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), the Clerk shall issue a
permit which shall be valid only for the date specified.
B. The Mayor shall designate such person or persons as he shall desire, who shall be authorized to
approve or disapprove such permits. (Ord. 422, 8-21-1967)
5-12-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to dances sponsored or conducted by religious, fraternal
or charitable organizations, where the attendance at said dance is limited and restricted to members
of such organization, nor shall a permit be required for dances sponsored or conducted by school
organizations where the attendance is limited to children of school age, nor shall a permit be required
of businesses which possess liquor or beer licenses. (Ord. 422, 8-21-1967)
5-12-6: VIOLATION:
Any person who shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, or suffer or permit to be conducted, any
dance or dance hall without first having obtained a permit as provided in this Chapter, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as in this Code provided.
(Ord. 422, 8-21-1967)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 98/336
Chapter 13
CLOSING OUT SALES
5-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the
meaning given herein. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT: A person making application for a license or the renewal thereof.
COUNCIL: The Council of the City of Gooding.
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE: A sale held out in such manner as to reasonably cause
the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other
like causes or means.
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the
public to believe that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be
discontinued, such sale including but not limited to the following kinds of sales: adjustor's; adjustment;
alterations; administrator's; assignee's; bankruptcy; benefit of administrator or executor; benefit of
creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor's committee; creditors; end;
executor; final days; force out; forced out of business; insolvence; insurance; last days; lease expires;
liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage; receivers; trustees; and quitting business.
GOODS: Includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a
sale regulated hereunder.
LICENSE OFFICER: The City Clerk of the City of Gooding.
PERSON: A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS or CLOSING OUT SALE: A sale held in such a manner as to reasonably
cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at
the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume
business at a new location in the City or will then continue business from other existing locations in the
City; provided, however, that the sale closing out of a line or type of goods not resulting in the
cessation of the entire business shall not be deemed a removal of business or closing out sale. (Ord.
555, 9-21-1987)
5-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as to sales under judicial process and prior to obtaining a license to hold or conduct a sale
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any
goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means constituting any one of the following kinds:
A. Fire, distress and other altered stock sale;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 99/336
B. Going out of business sale; and
C. Removal of business or closing out sale. (Ord. 555, 9-21-1987)
5-13-3: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
Except as to any application for a fire and other altered goods sale made within thirty (30) days from
the date such goods were damaged by fire, smoke, water or other like causes or means:
A. Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in the application for
a license hereunder for a period of at least six (6) months prior to the date of the proposed sale
shall not be granted a license, except that on the death of a person doing business in the City, his
or her heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply for a license hereunder.
B. Any person who has held a sale, as regulated hereunder, at the location stated in the application
within one year last past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license.
C. Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one place of business, the
license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application and no other
store or branch shall advertise or represent it is cooperating with it, or in any way participating in
the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent
that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale.
D. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to or affect the following persons:
1. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court competent jurisdiction;
2. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials;
3. Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction; or
4. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who publishes in good faith, any
advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without
knowledge that the provisions of this Chapter have not been complied with. (Ord. 555, 9-21-
1987)
5-13-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license to conduct a sale regulated by this Chapter shall be made to the license
officer at least ten (10) days prior to such sale in such form and manner as prescribed by the Council,
but containing at least the following information:
A. The name and address of the person for which an application is made and the name and address
of the owner or owners (if a partnership or corporation, the names and addresses of partners,
officers and managers) of the goods to be the object of the sale;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 100/336
B. The length of time the person has been in business in Gooding City and the length of time the
person has been in business at the address at which the sale is to be held;
C. Whether, and when, any sales enumerated by this Chapter have previously been held by said
applicant including the date and location of said sales;
D. A statement explaining the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the
manner in which the sale will be conducted;
E. The dates of the period of time within which the sale is to be held; and
F. A complete inventory of the goods and all information necessary to locate and identify the goods.
(Ord. 555, 9-21-1987)
5-13-5: FEE, BOND:
If it shall appear from said application that the proposed sale is of the character which the applicant
desires to advertise and conduct, upon the payment of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and the filing of a
bond payable to the City in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned upon
compliance with this Chapter, the license officer shall issue a license authorizing the applicant to
advertise and conduct a sale of the kind and during the period specified in the application. Any person
who had been conducting a business at the location where the sale is to be held for a period of not
less than one year, prior to the opening date of such sale, shall be exempt from the requirement to pay
the fee and file the bond herein provided. The license officer shall endorse upon such application the
date of its filing and preserve the same as a record of his office, and shall make an abstract of the
facts set forth in such application and indicate whether the license was granted or refused. The license
officer may authorize an extension of the sale upon a satisfactory showing by the applicant of a need
for such extension. (Ord. 555, 9-21-1987)
5-13-6: REVIEW OF GOVERNING BODY:
Upon refusal by the license officer either to grant, permit or, after granting permit, to extend
termination date of permit, the aggrieved party, upon filing with the license officer a written request for
reconsideration, shall have his application for license considered at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Council. At that meeting the application shall be considered and the Council upon a
proper showing of compliance with the licensing prerequisites of this Chapter shall direct the license
officer to issue and the license officer shall issue the requested license. (Ord. 555, 9-21-1987)
5-13-7: DUTIES OF LICENSEE:
A licensee hereunder shall have the duty to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 101/336
A. Make no additions whatsoever during the period of the licensed sale to the stock of goods set forth
in the inventory attached to the application for license.
B. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising, and conduct the licensed
sale in conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto.
C. Keep available at the place of sale a copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall
present such duplicate to the license officer, his representative or any police officer upon request.
D. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being
objects of sale and shall make such distinction to the public by placing tags on all the inventoried
goods in and about the place of sale apprizing the public of the status of all such goods.
Combining any additional or other goods with the goods inventoried shall cause the goods
inventoried to lose their identity for the purpose of the sale. Any such license issued shall cease to
apply to the sale of such goods. (Ord. 555, 9-21-1987)
Chapter 14
SALE OF WINE
5-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this Chapter are hereby defined as follows:
COMMISSIONER: The Commissioner of Law Enforcement of the State of Idaho.
PERSON: Includes an individual, firm, co-partnership association, corporation or any group or
combination acting as a unit, and includes the plural as well as the singular unless the intent to give to
a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context in which it is used.
RETAIL WINE LICENSE: A license issued by the Commissioner, authorizing a person to sell wine at
retail.
RETAILER: A person to whom a retail wine license has been issued.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume
obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of fruits or other agricultural products
containing sugar.
WINE BY THE DRINK LICENSE: A license to sell wine by the individual glass or opened bottle at
retail, for consumption on the premises only. (Ord. 446. 11-1-1971; amd. Ord. 509, 3-5-1979)
5-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be lawful for any person to sell wine at retail or wine by the drink within the corporate limits of
the City after having first procured a license therefor. (Ord. 509, 3-5-1979)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 102/336
5-14-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant upon application forms
furnished by the Clerk. Such application shall be filed by the Clerk and presented to the Mayor and
Council at the next meeting of the Council for their approval, rejection or further consideration. (Ord.
446, 11-1-1971)
5-14-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
The applicant for license shall possess all of the qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the
Commissioner of Law Enforcement of the State, as prescribed by the laws of the State, and maintain
such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is issued. The possession of licenses
regularly issued by the Department of Law Enforcement and the County in addition to a City beer
license, shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a license hereunder.
(Ord. 446, 11-1-1971)
5-14-5: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee imposed and collected shall be the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year. Such
license year shall be from one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. January 1 through December
31. Such fee shall be imposed and collected for all or any portion of the year. (Ord. 451, 1-17-1972)
5-14-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for a license and production of evidence, as required by Section 5-14-4
herein, as to the qualifications of the applicant and by the payment of the required license fee, the
Clerk shall, upon approval of the Council, issue to the applicant a license to sell wine at retail or wine
by the drink within the Municipality for such calendar year or the remainder thereof. (Ord. 509, 3-5-
1979)
5-14-7: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
The assignment or transfer of a wine license shall be the same as provided by City ordinance
providing for the assignment or transfer of a beer license. (Ord. 446, 11-1-1971)
5-14-8: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
Persons holding a valid wine by the drink license may sell wine for consumption on the premises only.
Retailers who do not possess a valid license for the retail sale of liquor by the drink, or retailers who
do not have a valid wine by the drink license, shall not permit consumption of wine on the licensed
premises and may sell the wine only in its original unbroken container. Wine sold for consumption on a
licensed premises may be sold only during hours that beer can be sold pursuant to the laws of this
State. Wine sold by the retailer for the consumption off the premises of the retailer may be sold only
during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to the laws of this State. (Ord. 509, 3-5-1979)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 103/336
5-14-9: POSSESSION:
No person may, while operating in or upon a motor vehicle upon a public street of this City, have in his
possession any wine in an open or unsealed container of any kind. (Ord. 446, 11-1-1971)
5-14-10: MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE:
A. No person under the age of nineteen (19) years may purchase, consume or possess wine.
B. No person shall give, sell or deliver wine to any person under the age of nineteen (19) years.
C. No person under the age of nineteen (19) years shall, by any means, represent to any retailer or
distributor or to any agent or employee of such retailer or distributor that he or she is nineteen (19)
years or more of age for the purpose of inducing such retailer or distributor, or his agent or
employee, to sell, serve or dispense wine to such person.
D. No person shall, by any means, represent to any retailer or distributor, or the agent or employee of
such retailer or distributor, that any other person is nineteen (19) years or more of age, when in
fact such other person is under the age of nineteen (19) years, for the purpose of inducing such
retailer or distributor, or the agent or employee of such retailer or distributor, to sell, serve or
dispense wine to such other person. (Ord. 509, 3-5-1979)
5-14-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The right shall be and remain at all times vested in the Mayor and Council, and the Mayor and Council
may as hereinafter provided, revoke or cancel any license for fraud or misrepresentation in its
procurement, or for a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, or for any conduct or act of the
licensee or his employees or any conduct or act permitted by him or them on the premises where such
business is conducted, or in connection therewith, or adjacent thereto, tending to render such
business or such premises where the same is conducted as a public nuisance or a menace to the
health, peace, safety or general welfare of the City, provided, that revocation or suspension of the
State license by the Commissioner of Law Enforcement shall be deemed prima facie evidence for
revocation or suspension of the license issued herein. (Ord. 446, 11-1-1971)
5-14-12: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter or fails to comply with any of the terms
and conditions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 446, 11-1-1971)
5-14-13: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to be severable and if any provisions of this
Chapter or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is declared invalid for any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 104/336
reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. (Ord.
446. 11-1-1971)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-1-1: ADMISSION FEES, FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of the proper admission fee,
any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission fees are charged; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of
police officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or
amusement. (1970 Code)
6-1-2: ASSAULT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "assault" which is hereby defined as any conduct which
places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. (1970 Code)
6-1-3: ASSEMBLY, UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to assemble together for the purpose of disturbing the
peace or for the purpose of committing an unlawful act and not to disperse upon the command of an
officer so to do. (1970 Code)
6-1-4: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
(Rep. by Ord. 679, 12-3-2012)
6-1-5: BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery. A person commits battery if he: a) intentionally or
knowingly without legal justification and by any means causes bodily harm to an individual, or b)
makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. (1970 Code)
6-1-6: BIRDS; INJURY TO:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 105/336
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt or kill or wound, by use of a firearm,
slingshot, bow and arrow or otherwise, any bird other than English sparrows, or to take the eggs or
young of any bird. (1970 Code)
6-1-7: BURGLAR TOOLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any nippers of any description known as
burglar's nippers, picklock, skeleton key, jimmy or other burglar's instrument or tool of any description,
unless it be shown that the possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose. (1970 Code)
6-1-8: CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO, SALE OF TO MINORS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or indirectly, to any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years any cigarettes, tobacco, or any compounds of tobacco used in filling up
or making up of a cigarette or to give or sell any cigarette papers to minors.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to buy, accept, or have in his or
her possession any cigarette, cigar or tobacco in any form or to buy, accept or have in his or her
possession any cigarette paper or other wrapper intended for the wrapping of tobacco in the form
of a cigarette or to have in his or her possession any compounds of tobacco used in the filling or
makeup of cigarettes. (Ord. 536, 10-5-1981)
6-1-9: COHABITATION, LEWD:
It shall be unlawful for any man or woman not being married to each other, to live and cohabit together
as man and wife, or lewdly and notoriously to associate together. (1970 Code)
6-1-10: COLLECTING CROWDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect within the city a crowd of people to the annoyance of the
citizens thereof or to the annoyance or injury of the public. (1970 Code)
6-1-11: CONCEALING KNOWLEDGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal knowledge of the commission of any offense or to
conceal knowledge of any unlawful act as defined in this code. (1970 Code)
6-1-12: CONTRACEPTIVES, SALE OF:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, distribute or give away in any manner whatsoever
any article, drug or medical preparation, manufactured, produced or intended for use, or which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 106/336
may be used as a contraceptive; provided however, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to
regularly licensed practitioners of medicine, or drugstores employing a registered pharmacist.
B. It shall be unlawful to vend, sell, give away or distribute any such articles, drugs or medicines for
use as, or possible for use as, contraceptives, by means of machines, or peddling or canvassing
within the city. The proprietor of any premises wherein any such drugs, medicines, or articles are
kept, contrary to the provisions of this section shall be presumed to be the vendor or distributor of
the medicines, drugs or articles. (1970 Code)
6-1-13: CRUELTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cruelly or inhumanely whip, injure, beat or mistreat his own wife,
child, stepchild or apprentice, or other child under his care. (1970 Code)
6-1-14: DELINQUENCY, ENCOURAGING:
It shall be unlawful for any person by any act or neglect to encourage, aid or cause a child to come
within the purview of the juvenile authorities; and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person after such
notice that a driver's license of any child has been suspended or revoked to permit such child to
operate a motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. (1970 Code)
6-1-15: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A. Any person who shall be guilty of any violent, noisy, riotous or disorderly conduct, or who shall use
any profane, abusive or obscene language, or in any way commit a breach of the peace, or do
anything that shall be offensive to the senses or dangerous to the peace of the inhabitants of the
City shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Every person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct when he:
1. Solicits anyone to engage in, or engages in, lewd or dissolute conduct in any public place or in
any place open to the public or exposed to public view; or
2. Accosts other persons in any public place or in any place open to the public for the purpose of
begging or soliciting alms; or
3. Loiters in, about or upon any street, alley or other public way or public place, or in any place
open to the public, without lawful business and conducting himself in a lewd, wanton or
lascivious manner in speech or behavior; or
4. Has upon her person or in his possession any instrument, tool or other implement for picking
locks or pockets or any implement that is usually employed or that reasonably may be inferred to
have been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony, misdemeanor or the
violation of any ordinance, and who shall fail to account for the possession of same; or
5. Loiters, remains, or wanders upon the streets or from place to place without apparent reason or
business and who refuses to identify himself and to account for his presence when requested by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 107/336
a police officer so to do, if the surrounding circumstances are such to indicate to a reasonable
man that the public safety demands such identification; or
6. Occupies, lodges or sleeps in any building, structure or place, whether public or private, or any
automobile, truck, railroad car or other similar vehicles or equipment without the permission of
the owner or person entitled to the possession or in control thereof; or
7. Is found in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view under
the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug or any substance defined as a poison and
regulated as a poison, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 27, title 37, Idaho Code, or under
the influence of any combination of any intoxicating liquor, drug or substances, in such a
condition that he is unable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others, or by
reason of his being under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or any drug or the influence of any
substance as defined and regulated by said chapter 27 of title 37, Idaho Code, or under the
influence of any combination of any intoxicating liquor, drug or any such substance, interferes
with or obstructs the free use of any street, sidewalk or other public way or any place open to the
public or exposed to public view; or
8. Loiters, prowls or wanders upon the private property of another, without visible or lawful
business with the owner or occupants thereof; or
9. Loiters or remains in or about a school, not having any reason or relationship involving custody
of or responsibility for a pupil or student, or any other specific, legitimate reason for the same.
C. A person shall commit a misdemeanor if he loiters, prowls, remains or wanders in a place, at a time
or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the
safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance
of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors or by deliberate furtive action,
attempts to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it
impracticable, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Section, afford the
actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to
identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense
under this Section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears
at trial that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the police officer at the
time, would have dispelled the alarm.
D. Any person who commits any of the acts prescribed and defined by subsections B1 through B9 of
this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 506, 9-5-1978)
6-1-16: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, wilfully, maliciously, intentionally or unnecessarily, to disturb the
peace and quiet of another or of any neighborhood or family or religious congregation or other
assembly by loud or unusual noises or indecent behavior or by offensive or unbecoming conduct or for
any person to threaten, quarrel, fight or provoke an assault or battery or curse or swear or utter any
obscene or vulgar or indecent language in the presence of another. (1970 Code)
6-1-17: DRUNKENNESS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 108/336
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found drunk, intoxicated or under the influence of intoxicating
liquor upon any public thoroughfare or other public place. (1970 Code)
6-1-18: ESCAPE, AID IN:
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person to escape from lawful confinement or to
assist any person to escape from the custody of any peace officer. (1970 Code)
6-1-19: ESCAPES:
It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful custody to escape or attempt to
escape from custody. (1970 Code)
6-1-20: EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALK OR IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or upon the floor of any
public building or room used for public assemblies. (1970 Code)
6-1-21: FALSE PRETENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or merchandise under false
pretenses, or to enter any public place and call for refreshments or other articles and receive and
refuse to pay for same, or depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he received
the food, goods, wares and merchandise. (1970 Code)
6-1-22: FALSE REPRESENTATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to represent falsely himself to be an officer of the City or who shall
attempt to impersonate any such officer or who shall without authority perform any official act therein
on behalf of an officer. (1970 Code)
6-1-23: GENERAL OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is
prohibited or required by State law, insofar as such laws are applicable to municipal government.
(1970 Code)
6-1-24: HYPNOTISTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice hypnotism or for any person to be a subject for such
hypnotist provided that this shall not apply to hypnotism as used in the treatment of patients by an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 109/336
accredited Doctor of Medicine or Doctor of Dentistry nor shall it prohibit the teaching of hypnotism in
any state accredited educational institution which maintains an academic standard of the college level.
(1970 Code)
6-1-25: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress or
condition in any public place or in any such place to make any indecent exposure of his or her person
or private parts thereof or the private parts of another or to conduct himself in a lewd or lascivious
manner or to appear in any such place in a dress not belonging to his sex. (1970 Code)
6-1-26: INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES, DEPOSITS OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any public
thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person or property. (1970 Code)
6-1-27: JUNK, KEEPING OF RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or materials which may be
classified as junk adjacent to or in close proximity to any schoolhouse, church, public parks, public
grounds, business buildings or residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the
storage of the same. (1970 Code)
6-1-28: LETTING PREMISES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used any building or property owned by
him, for any purpose whereby riotous or disorderly persons are gathered. (1970 Code)
6-1-29: LIQUOR; AGE MISREPRESENTATION1:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of nineteen (19) years to, by any means, represent
to any person licensed to sell beer or intoxicating liquor, or to any agent or employee of such retail
licensee, that he is nineteen (19) or more years of age for the purpose of inducing such retail
licensee, his agent or employee, to sell, serve or dispense beer or intoxicating liquor to him.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to, by any means, represent to any such retail licensee, his agent
or employee, that any other person is nineteen (19) or more years of age, when in fact such other
person is under the age of nineteen (19) years, for the purpose of inducing such retail licensee, his
agent or employee, to sell, serve or dispense beer or intoxicating liquor to such other person. (Ord.
471, 9-16-1974)
6-1-30: LOUD SPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 110/336
It shall be unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a sound truck, loud speaker or sound
amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loud speaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or
character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless such
person in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from the Chief of
Police to operate any such vehicle so equipped. (1970 Code)
6-1-31: LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to pavement to be permitted upon the public
thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicle shall first plank such streets. (1970 Code)
6-1-32: MINORS IN POOL, BILLIARD HALLS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of twenty (20) years to enter, remain or loiter in or
around a pool or billiard hall or in any room or rooms wherein such amusement is carried on or
maintained. (Ord. 332, 2-18-1952)
6-1-33: MUFFLERS; UNNECESSARY NOISE2:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall not at all times be equipped
with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good working order and in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise and it shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to use
a cutout, by-pass or similar muffler elimination appliance. (1970 Code)
6-1-34: OBSCENE CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or stool in any place open to the public view, or to be
guilty of any lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct or to sing any lewd or obscene song, ballad or other
words in any public place or any other place where other persons are present or indecently to exhibit
any animals. (1970 Code)
6-1-35: OBSCENE LITERATURE, DISTRIBUTION OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, pass, give or deliver to another any obscene, lewd or
indecent book, pamphlet, picture, card, print, paper, writing, mold, cast, or figure or to have same in
his possession. (19790 Code)
6-1-36: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause to be obstructed any of the sidewalks, streets
or alleys without first having obtained permission to do so from the Chief of Police or Street
Commissioner. (Ord. 367, 12-5-1955)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 111/336
6-1-37: OFFENSE, AID TO AN:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet, counsel, advise or encourage
any other person in the commission of any of the acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage
the commission of such offense hereby defined. (1970 Code)
6-1-38: PETIT THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit petit theft which is hereby defined as a theft when the
property taken is of a value of less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (1970 Code)
6-1-39: PLAYING BALL ON STREETS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball or throw any ball to and fro upon any public
thoroughfare in the City. (1970 Code)
6-1-40: PICKETING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, not an employee, past, present or expectant of the owner or
proprietor of the business attempted to be picketed and who has no personal dispute with the owner
or proprietor concerning terms and conditions of employment to stand, sit or walk on any street or
sidewalk in the City with the intent and purpose of dissuading or discouraging any person from
patronizing the place of business. (1970 Code)
6-1-41: PICNICS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used any yard, ground or grave or other
real estate within the City for public picnics or open air dances, to be conducted in such manner as to
be on annoyance or injury to the public. (1970 Code)
6-1-42: POLICE OFFICERS, ASSISTANCE TO:
It shall be unlawful for any male citizen over the age of eighteen (18) years to refuse or neglect to
render assistance to any police officer when called upon for such assistance or aid in the suppression
of riot or other unlawful assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an offense.
(1970 Code)
6-1-43: POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print or nail any handbill, sign, poster,
advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone, flagstone or any other portion or part of any
sidewalk, or upon any tree, lamppost, hitchpost, telegraph pole, hydrant or upon any private wall, door
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 112/336
or gate, without the consent in writing of the owner of the wall, door or gate; provided, however, that
this Section shall not prevent posting by proper City and County officials of election signs, polling
place signs and other signs or placards necessary under the law to the conduct of elections. (1970
Code)
6-1-44: PROPERTY, MALICIOUS INJURY TO:
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to injure, deface, mutilate, remove, pull
down, break or in any manner interfere with or molest or secrete or destroy any real or personal
property belonging to or under the control of any person. (1970 Code)
6-1-45: PROSTITUTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or advertise in any manner her vocation as a prostitute or
for any person to advertise the profession of a prostitute or solicit for a prostitute. (1970 Code)
6-1-46: PROSTITUTION, HOUSE OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or assist in the keeping of a house of ill-fame or prostitution
or knowingly to reside therein or knowingly to rent, lease or permit any person to occupy any house or
room owned, leased or controlled by him for this purpose. (1970 Code)
6-1-47: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere wilfully with, resist, delay, obstruct, molest or threaten to
molest any officer of the City in the exercise of his official duties. (1970 Code)
6-1-48: RIOT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to disperse upon an order to do so by a
police officer, when two (2) or more persons are assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or
for the purpose of committing any unlawful act. (1970 Code)
6-1-49: SWINDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person who by color, or aid of any trick or sleight of hand performance or by
fraud or by fraudulent scheme, cards, dice or device to win for himself or for another any money or
property or a representative of either. (1970 Code)
6-1-50: TRESPASSING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take down any fence or to let down any bars or to open any gate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 113/336
in or on the property of another without the consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge
thereof. (1970 Code)
6-1-51: VAGRANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person without visible means of support and the physical ability to work not
to seek employment or labor, or to refuse to work when employment is offered him; for any person to
seek alms as a business; for any person to roam about from place to place without any lawful
business; for any idle or dissolute person or associate of known thieves to wander about the streets at
a late and unusual hour of the night, or to lodge in any other place than is kept for lodging purposes
without the permission of the owner of the property or the person in possession thereof; or for any
person to consort habitually with common prostitutes, habitual drunkards or any user of narcotics.
(1970 Code)
6-1-52: VEHICLES, INJURY TO3:
It shall be unlawful for any person to individually, or in association with one or more others, wilfully
break, injure, tamper with or remove any part or parts of any vehicle for the purpose of injuring,
defacing or destroying such vehicle, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or
for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle or to in any other
manner wilfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle. (1970
Code)
6-1-53: VENEREAL DISEASES; LITERATURE CONCERNING:
A. No person shall offer to sell, or give away, distribute or have in his possession with intent to give
away, sell or distribute, any book, pamphlet, circular, handbill or advertisement of any kind
purporting to treat diseases known as "venereal diseases" describing or explaining the genital
organs, giving the nature and remedies of diseases peculiar to females, or the nature or causes of
nervous debility, impotency, sterility or barrenness, gonorrhea, gleet, stricture, syphilis, infection of
the prostate gland or the remedies therefor, or the cause or remedies for abortion or miscarriage,
or articles or means of preventing conception.
B. No person shall sell, give, distribute or have in his possession, with intent to give away, sell or
distribute any book, pamphlet, circular, handbill, advertisement or notice of any kind, giving or
purporting to give information from whom or where medicine or anything whatever may be
obtained for the cure, prevention or treatment of uterine diseases, or diseases peculiar to females,
venereal diseases, or diseases of the genital organs, or nervous debility, impotency, sterility or
barrenness, gonorrhea, gleet, stricture, syphilis, infection of the prostate gland, abortion or
miscarriage, or articles or means of preventing conception. (1970 Code)
6-1-54: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare.
(1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 114/336
6-1-55: WEAPONS, FURNISHING TO PRISONERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take into jail or to deliver or
attempt to deliver to any prisoner therein confined, or in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool,
intoxicating liquors, drug or other article without the consent of the officer in charge. (1970 Code)
6-1-56: WINDOW PEEPING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer or peep into, or to be found loitering around or within
view of any window not on his own property with the intent of watching or looking through said
window. (Ord. 374, 8-5-1957)
6-1-57: WINDOW SILLS TO BE KEPT CLEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any window sill, porch or other projection above
the first story of any building abutting on any sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon
any person on the sidewalk in front of such building, unless said article be securely fastened or
protected by screens. (1970 Code)
6-1-58: WEAPONS, DISCHARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any weapon, air gun, sparrow gun, flipper, firearm or
any similar device or contrivance within the limits of the City. Exceptions to the above provisions are
as follows:
A. Police or law enforcement officers in their line of duty.
B. Gooding police officers upon the consent of the City Council to control animals within the City limits.
(Ord. 610, 7-26-1999)
6-1-59: MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL; UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the specific authorization of the Mayor, a member of the
Council, Chief of Police, or any department head, to attempt to enter, enter or be in the Gooding
Municipal Swimming Pool, including the dressing rooms and other structures adjacent thereto, at any
time when the said swimming pool facilities are not open to the general public. (Ord. 488, 8-2-1976)
6-1-60: LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or cause to be consumed any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place or building or at any public gathering, within the limits of the City.
Provided, however, that this shall not apply to premises which hold a current and valid license to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 115/336
dispense beer or intoxicating liquor. "Public place", as defined in this Section, includes any place,
building or conveyance, to which the public has or is permitted to have access, and any place,
highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement, within the limits of the City.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in
any sum not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00),
or imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 503, 6-5-1978)
6-1-61: NOISE:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY: Gooding, Idaho, or the area within the city limits of Gooding, Idaho.
COMMON AREA(S): The area(s) of a facility, complex, apartment unit, motel or the like that is
open either to the general public or person with the permission of the owner or agent of the owner
of the area. This definition would include, but not be limited to, the following: swimming pools,
restaurants, patios, meeting rooms, lounges, bars or other areas with a facility that are either
constructed or designed for use in this manner.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical
trauma or property damaged demanding immediate attention.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A motor vehicle owned or leased by a city, county or fire district; an
ambulance; or a motor vehicle owned or leased by a federal, state, county or municipal law
enforcement agency.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization or entity having a legally recognized existence,
whether public or private.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof adapted or used and intended for the
overnight accommodation of persons. In the event a building used for multiple individual units,
such as an apartment, condominium, motel or other multi-family residence, each individual unit
shall be considered a separate residence for the purpose of this section.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any audible sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided
hearing faculties.
B. Operation Of Any Device: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of
any device in such a manner that the sound therefrom:
1. Is plainly audible within any place of residence not the source of the sound; or
2. Is plainly audible upon a public right of way or street at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or
more from the source of such sound.
C. Jake Brakes: It shall be unlawful to use engine compression brakes, commonly known as "jake
brakes", within the city limits of the city of Gooding, Idaho.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 116/336
D. Erection, Demolition And Major Alterations: It shall be unlawful to engage in the erection, including
excavating, of new buildings and demolition and major alteration or repair of any existing buildings
other than between the hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
Monday through Saturday, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety. Major alteration or repair is defined as having a value in excess of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
E. Appliances, Blasting Agents And Explosives: It shall be unlawful to operate any pile driver, steam
shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, ram or electric hoist or other appliance, blasting devices or
other explosives, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, other than between the
hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday,
except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety.
F. Exemptions: The following sounds shall be exempt from the provisions of this section:
1. Sounds caused by any emergency vehicle or personnel in responding to an emergency call or
acting in time of an emergency.
2. Sounds caused by activities upon any outdoor municipal, school, religious or publicly owned
property or facility, provided that such activities have been authorized by the owner of such
property or facility or by its agent.
3. Sounds from parades, firework displays or any other event for which a permit for that type of
activity is required and has been obtained from the appropriate governmental entity within the
limits imposed by any such permit.
4. Sounds caused by locomotives or other railroad equipment.
5. Sounds from burglar alarms that are not in violation of law.
6. Sounds caused by safety warning devices which are required by law.
7. Sounds caused from devices associated with lawful land uses within the zoning district from
which the noise emanated, including any sound lawful under the terms of a special use permit.
8. Sounds emanating from devices used within the common area of a multi-unit residential
dwelling, whose use has been approved by the persons who have lawful authority to manage
the common areas. This exemption only applies in relation to persons complaining about sounds
from other units within the same multi-unit facility.
G. Relationship To Other Laws: The provisions of this section are intended to be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall not affect any other prohibition or regulation of noise or sound now adopted by
the city of Gooding or by any other jurisdiction with authority to administer laws within the city limits
of Gooding, Idaho.
H. Penalty: Any person who violates a term or provision of this section shall be guilty of an infraction
punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), including court costs and fees. (Ord. 642, 4-4-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 117/336
Chapter 2
CURFEW
6-2-1: CURFEW ESTABLISHED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain and it shall be
unlawful for any parent, guardian or adult person having the care and custody of any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years to allow or permit such person to be or remain in or upon the streets, alleys
or public places or grounds between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. (Ord. 470, 9-16-1974)
6-2-2: EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITION:
The provisions of section 6-2-1 of this chapter shall not apply to any person who is accompanied by
his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person, nor to any
person who is in the performance of an errand or duty directed by such person, parent, guardian or
other adult person having the care and custody of such person (which direction must be in writing,
signed and bearing the date of such errand or duty), nor to any person who is actually at the time
engaged in legitimate employment for profit. (1947 Code § 6-202)
Chapter 3
DOGS
6-3-1: DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or person who keeps any dog to permit the same to run
at large upon the private premises of others or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, highways, vacant
lots, school grounds or other public places within the city of Gooding.
A dog shall be deemed to be running at large when off or away from the premises of the owner,
possessor, or keeper thereof, and not under the immediate control of such owner, possessor, or
keeper, or his agent or servant or a member of his immediate family, either by leash, cord or chain,
provided, however, that any dog on the premises of a city park or school grounds must be controlled
by a leash not exceeding ten feet (10') in length held in the hand of the person controlling the dog.
Procuring a license and tag shall not authorize the running at large of said dog.
Dogs in a vehicle, whether in the front, back, on top, or on the hood shall be secured so they cannot
jump out of the vehicle. Persons failing to secure such dog shall be punished as set forth in section 6-
3-14 of this chapter, as amended. (Ord. 684, 9-16-2013)
6-3-2: NUISANCES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or other keeper of a dog or other animal, to fail to exercise proper
care and control of such animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance. Frequent,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 118/336
continuous or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking other
domestic animals, trespassing upon public or private property shall be deemed a nuisance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or other keeper of an animal to fail to provide such animal with
sufficient and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection, and veterinary care when
needed to prevent suffering.
C. Any dog that bites or molests any person upon the public streets, alleys, or other public places, or
private premises other than those controlled by the owner, possessor or person who keeps such
dog, shall upon a complaint being filed by the person bitten, be put to death in a humane manner;
provided, however, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to apply to any dog who bites
any person in actual defense of such dog's owner or immediate family when such owner or family
member is actually and unlawfully attacked by the person bitten.
D. If any fierce, dangerous or vicious dog is found at large which cannot be taken up and impounded,
such dog may be slain by any police officer or animal control officer. A "vicious dog" is hereby
defined as any dog which bites or snaps at a human being upon the public streets or ways, or
maims or kills other domestic animals. (Ord. 666, 3-16-2009)
6-3-3: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND:
Any police officer, animal control officer or any other person authorized by the city may seize and
impound all dogs as required by this chapter, including any and all dogs or any other animal found
running at large upon the public streets, alleys or other public places or private premises without the
permission of the owner of said premises. (Ord. 666, 3-16-2009)
6-3-4: HEARING REGARDING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A hearing may be held at the request of any animal owner whose animal has been impounded. Said
hearing shall be requested by contacting the city chief of police and shall be requested within two (2)
weeks of said impoundment. (Ord. 559, 3-7-1988)
6-3-5: LAWFUL TO GO ON PREMISES:
In the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, any police officer, deputy sheriff and/or animal
control officer or his assistant are authorized to enter the private property of any person to take
possession of a dog when in fresh pursuit of such dog at the time the dog goes onto private property.
(Ord. 666, 3-16-2009)
6-3-6: FEMALE IN HEAT PROHIBITED FROM RUNNING AT LARGE:
A. The owner of a female dog shall cause such dog, when in season, to be penned or closed in such
manner as to preclude other dogs from attacking such female dog or being attracted to such
female dog so as to create a public nuisance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 119/336
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having possession, charge, custody, or control of any
female dog to cause, permit, or allow the same to stray or run, or in any other manner be at large
in or upon any street or sidewalk while such dog is in copulating season. If a female dog cannot be
controlled by the owner during the copulating season, the female dog may be impounded by the
animal control officer or any police officer. (Ord. 559, 3-7-1988)
6-3-7: SUSPECTED RABIES:
A dog which is known to have bitten, or injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin, or a
suspected rabid dog, shall be placed in confinement under observation of a veterinary hospital and
shall not be killed or released until it is at least ten (10) days after the onset of symptoms suggestive of
rabies. Any other animal subject to rabies that has bitten a person shall likewise be confined and
observed for at least ten (10) days. If the animal dies or has been killed, its head shall be removed
and immediately taken to the state health laboratory to be examined for rabies.
No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to allow an official of the city of Gooding to make an inspection
or examination thereof at any time during said period. No such dog or animal shall be removed from
the place of quarantine without written permission of the city of Gooding. If the animal shall be
determined to be free of rabies, the same shall be returned to the owner upon payment of all costs
and fees incurred by the city as set forth hereafter for impounded dogs. If such fee is not paid within
twenty four (24) hours the dog shall be subject to disposal as set forth hereafter. (Ord. 666, 3-16-2009)
6-3-8: LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own or harbor any dog within the corporate limits of
the city of Gooding without first obtaining a license therefor as herein provided; any owner or harborer
of any dog within the corporate limits of the city is hereby required to secure about the neck of such
dog a collar with license tag attached thereto which license tag shall be obtained from the city office.
The license fee required to be paid by the owner or harborer of such dog shall be ten dollars ($10.00)
for each dog. Such license fee shall be paid annually within thirty (30) days after January 1 of every
year. (Ord. 666, 3-16-2009)
6-3-9: CRUELTY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maltreat or torture any dog or other animal, or, having the right or
authority to kill any dog or other animal, to kill such dog or other animal in an inhumane manner. (Ord.
559, 3-7-1988)
6-3-10: UNLAWFUL TO POISON:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to administer or cause to be administered poison of any
sort whatsoever to any animal which is the property of another, or poison food where same is
accessible to any dog or other animal. Any person or persons so offending shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 559, 3-7-1988)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 120/336
6-3-11: DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Gooding police department to carry out and enforce all the provisions of this
chapter; to enforce the licensing and the control of dogs in the city of Gooding as hereinbefore
provided; to file complaints in the magistrate court against any person, persons, firm or corporation
failing to license any dog as hereinbefore provided; or who otherwise fails to comply with any
provisions of this chapter; and to capture and secure all dogs found running at large contrary to the
provisions of this chapter; to remove such dogs in a humane manner to the pound; to hold dogs as
impounded for a period of not less than seventy two (72) hours. (Ord. 666, 3-16-2009)
6-3-12: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS:
Any dog impounded may be taken from the pound by the owner, or any authorized person, upon
exhibiting to the animal control officer or other authorized person having charge of said pound a
receipt, from the city, showing that the license fee has been paid for such dog, and upon paying the
city an impounding fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the first offense, forty dollars ($40.00) for the second
offense and eighty dollars ($80.00) for the third offense. Any dogs committing more than three (3)
offenses shall be disposed of in a humane manner. All impounded dogs not redeemed within seventy
two (72) hours may be offered for sale at a price not less than the costs of impoundment and keeping,
or any additional sum determined to be reasonable by the animal control officer, including any license
fee. Alternatively, such dog shall be turned over to an animal rescue group, that has appeared before
and been approved by the council, if adoptable. (Ord. 684, 9-16-2013)
6-3-13: DOG TRAPS:
It shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor for any person to release a dog or dogs from a dog
trap owned or under the control of the city, or to any way injure, destroy or tamper with a dog trap
owned or under the control of the city. (Ord. 561, 4-18-1988)
6-3-14: PENALTIES:
Any owner, possessor or person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction or entry
of a guilty plea, be guilty of an infraction and shall be fined as follows:
A. First offense: Fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs.
B. Second offense: One hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs.
C. Third offense, and thereafter: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 684, 9-16-
2013)
6-3-15: KENNEL LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 121/336
A. It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess upon the premises of any one household
or property, more than four (4) dogs, unless the owner or person having custody or harboring such
dogs shall have obtained a kennel license and unless the area is zoned for the allowance of
kennels. Provided, however, that dogs under three (3) months old shall not be considered when
determining the number of dogs. In zoning areas allowing kennels, a kennel license may be
obtained pursuant to the following procedure:
1. Upon the application of any person owning, harboring or maintaining more than four (4) dogs,
must be accompanied by the written consent of at least seventy five percent (75%) of all persons
in possession of the premises within a radius of three hundred feet (300') of the premises upon
which said kennel is to be maintained.
2. The application shall state the name and address of the owner where the kennel is to be located
and the number of dogs to be kept.
3. The issuance of a kennel license shall not obviate the necessity of obtaining an individual dog
license, nor shall any of the provisions hereof be deemed to vary or alter any of the zoning
regulations of the city of Gooding.
4. All applications for a kennel license shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) or such other fee as may from time to time be adopted by the Gooding city council.
5. Kennel licenses must be renewed annually and such application must meet all of the
requirements of this section each year.
B. It is the intent of this section to permit nonconforming uses to continue. It is the further intent of this
section that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon nor be grounds for adding additional
animals. Property that is presently being used to house animals shall be grandfathered, if they are
legal under the ordinances currently in effect. However, in the event any animal is sold it must be
replaced within six (6) months or this section shall control the use of the land.
In the event any current property owner sells the property upon which the restricted animals are
currently kept, the new owner shall be governed by this section. (Ord. 637, 10-4-2004)
Chapter 4
ANIMALS AND FOWL
6-4-1: FOWLS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any chickens, ducks, turkeys or geese or any
other fowl owned by them to run at large upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city or upon the
private property of any person without the consent of the owner thereof. (1947 Code § 6-301)
6-4-2: POISONING OR KILLING ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully kill or administer poison to any domestic animal without
the consent of the owner thereof, or to expose any poisonous substance with the intention that it shall
be taken by any domestic animal. (1947 Code § 6-302)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 122/336
6-4-3: KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS:
A. It shall be a public health nuisance for any ungulate, including, but not limited to, horse, cow, goat,
sheep, or any chicken, duck, goose or other fowl regardless of age or sex, to be kept within the city
limits of the city of Gooding, Idaho.
B. The mayor and/or his designated appointee shall notify any person in violation or nonconformance
with subsection A of this section by written notice of abatement setting forth the violation and
allowing forty eight (48) hours to abate such nuisance. Said notification shall be personally served
upon the landowner, occupant or any other person allowing such nuisance to exist.
C. If the nuisance is not remedied within forty eight (48) hours of serving such notice, the chief of
police, or his designee, shall immediately cause the same to be abated by removing the offending
animal(s), impounding the same and notifying the owner, occupant, or other person having control
over the animal(s) that the owner, occupant or other person, shall have five (5) days to redeem the
animal(s) and that after the five (5) day period the animal(s) will be sold or destroyed.
D. The owner shall be obligated to the city of Gooding for the costs of impoundment and board and no
animal will be redeemed until such costs are paid in full. In the event the animal(s) is sold the
proceeds shall be first applied to the costs of impoundment, boarding and sale and the remainder
shall be delivered to the owner of such animal(s). In the event an animal is destroyed the owner
will still be obligated for all of the above costs plus costs of removal and destruction. (Ord. 637, 10-
4-2004)
6-4-4: KEEPING SWINE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep either on his premises or on the premises of another any
hog, pig or shoat. (1947 Code § 6-305)
6-4-5: GRAZING ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning livestock or the agent or employee of such person to allow
any horses, mules, jacks, sheep, cattle, hogs or any animal to range or graze within the limits of the
city. All stock driven through the city must be accompanied by a competent herder who shall not
permit the said stock to enter upon ditches or sidewalks or injure shade trees or shrubbery, and no
stock of any kind or nature shall be driven down, through or upon Main Street. No stock shall be kept
within the city limits overnight unless the said stock be confined within a barn or enclosure. (1947
Code § 6-306)
6-4-6: CHIEF OF POLICE TO IMPOUND ANIMALS:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to take up and impound any such stock mentioned in this
chapter found in violation of any of its provisions. (1947 Code § 6-307)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 123/336
6-4-7: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING:
When the chief of police shall seize and impound any animal mentioned in this chapter, he shall, if the
owner of such animal is known to him, give personal notice to such owner of such seizure either by
serving a written notice personally or placing it in the post office stamped, sealed and addressed to
such person. If the owner be unknown, the chief of police shall post in at least four (4) conspicuous
public places for not less than five (5) days prior to the time of sale, a written or printed notice
containing the description of the animal seized by him, with their marks or brands, the date of seizure
and the time and place where the same will be sold, provided that no sale shall be made within five (5)
days from the date of such seizure. (1947 Code § 6-308)
6-4-8: UNCLAIMED ANIMALS:
Any animal seized or impounded if unclaimed, or if claimed and upon which the legal charges have
not been paid, shall be branded and sold by the chief of police at public sale to the highest bidder for
cash at the time and place mentioned in the notice of sale. The money received by the chief of police
for the sale of any animal so seized and impounded shall, after deducting the cost of such seizure,
keeping, posting notice and sale, be paid to the treasurer. (1947 Code § 6-309)
6-4-9: IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
Any animal so seized and impounded shall be provided with proper care, food and water by the chief
of police or pound keeper. (1947 Code § 6-310)
6-4-10: POUND TO BE PROVIDED:
The chief of police shall erect, or cause to be erected or maintained, a suitable enclosure to be kept
locked when any animal or animals shall be impounded therein, which shall be designated as the city
pound, or he may rent a suitable enclosure for such purposes at a rental not to exceed three dollars
($3.00) per month. (1947 Code § 6-311)
6-4-11: REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS:
If at any time prior to the sale of any impounded animal the person entitled to the possession thereof
shall claim the same, he shall prove his ownership or his right to the possession of such animal and
upon the payment to the chief of police of a penalty of one dollar ($1.00) and all legal charges and
expenses incident to taking up and keeping such animal the same shall be delivered to him. (1947
Code § 6-312)
6-4-12: FEES FOR IMPOUNDING:
The chief of police shall be allowed the following fees for seizing, impounding, branding or selling any
animal under the provisions of this chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 124/336
A. Impounding:
1. For taking up and impounding horses, mules, jackasses, burros and cattle per head: Two dollars
($2.00).
2. For sheep, goats and swine per head: One dollar ($1.00).
B. Keeping And Feeding:
1. For keeping and feeding per head for each day for horses, mules, jackasses, burros and cattle:
Fifty cents ($0.50).
2. For sheep, goats and swine: Fifteen cents ($0.15).
C. Posting: For posting notices: Fifty cents ($0.50). (1947 Code § 6-313)
6-4-13: REPORT OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
The chief of police shall at the first regular meeting of each month of the council, file a report showing
the animals so impounded, when seized, the date of sale, the amounts received for penalties and on
the sale of such animals, the amount of his fees, the amount paid the treasurer and names of the
owner if known to him. He shall receive a receipt from the treasurer for all such monies paid and file
the same with his report. (1947 Code § 6-314)
6-4-14: MONIES RECEIVED OVER COSTS:
Should it appear from the report of the chief of police, provided for under this chapter, that the amount
received upon any sale is greater than the gross sum of penalty, expenses and charges, the treasurer
shall hold the excess as a special deposit to be paid to the owner of such animal on demand or proof
of ownership or right of possession to such animal as at any time prior to the expiration of three (3)
months from date of sale. If claim be not made for the special deposit within the three (3) months, the
treasurer shall place the money in the general fund for the use of the city. (1947 Code § 6-315)
6-4-15: BREAKING INTO POUND:
Any person who shall break into the city pound or take therefrom any animal impounded therein or
shall attempt to take any such animal or animals from the chief of police while on his way to the
pound, shall, on conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1947 Code § 6-316)
6-4-16: HORSES AND MULES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a horse or mule standing without having the same securely
fastened and tied. (1947 Code § 6-317)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 125/336
6-4-17: HITCHING TO TREES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hitch any animal to any tree situated on the streets of the city or
to hitch or tie any animal so that said animal will cause the injury of any shade tree or to any ditch in
said street. (1947 Code § 6-318)
6-4-18: IMPROPER HITCHING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hitch or fasten any animal to or in such manner as to destroy or
injure any growing or living shade tree, ornamental or fruit tree, or any box or case around such tree.
(1947 Code § 6-319)
6-4-19: SLAUGHTERING OR BUTCHERING PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to kill any animal for slaughter or butchering within the city of
Gooding, except in the normal course of business by a duly licensed slaughterhouse.
B. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be, upon conviction or entry of a guilty plea,
found guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars
($300.00) and/or sentenced to the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 612, 1-
3-2000)
Chapter 5
GUN DEALERS
6-5-1: RECORDS:
Any person buying, selling, trading or dealing in new, used or secondhand shotguns, rifles, pistols and
other firearms of every kind capable of being carried on or about the person shall keep a permanent
legible written record in a bound volume showing and containing the following information relative
thereto: a) the date acquired or sold; b) name and address of person from whom acquired or to whom
sold; c) name and make; d) serial, factory or other identification numbers; e) date sold or bought; f)
name and address of person from whom bought or to whom sold. Such records shall be open for
inspection by any member of the police force at any and all reasonable times. (Ord. 358, 6-6-1955)
6-5-2: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Any and all customers or persons buying, selling or trading any such firearms from any such dealer,
shall furnish said information upon request. (Ord. 358, 6-6-1955)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 126/336
Chapter 6
BICYCLE SALES
6-6-1: DEFINITION:
The term "bicycle" as used herein means and includes any and all two (2) wheeled vehicles having a
tandem arrangement of the wheels, a saddle or seat for the rider, handle bars and levers or pedals for
propulsion of the vehicle by the feet of the rider. (10-201; 1947 Code)
6-6-2: BICYCLES TO BE REGISTERED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate or propel any bicycle, or permit any bicycle to stand
or be parked on the streets or alleys unless such bicycle has been registered with the Clerk and
unless there is properly attached thereto a registry plate secured from said Clerk as hereinafter
provided. (10-202; 1947 Code)
6-6-3: REGISTRATION:
Annually on or before the first day of January every bicycle in the City must be registered with the
Clerk and such registry shall show the true name and address of the owner of each bicycle, the make,
serial number, the name of the person or dealer from whom such bicycle was purchased, the date of
its purchase, and such information as may be demanded by said Clerk. (10-203; 1947 Code)
6-6-4: PLATES TO BE ATTACHED:
As each registration is effected a number plate shall be assigned to said bicycle, which number plate
must be attached to the front of said bicycle in such manner that said plate and the numbers thereon
will be in plain view while such bicycle is in motion or parked, and such number plate shall remain so
attached throughout the current registration year; and any number plate issued during any year shall
be invalid and shall be detached from the bicycle on and after the first day of January following its
issuance; and only one plate shall be displayed upon a bicycle. (10-204, 1947 Code)
6-6-5: SALE OR TRANSFER:
In case of the sale or transfer of a bicycle, the purchaser or transferee shall immediately report such
sale or transfer to the Clerk and give the Clerk the name and address of the new owner, and the
registration number plate shall thereupon be transferred to such new owner or transferee, and the
number plate originally assigned to such bicycle must remain attached thereto until the end of the
current registration period. (10-205, 1947 Code)
6-6-6: REGISTRATION FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 127/336
Every bicycle owner shall pay a fee of fifty cents ($0.50) for each bicycle registered and to which a
number plate is so issued, and upon each transfer of a bicycle the purchaser or transferee shall pay a
like sum upon his registration as provided in Section 6-6-5 herein; the Clerk shall be responsible under
his official bond for all monies collected under this Chapter and such monies shall be delivered to the
Treasurer on the first day of each month. (10-206, 1947 Code)
6-6-7: VEHICLE LAWS:
Every person riding a bicycle upon any highway, street or alley shall be subject to all the laws, rules
and regulations applicable to the driver of any vehicle except those provisions which by their very
nature can have no application. (10-207, 1947 Code)
6-6-8: WARNING DEVICE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, use or operate a bicycle upon the highways, streets, alleys
and public places unless the same be equipped with a bell, gong or some sounding device sufficient
for giving others upon such ways timely warning of the approach of said bicycle; and the operators of
all bicycles upon such ways shall use such warning device for said purpose; however, that sirens may
not be used on bicycles. (10-208, 1947 Code)
6-6-9: LIGHTS REQUIRED:
No person shall ride a bicycle upon the streets, alleys or public places during the night time without
having such bicycle equipped with a headlight which shall be so constructed and attached as to be the
clearly discernible by any normal person for a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') in front of
said bicycle, and also with a reflector attached to the rear of said bicycle so that it may be readily
observed by traffic approaching from the rear. (10-209, 1947 Code)
6-6-10: PARKING BICYCLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, use, park or leave a bicycle upon any of the sidewalks
and no bicycle shall be parked or left in a parking space or lane established and marked on the street
or curb by the City officials for the use of automobiles, but shall be parked and left in racks and similar
spaces provided or to be provided for the use of bicycles, or in spaces not marked off and reserved for
automobiles and similar vehicles. (10-210, 1947 Code)
6-6-11: NUMBER ON BICYCLE PROHIBITED; HOLDING ONTO VEHICLE:
Two (2) or more riders on the same bicycle is prohibited at all times, and no one while riding a bicycle
shall hold onto or be in any way attached to any other vehicle or person thereon. (10-211, 1947 Code)
6-6-12: SERIAL NUMBER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 128/336
No bicycle shall be sold or registered unless it shall have embossed, cut or impressed on some
portion thereof a serial or manufacturer's number; any person who has in his possession a bicycle
from which the serial or manufacturer's number has been removed or defaced shall immediately
present such bicycle to the Chief of Police, who shall issue numbers to the owner to be placed on
such bicycle and registered as its serial number before a number plate shall be issued therefor. (10-
212, 1947 Code)
6-6-13: RACING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to run or engage in or cause to be run or engaged in any bicycle
race except with the express permission and under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police, which
official is hereby given authority to designate the times and places such races may be held and
prescribe regulations therefor. (10-213, 1947 Code)
6-6-14: RECKLESS RIDING:
It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle in a reckless or careless manner, or in any manner that will be
dangerous to the person or property of the person operating such bicycle or to others, and all persons
riding bicycles are expressly forbidden to weave from left to right or vice versa. (10-214, 1947 Code)
6-6-15: UNCLAIMED BICYCLES:
Any and all bicycles left and abandoned on any street, alley, public place or vacant lot shall be taken
up and held by the Chief of Police, and if the same are not claimed by the owner or his authorized
agent within a period of ninety (90) days may sold by the Chief of Police at public auction to the
highest bidder for cash. Provided, that if the owner of any such bicycle be known to the Chief of
Police, or if he can identify the owner by reference to the bicycle registry of the City, he shall
immediately notify such owner in writing, describing the bicycle and advising where the same may be
obtained. (Ord. 355, 6-21-1954)
6-6-16: NOTICE REQUIRED:
Before sale of such bicycles, notice thereof shall be given in two (2) issues of the Enterprise, which
notice shall describe the bicycles so to be sold by giving the name, color, make and any other
distinguishing information, and such notice shall also give the time, place and terms of sale, and shall
state that the owner may claim and receive his bicycle at or before the time of such sale by submitting
proof of his ownership and paying costs of the notice. (Ord. 355, 6-21-1954; amd. Ord. 501, 1-16-
1978)
6-6-17: SALE; TITLE:
Any person purchasing a bicycle at such sale will succeed to all the title and interest thereto, will be
deemed the owner thereof by the City and may register the same and be issued a license in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 129/336
manner provided in this Chapter. All monies received from the sale of any such bicycles shall be
turned into the City's General Fund. (Ord. 355,6-21-1954)
Chapter 7
ABANDONED VEHICLES
6-7-1: DECLARED NUISANCES:
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, major household
furnishings or appliances or machinery, or parts thereof, on public or private property within the City is
found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of property, to promote blight and deterioration,
to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute attractive nuisances creating a hazard to
health and safety of minors, injurious to the health, safety and general welfare; and the presence of
such items on public or private property within the City except as expressly permitted in this Chapter,
is declared to constitute and be a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 562, 6-6-1988)
6-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
ABANDONED, WRECKED AND JUNKED: With reference to vehicles, an unsightly motor vehicle
which meets any one of the following qualifications:
A. Does not carry a current valid State registration and license plate:
B. Cannot be safely operated under its own power.
MACHINERY: All articles of industrial, farm or domestic machinery or equipment and any and all metal
or wooden machinery, motors, equipment or tools.
MAJOR HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS AND APPLIANCES: All articles usually referred to as major
household furnishings and appliances used in house-keeping, including, but not limited to, chairs,
tables, davenports, beds, refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, furnaces and grease, oil and paint
containers of five (5) gallons or over capacity.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power designed to
travel on the ground by wheels, treads, runners or slides and to transport persons or property or pull
machinery including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles and tractors.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation or partnership. (Ord. 562, 6-6-1988)
6-7-3: PLACEMENT IN STREET UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to place, allow, discard, maintain, park or store any abandoned, wrecked
or junked vehicle, major household furnishing or appliance or machinery, or parts thereof, as defined
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 130/336
in Section 6-7-2 upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property within the City. (Ord.
562,6-6-1988)
6-7-4: PLACEMENT IN OPEN VIEW ON PRIVATE PROPERTY UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person, whether he be owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise of any
private property or premises, to place, allow, discard, maintain, park, store or permit to be placed,
allowed, discarded, maintained, parked or stored upon such property or premises for a period of time
exceeding thirty (30) days any abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle, major household furnishing or
appliance or machinery, or parts thereof, as defined in Section 6-7-2; provided, however, that the
provisions of this Section shall not apply to any property or premises where the vehicle, furnishing,
appliance or machinery, or part thereof, is housed within a building or fence so as to not be visible
from the street or other public or private property, or stored or parked in a lawful manner in connection
with or incidental to a business or commercial enterprise which is the primary or principal use of such
property or premises. (Ord. 562, 6-6-1988)
6-7-5: ABATEMENT:
A. By the order of the Mayor or any member of the City Council, any duly sworn police officer of the
City may order any abandoned, wrecked, or junked vehicle, a major household furnishing or
appliance or machinery, or parts thereof removed from the premises from which they reside within
ten (10) days.
B. Notice of the order shall be placed by the policeman upon the vehicle, furnishing, appliance,
machinery, or parts thereof, and a copy of the notice shall additionally be served upon any adult
person occupying the premises upon which same item is located and upon the owner of the item, if
said person is known.
C. If there be no occupant or owner of the premises, any notice affixed to any building or upon any
other prominent object upon the premises shall constitute notice to such owner or occupant of the
premises or the owner of the item involved; provided, however, that if such owner or occupant is
only temporarily absent, such notice shall be by certified mail.
D. If removal is not accomplished within the time and in the manner prescribed by the order and
notice, the Police Department by the direction of the Mayor and City Council, may seek an order
from the appropriate court of competent jurisdiction, directed to the owner or occupant to show
cause why the item of abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle, major household furnishing or
appliance, or machinery, or part thereof should not be removed.
E. Upon obtaining a proper order, the Police Department may cause such item of abandoned,
wrecked, or junked vehicle, a major household furnishing, or appliance, or machinery or parts
thereof to be removed at the expense of the owner and placed in an impounding yard where it
shall be offered for sale to the highest and best bidder at a public auction after two (2) publications
in any newspaper published within the City, only in full accordance with such laws and regulations
as may govern such dispositions of abandoned or junked vehicles as established by the proper
agency of the State.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 131/336
F. The proceeds of such a sale shall be used to pay expense of removal, impounding and sale, and if
the proceeds are not sufficient therefor the balance shall immediately become due alone from the
owner or occupant of the premises if not paid by such owner. (Ord. 562, 6-6-1988)
6-7-6: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY OFFICIALS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow any authorized City officer or
employee to enter upon private or public property during usual business hours to enforce any
provision of this Chapter. (Ord. 562, 6-6-1988)
6-7-7: VIOLATION DEEMED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord.
562, 6-6-1988)
Chapter 8
FIREWORKS
6-8-1: FIREWORKS:
A. Fireworks shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are
used, fire balloons (balloons of a type which have burning material of any kind attached thereto or
which require fire underneath to propel them), firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles,
fountain wheels, dago bombs, sparklers and other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks
containing any combustible or explosive substance for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect by combustion, deflagration, explosion or detonation.
B. Exempted from this part are all toy pistols, toy cannons, toy guns and toy canes, and similar
devices such as party poppers or party favors, in which paper caps containing not more than
twenty five one-hundredths (.25) grain of explosive compound per cap are used, and such caps
whether single, roll or tape type. (1970 Code)
6-8-2: DANGEROUS FIREWORKS:
Dangerous fireworks includes any of the following:
A. Firecrackers, cannon crackers, giant crackers, salutes, silver tube salutes, cherry bombs, mines,
ground bombardment, grasshoppers and other explosive articles of similar nature;
B. Blank cartridges;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 132/336
C. Skyrockets and rockets, including all similar devices employing any combustible or explosive
material and which ride in the air during discharge;
D. Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire into the air;
E. Chasers and whistles, including all devices which dart or travel about the surface of the ground
during discharge;
F. Snakes and hats containing bichloride of mercury;
G. Sparklers more than ten inches (10") in length or one-quarter inch (1/,") in diameter or made with
other than iron wires;
H. All articles for pyrotechnic display such as aerial shells, salutes, flash shells, sky battles, parachute
shells, mines, dago bombs and similar fireworks devices including cracker balls;
I. All torpedoes which explode by means of friction, or which contain arsenic, and all other similar
fireworks devices including cracker balls;
J. Fire balloons or balloons of any type which have burning material of any kind attached thereto.
(1970 Code)
6-8-3: SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS:
Safe and sane fireworks include any of the following:
A. Cane fountains with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding fifty (50) grams each;
B. Cylindrical fountains, whether base, spike or handle with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding
seventy five (75) grams each and inside tube diameter not exceeding three-fourths inch (3/4");
C. Sparklers and dipped sticks not more than ten inches (10") in length or one-fourth inch ('/4") in
diameter made of steel or iron wire and suzuki and Morning Glories with pyrotechnic composition
not exceeding four (4) grams each;
D. Snakes which do not contain bichloride of mercury and pyrotechnic composition not exceeding two
(2) grams each;
E. Wheels with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding sixty (60) grains for each driver unit or two
hundred forty (240) grains for each complete wheel. The inside tube diameter of driver unit shall
not exceed one-half inch ('/2");
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 133/336
F. Whistles, without report and which do not dart or travel about the ground during discharge with
pyrotechnic composition not exceeding six (6) grams and containing no picric or gallic acid. (1970
Code)
6-8-4: PERMITS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to import, export, offer for sale, sell, possess, keep or
store, or permit the keeping or storing of any dangerous fireworks for any use or purpose, except
that a person holding a dangerous fireworks permit issued pursuant to the terms and conditions of
this Chapter may use dangerous fireworks for a safely supervised and conducted public display of
fireworks, and said fireworks may be stored for a period not exceeding four (4) days immediately
preceding the date of said public display.
B. No person, without having a valid safe fireworks permit issued pursuant to the terms and conditions
set forth in this Chapter shall import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, or sell
any safe and sane fireworks for any use or purpose. (1970 Code)
6-8-5: APPLICATION:
A. Any reputable person in reasonable pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal business or
charitable purpose, desiring to engage in the sale of safe and sane fireworks within the City, shall
first make written application to the Clerk for a safe and sane fireworks permit. Each applicant shall
pay to the Clerk a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) at the time he files his application, and shall not be
refundable in any event.
B. Any reputable person in reasonable pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal business or
charitable purpose, desiring to make a public display of dangerous fireworks shall first make
written application to the Clerk for a dangerous fireworks permit. Each applicant shall pay to the
Clerk a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) at the time he files his application, and shall not be refundable in
any event. (Ord. 476, 4-21-1975)
6-8-6: FORM OF APPLICATION:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit or a dangerous fireworks permit shall file his
application with the Clerk. Each application shall show the following:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. The purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for which it was organized.
C. The names and addresses of the officers, trustees and/or directors, if any, of the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 134/336
D. The location where the applicant requests permission to sell safe and sane fireworks or display
dangerous fireworks.
E. When and where the applicant was organized and established, or, if a natural person, the
applicant's age.
F. The location of the applicant's principal and permanent meeting place or places, or principal place
of business.
G. The applicant's State Sales Tax Permit Number.
H. If the applicant is an entity other than a sole proprietorship, the name and a general description of
the business activities of each parent or subsidiary company, business or entity, and a general
description of the ownership organization of each parent or subsidiary, if any.
I. Such other information as the Clerk may require on a standard form submitted to all applicants and
which is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and morals. (1970 Code)
6-8-7: INVESTIGATION:
The Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made of each application and applicant and shall submit
a written report of his findings and recommendations for or against the issuance of the permit,
together with his reasons therefor, to the Mayor and Councilmen of the City, which report shall not be
public information except on request of the applicant or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(1970 Code)
6-8-8: POWER TO DENY:
The Mayor and Councilmen of the City shall have the power in its discretion to grant or deny any
application, subject to such reasonable conditions, if any, as it shall prescribe so long as the denial of
the application is reasonably necessary for protection of the public health, safety and morals. (1970
Code)
6-8-9: TERM OF PERMIT:
A safe and sane fireworks permit or a dangerous fireworks permit issued pursuant to this Chapter
shall be valid only within the calendar year in which issued. A permit shall be valid only for the specific
premises or location designated in the permit. However, subject to reasonable conditions necessary
for protection of the public health, safety and morals, an applicant may be granted permits for more
than one site or location within the City. No permit shall be transferable or assignable. (1970 Code)
6-8-10: TIME OF FILING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 135/336
Each application' for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks at retail shall be filed with the Clerk on or
before June 1 of the calendar year for which the permit is sought. (Ord. 476, 4-21-1975)
6-8-11: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit or for a dangerous fireworks permit shall have
filed with the Clerk prior to the issuance and validity of any permit a policy, or a certified true copy
thereof, of public liability and products liability insurance, including both accident and occurrence
coverage. The insurance coverage limits for both public liability coverage and products liability
coverage limits shall be at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person per
occurrence bodily injury, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence aggregate
bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence aggregate property
damage. Each policy of insurance shall be in form and substance acceptable to the City and shall
name as insured parties under the terms of the policy the City in performance of official functions
regarding all operations under or pertaining to said permit and licensee or licensor of the applicant,
and all vendors of the fireworks covered by the permit to be issued to the applicant. Said policy of
insurance shall be so written that it cannot be cancelled without at least ten (10) days prior written
notice to the City from the underwriting insurance company. The policy of insurance shall be
underwritten through or by a qualified and duly licensed insurance company or companies doing or
authorized to do insurance business in the State of Idaho. (1970 Code)
6-8-12: TIME OF SALE:
"Safe and Sane Fireworks", as now defined by title 39, chapter 26 of the Idaho Code, and as the same
may hereafter be defined by amendment, may be possessed, sold, given away or discharged and
used between and including twelve o'clock (12:00) noon June 28 to midnight on the fifth day of July of
each year. (Ord. 530, 4-20-1981)
6-8-13: STANDS:
A. Temporary fireworks stands from which safe and sane fireworks are to be sold shall be subject to
the following provisions:
1. The stand in which the fireworks shall be stored or sold shall not be located within twenty five
feet (25) of any other building nor within one hundred feet (100') of any gasoline station or
flammable liquid dispensing device or installation.
2. All such stands shall meet the structural stability requirements of the building regulations of the
City and all lighting circuits and other electrical equipment shall meet the requirements of the
electrical regulations of the City.
3. The stand shall have exit doors at least thirty inches (30") wide at both ends of the structure and
one additional door for each twenty five feet (25') of rear wall in excess of twenty five feet (25').
All doors shall open outward from the stand and all doorways shall be kept free and clear from
all supplies and materials at all times.
4. Each stand shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) two and one-half (2'/2) gallon soda and
acid type fire extinguishers, in good working order, and easily accessible for use in case of fire,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 136/336
which shall be kept in immediate proximity to the location where the fireworks are retailed.
5. There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty one (21) years of age or older, on duty at all times.
All fireworks shall be effectively kept away from any kind of self-service by the public, and shall
be placed in a location which is unavailable and inaccessible to members of the public in
capacities other than as legal customers. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be
allowed inside the temporary stand at any time, nor shall any person under eighteen (18) years
of age work at or about any stand where safe and sane fireworks are sold or offered for sale.
6. No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside of any stand when it is
not open for business.
7. "NO SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed both inside and outside the stand. No
smoking shall be permitted within the stand or within fifteen feet (15') of the stand.
8. No temporary stand shall be erected before June 10 of any year. The premises on which the
stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and debris not later than noon on July 26.
9. No fireworks shall be discharged in or within twenty five feet (25') of any fireworks stand.
10. No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any fireworks stand or permit a
fire nuisance to exist.
11. No fireworks shall remain unattended at any time regardless of whether the fireworks stand is
open for business or not. If any fireworks are stored, they shall only be stored at places as are
approved for storage of fireworks by the City.
12. No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
B. Permanent business structures from which safe and sane fireworks are to be sold shall be subject
to the following provisions:
1. All such buildings shall meet the structural stability requirements of the building regulations of
the City and all lighting circuits and other electrical equipment shall meet the requirements of the
electrical regulations of the City.
2. The building shall have exit doors at least thirty inches (30") wide at both ends of the structure
and shall otherwise conform to the exit regulations established by the City building regulations
for structures of the size and nature of said building. All doors shall open outward and all
doorways shall be kept free and clear from all supplies and materials at all times.
3. Each building shall be provided with such number of fire extinguishers as the Fire Chief of the
City shall deem adequate, but in all cases the number shall not be less than two (2). The fire
extinguishers shall be two and one-half (21/2) gallon soda and acid type extinguishers or other
types approved by the Fire Chief of the City. The fire extinguishers shall be kept in good working
order, easily accessible for use in case of fire, and kept in immediate proximity to the location
where the fireworks are retailed.
4. There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty one (21) years of age or older, on duty at all times.
All fireworks shall be screened or otherwise effectively segregated from any kind of self-service
by the public, and shall be placed in a location which is unavailable and inaccessible to
members of the public in capacities other than as legal customers. No person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall be allowed at any time inside the screened or otherwise segregated area
where the fireworks are located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 137/336
5. No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside the screened or
otherwise segregated area when it is not open for business.
6. "NO SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed both inside and outside the screened or
otherwise segregated area. No smoking shall be permitted within the screened or otherwise
segregated area or within fifteen feet (15) of such area.
7. No fireworks shall be discharged in or within twenty five feet (25') of the screened or segregated
area where fireworks are kept.
8. No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate, or permit a fire nuisance to exist in or around
the area where fireworks are sold.
9. If fireworks are stored, they shall only be stored in such places as are approved for storage of
fireworks by the City.
10. No building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall be used
for the retail sale of safe and sane fireworks.
11. The City may establish other regulations for permanent structures where fireworks are to be
sold so long as said regulations are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety
and morals and apply uniformly to all applicants. (1970 Code)
6-8-14: RECORDS:
Each permittee shall be required to retain at the licensed premises while said premises are open, and
at his principal place of business for a year thereafter, copies of all invoices, receipts and orders
evidencing the source from which he acquired the fireworks which he handled. (1970 Code)
6-8-15: BOND:
In those cases where the applicant conducts the sale of fireworks from a temporary fireworks stand,
he shall post with the clerk a cash bond or cash deposit in the amount of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) (or such other security as may be acceptable to the city) conditioned upon the prompt
removal of the temporary fireworks stand and the cleaning up of debris from the site of the temporary
fireworks stand, which deposit or security shall be returned to the applicant only in the event he
removes said temporary fireworks stand and cleans up all debris to the satisfaction of the fire chief of
the city, or such other official as the city may designate. In the event of the applicant's failure to so
remove the stand and debris, said cash bond or cash deposit shall be forfeited to the city. In no event
shall the applicant be entitled to the return of said cash bond or cash deposit if he has failed to remove
said temporary fireworks stand and clean up all debris by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of July 26 of any
year. It shall be the legal duty of each permittee to clear such sites and remove all debris therefrom on
or before July 26 of the year in which the permit is granted, and failure to do so shall be punishable by
a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine and/or sixty (60) days confinement in the city jail. (1970 Code)
6-8-16: COMPLIANCE:
It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks permit to comply with all the provisions of the
Idaho state fireworks act and this chapter. The conviction of violation of the aforesaid Idaho state
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 138/336
fireworks act or any of the provisions of this chapter by the permittee, or by any of its agents,
employees or officers shall constitute a cause, in and of itself, to deny any subsequent application for
a permit. (1970 Code)
Chapter 9
GARAGE/YARD SALES
6-9-1: DEFINITION:
"Garage/yard sale" shall mean and include all general sales open to the public, conducted from or on
any residential premises in the city of Gooding, for the purpose of disposing of personal property,
including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage", "lawn", "yard", "attic", "porch", "room", "back
yard", "patio", or "moving". For purposes of this definition, "personal property" shall mean property that
is utilized, owned, and maintained by an individual or by members of a family owning or residing on
the place where the sale takes place and acquired in the normal course of living or maintaining a
residence. There shall be no yard sale allowed for merchandise which was purchased for resale or
obtained on consignment. No property offered for sale shall be displayed on any public right of way.
(Ord. 685, 11-4-2013)
6-9-2: TIME LIMIT:
A. Garage sales shall be limited in time to no more than three (3) consecutive days.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage/yard sale at any one address at which four
(4) or more garage/yard sales have been conducted by any person in the current calendar year.
C. Garage/yard sales shall be limited to daylight hours only.
D. Unsold items are to be removed or stored indoors within twenty four (24) hours from the end of the
sale. (Ord. 685, 11-4-2013)
6-9-3: SIGNS:
A. No sign shall be exhibited for more than two (2) days prior to the day such sale is to commence.
B. All signs must be removed within twenty four (24) hours of the termination of the garage sale. (Ord.
685, 11-4-2013)
6-9-4: REMOVAL OF ITEMS:
All yard sale items shall be removed from display within twenty four (24) hours of the termination of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 139/336
the yard sale. (Ord. 685, 11-4-2013)
6-9-5: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
penalties of the general misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho. Provided, however, there shall be
a mandatory minimum fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and a minimum
mandatory fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second and subsequent offense, together with court
costs. (Ord. 685, 11-4-2013)
Chapter 10
OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS
6-10-1: OCCUPANTS TO REMOVE SNOW:
Every owner or occupant of any house or other building and the person entitled to the possession of
any vacant lot, and every person having the charge of any church, or public hall or public building shall
during the time snow shall be on the ground by nine o'clock (9:00) every morning, when necessary,
clear the sidewalks and gutters in front of such lot from snow, and keep conveniently free therefrom
during the day, and shall also at all times keep such sidewalks clear and free from dirt, filth and other
obstructions or encumbrances so as to allow citizens the use of the said sidewalks in an easy, safe
and commodious manner, and every person neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of
this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, (8-201; 1947 Code)
6-10-2: REMOVAL OF RUBBISH:
Any owner, tenant or occupant of any real property shall remove all rubbish, brush, bushes, stones,
weeds, noxious grasses, snow and other obstructions from the sidewalks and alleys adjoining the
premises or property owned or occupied by him. (8-202; 1947 Code)
6-10-3: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALK:
Any person who shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed any of the sidewalks, streets or alleys and
shall continue such obstruction for a period of two (2) hours after written notice from the Chief of
Police or Street Commissioner to remove the same shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (8-204;
1947 Code)
6-10-4: CARTS AND WAGONS ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, push, convey or propel in any manner over or upon the
sidewalks any push cart, wagon or cart of any kind, size or description, provided that nothing in this
Section shall apply to any such cart, wagon or push cart used for the carrying or conveying or hauling
of infants. (8-207; 1947 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 140/336
Chapter 11
RAILROADS
6-11-1: CROSSING TO BE LIGHTED:
All railroads passing through the City shall place or cause to be placed and maintained at each
crossing thereof with the streets of the said City an electric light of not less than one hundred (100)
watt power, said lights to be so placed as to properly light said crossing. (6-401; 1947 Code)
6-11-2: SPECIFICATIONS FOR CROSSINGS:
All railroads crossing any of the streets within the City shall make and maintain said crossings as wide
as the street, and all space between the tracks thereof and between the main tracks and side tracks
shall be properly filled, graded and leveled in such a manner as to make the entire crossing level and
uniform with said tracks. Provided, that crossings on streets other than Main Street and Third and
Fourth Avenues shall be maintained as the Council from time to time directs. (6-402; 1947 Code)
6-11-3: SPEED LIMIT OF TRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any railroad or employee of any railroad to run, operate or cause to be run or
operated any engine, truck, train or car within the limits of the City at a greater rate of speed than forty
five (45) miles per hour. (Ord. 453, 3-20-1972)
6-11-4: FLYING SWITCHES:
It shall be unlawful for the officers, servants or employees of any railroad company to execute what is
known as a flying switch. (6-404; 1947 Code)
6-11-5: ENGINES; LIGHTS REQUIRED:
All engines operated upon, in, through or over any railway track within the City shall have its headlight
burning between the hours of sunset and sunrise of each day and all engines, trains, trucks or cars
moving backward between the hours of sunset and sunrise shall not exceed in speed six (6) miles per
hour and shall carry at the head of said engine, train, truck or car a watchman who shall be provided
with a lighted lantern; provided, that the words "head of said trains" as used in this Section shall be
held to mean the direction in which said engine, train, truck or car is moving without reference to the
manner of construction of said engine, train, truck or car. (6-405; 1947 Code)
6-11-6: CROSSINGS TO BE GUARDED:
It shall be the duty of all railroads passing over, through and upon the streets of the City to provide at
the crossing of the railroads and said streets suitable gates or guards and to maintain a watchmen at
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 141/336
said crossing or to provide both gates and watchman as the Council shall deem necessary, providing
that the Council may by resolution exempt all railroads from the provisions of this Section for a period
not to exceed one year, which exemption may be extended by Council by resolution from year to year,
and provided further that this Section shall apply only to such crossings as the Council shall by
resolution determine. (6-407; 1947 Code)
6-11-7: BLOCKING CROSSINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or having charge of any train of railroad cars or
any railroad cars to allow the same to remain in or upon any of the streets of the City in such manner
as to stop, block or impede the free use of such streets by either foot passenger, teams, wagons or
other vehicles for a longer period than five (5) minutes and the person having charge of any such train
or cars are hereby required to keep such streets or crossings clear from such train or cars. (6-408;
1947 Code)
6-11-8: JUMPING ON AND OFF TRAINS:
Any person who without permission of the conductor, shall jump on or from or ride upon any train of
railroad cars or any car or engine or part of a train while the same is in motion, unless they are
employed on such train shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (6-408; 1947 Code)
Title 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
7-1-1: FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED:
A. The 2000 Edition of the International Fire Code is adopted as the official fire code of the City of
Gooding, State of Idaho, for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from
fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances,
materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of
buildings and premises in the City of Gooding, Idaho and providing for the issuance of permits for
hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of the International Fire Code, 2000 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this Chapter.
B. The adoptive versions of the foregoing code shall be deemed superceded by successive versions
of such code as they are adopted or approved by the Idaho State Fire Marshall or the State of
Idaho, effective on the date any such codes are made effective by either the Fire Marshal or Idaho
legislation. (Ord. 630, 6-2-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 142/336
7-1-2: DUTIES OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT:
A. The Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire Department of the City and shall be under the
supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire Department as inspectors.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to the City Council the appointment of
inspectors who shall be selected through an examination of the Fire Marshals office of the State of
Idaho. (Ord. 608, 3-1-1999)
7-1-3: APPEALS:
Whenever the Chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code
has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief
to the Uniform Fire Code Appeals Board of the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision
appealed. (Ord. 608, 3-1-1999)
7-1-4: AMENDMENTS TO THE UNIFORM CODE:
(Rep. by Ord. 630, 6-2-2003)
7-1-5: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code or Standards hereby adopted, or fail
to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made hereunder, or who
shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Fire Chief or by
a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every
such violation and noncompliance, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less
than twenty five ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not
less than five (5) days nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The application of the above penalty(s) shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.
C. The City may enforce any of the above provisions in this Chapter either civilly, criminally or both. In
the event the property owner maintains a property in violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter, such violation will also be considered a nuisance. The City may remove or abate such
nuisance from the property upon which the same exists after giving the owner thereof notice to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 143/336
remove the same within fifteen (15) days, and upon the failure of said owner to remove or cause
the nuisance to be removed within said time, the expense thereof to the City may be certified to the
proper officer of Gooding County, Idaho for other taxes as provided by law, specifically section 50-
334 Idaho Code, as amended. (Ord. 608, 3-1-1999)
Chapter 2
FIRE REGULATIONS
7-2-1: BURNING OF RUBBISH IN BUSINESS DISTRICT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned any trash, lumber, leaves, straw,
papers or any other combustible material outside of any building in any street, alley, vacant lot or
vacant portion of any lot located within the business district. (1970 Code)
7-2-2: BURNING OF RUBBISH IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned any trash, lumber, leaves, straw,
papers, or any other combustible material outside of any business district from the period of June 1 of
each year to October 31 of each year, without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of the Fire
Department, stating when such burning shall be done and under such proper safeguards as the Fire
Chief may direct. (Ord. 507, 9-5-1978)
7-2-3: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle other than on official business, to follow any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, closer than five hundred feet (500'), or to drive into or
park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (10-132;
1947 Code)
7-2-4: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE APPARATUS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any vehicle to leave such vehicle on any street in such a
manner as to interfere with or obstruct any fire apparatus or the workings thereof at a fire when an
alarm has been sounded. (10-133; 1947 Code)
7-2-5: CONDUCT OF SPECTATORS AT FIRE:
It shall be unlawful for any onlooker, bystander or spectator to knowingly or wilfully handle, stand upon
or otherwise interfere with any fire apparatus while the same is being used to extinguish any fire or to
approach nearer than one hundred feet (100') to the building or fire. Provided, this Section shall not
apply to the owner or occupant of said building or any person assisting in removing articles of property
therefrom at the request and by the permission of the owner or the Chief of the Fire Department or the
representative of any insurance company having insurance thereon or the contents thereof, or to any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 144/336
person assisting in extinguishing said fire upon the request of the Chief of the Fire Department or
persons in charge of fire apparatus. (10-134; 1947 Code)
Chapter 3
FIRE LIMITS REGULATIONS
7-3-1: BOUNDARIES:
The fire limits of the City shall be all that portion included within the boundaries of the City as the same
now exist or may from time to time be changed. (1970 Code)
7-3-2: BONFIRES PROHIBITED; PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall not be lawful within the fire limits for any person to build bonfires, or fires of any description on
any street, alley or vacant lot, nor shall any person build bonfires in any part of the City without a
special permit from the Street Commissioner or the Chief of Police. (3-106; 1947 Code)
7-3-3: FILLING STATIONS:
A self-service automobile filling station shall comply with all other regulations as to equipment and
storage for the storing and dispensing of gasoline and similar petroleum products and in addition
thereto, shall comply with the following provisions:
A. Coin-Operated And Self-Service Devices: Any coin-operated or other dispensing device for
gasoline or similar petroleum products shall be operated only when a competent attendant is on
the premises supervising the operation of the station. Such attendant shall be thoroughly instructed
in the operation of all equipment, fire distinguishing apparatus and the safety regulations for
dispensing of such liquid products. The supervision of a competent attendant shall mean a
competent person shall at all times be in the vicinity of and able to observe the operation of any
self-service dispensing equipment and capable of rendering assistance in case of need.
B. Automatic Shutoff Nozzle: Every coin-operated or other dispensing device for the said petroleum
products for a self-service station shall be provided with an automatic shutoff nozzle, without a
latch-open device, and with a vacuum operated valve so designed and constructed as to
automatically shut off before gasoline overflows.
C. Automatic Locking Device: Each dispensing unit of gasoline and similar petroleum products shall
be provided with an automatic locking device which prevents the reuse of the unit after the hose
has been replaced or until the unit has been manually unlocked. A computing pump that
automatically prevents reuse until reset device is operated may be approved as complying with this
provision. Each dispensing unit shall be kept locked or otherwise maintained inoperable at all
times, except during the time it is actually in use by a customer. (Ord. 419, 1-16-1967)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 145/336
Chapter 4
EXPLOSIVES
7-4-1: EXPLOSIVES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, process, store or keep any gunpowder,
nitroglycerin or other similar highly explosive substance within five hundred feet (500') of any home or
substantial building belonging to another. (Ord. 294, 3-2-1948)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
8-1-1: ADOPTION OF U. S. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ORDINANCE:
A. The inspection, grading, regrading and placarding of eating and drinking establishments within the
City or its police jurisdiction, the issuing, suspension and revocation of permits for the operation of
such establishments, the sale of adulterated, misbranded or unwholesome food and drink, the
enforcement of this Chapter shall be regulated in accordance with the terms of the unabridged
form of the 1943 Edition of the U. S. Public Health Service Ordinance Regulating Eating and
Drinking Establishments, three (3) certified copies of which shall be on file in the office of the Clerk.
Provided, however, that in Section 2 of said U. S. Public Health Service Ordinance, itinerant
restaurants shall be required to secure a permit.
B. Provided, further, that when any restaurant fails to qualify for any of the grades specified in said U.
S. Public Health Service Ordinance, the Health Officer or other designated official is authorized to
suspend the permit or in lieu thereof to degrade the restaurant and permit its operation during a
temporary period not exceeding thirty (30) days. (1970 Code)
Chapter 2
MILK
8-2-1: ADOPTION OF PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE MILK CODE:
The production and handling of milk and milk products sold for ultimate consumption within the City or
its jurisdiction, all inspections, the issuing and revoking of permits and the serving of milk to the public
shall be regulated by the adoption of the U. S. Public Health Service Milk Code, published by the U. S.
Department of Health, Education and Welfare (1953), three (3) copies of which are now on file in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 146/336
office of the Clerk, and said Code is hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out at length
herein. (1970 Code)
8-2-2: PERMITS:
Under Section 3 of the above adopted Code, permits issued shall be in the sum of five dollars ($5.00)
per year, payable in advance. (1970 Code)
Chapter 3
GARBAGE
8-3-1: COLLECTIONS REQUIRED:
In the interest of the public health, sanitation and welfare of the City, all garbage and rubbish, including
ashes, cans, glass, boxes, lawn clippings, waste food and similar garbage and rubbish, also papers,
trash and leaves if in containers, and also tree branches and limbs not exceeding four feet (4') in
length and fifty (50) pounds in weight, but not including trees, large limbs and loose leaves, shall be
collected from each residence and from business houses on such schedules as may, from time to
time, be determined by the Council. (Ord. 514, 3-9-1979)
8-3-2: CITY TO HAUL:
Said garbage and rubbish shall be collected, hauled and disposed of by the City in any manner in the
discretion of the Mayor and Council. (Ord. 556, 9-21-1987)
8-3-3: GARBAGE CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
A. The City shall furnish one ninety (90) gallon container to all residences and to each small business.
Large businesses shall be furnished a commercial container. The person accepting the container
shall be responsible for its condition. If it is damaged, abused or destroyed, the person who
received the container shall be required to replace and pay for another container. No other type of
container can be used. Anyone wanting or needing more than one container will be charged for the
container and for the extra pick-up.
B. All dumpsters will be picked up and replaced with containers.
C. All commercial containers are the responsibility of the business and any damage, abuse or
destruction will require the business to replace the container at its own expense.
D. No items that are too large to fit in a container will be removed. The property owner or tenant will be
responsible for removing large items to the land fill or transfer station as appropriate. (Ord. 578,
10-21-1991)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 147/336
8-3-4: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
A schedule of fees shall be adopted by the Council for the collection and disposal of garbage, which
schedule shall be filed with the Clerk, and which may be amended or altered by the Council from time
to time. (Ord. 431, 5-19-1969)
8-3-5: FAILURE TO PAY FEE:
In the event any person fails, neglects or refuses to pay said service charges within thirty (30) days of
the mailing of such bill by the City, then the City may discontinue service to such person and shall not
be continued until all delinquencies are paid in full. (Ord. 393, 7-25-1961)
8-3-6: GARBAGE ACCOUNT:
All service charges so collected for the collection, hauling and disposition of garbage shall be by the
City officials placed in a separate fund designated as "Garbage Account". Such fund may be used for
the purpose of maintaining said garbage service and affiliated services. (Ord. 393, 7-25-1961)
8-3-7: ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER:
As an additional and concurrent method of enforcing and collecting said garbage service fee, the City
is hereby authorized and empowered to institute civil action in the appropriate court for the collection
of said charge as a civil debt or obligation. (Ord. 393, 7-25-1961)
8-3-8: MUNICIPAL GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
SERVICE COMPULSORY; EXCEPTION:
No person shall be permitted to refuse to accept the refuse collection and disposal service herein
provided for, and the failure of any person to receive such service shall not exempt such person from
the payment of charges herein specified, save and except any of those persons residing in areas in
which no collection service is provided for the entire area where no service is rendered by the City or
its contractor, no charge will be made. Boundaries within the City excepted from such charges will be
established by the City Superintendent with the consent and approval of the City Council. (Ord. 578,
10-21-1991)
8-3-9: STORING OF REFUSE:
A. Broken concrete, rocks, plaster and discarded building materials or trees and large limbs shall not
be placed in the sanitary containers. Cardboard cartons and boxes shall be cut up or flattened to
reduce volume before deposit in sanitary containers.
B. No person shall place any garbage, rubbish or refuse in any street, alley or other public place or
upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the City limits except in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 148/336
the proper containers for collection other than that provided pursuant to the authority of this
Chapter. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or garbage or rubbish on any premises is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove an existing accumulation of
refuse within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the City Superintendent shall be deemed a
violation of this Chapter.
C. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the City any refuse or garbage in
such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley
or other public place or in or on a private premises within the limits of the City. The City may
authorize storage of refuse on streets and alleys for spring and fall clean-up. The City, by
resolution, shall designate such places and times where such accumulation is allowed. (Ord. 578,
10-21-1991)
D. No persons shall place tires or ashes in the trash containers supplied and picked up by the City
Sanitation Department. All tires and ashes are the sole responsibility of the person owning,
creating or disposing of them. The City shall not collect ashes or tires for disposal and if such items
are discovered in any trash container, the trash container will not be picked up by the City and the
container will be tagged appropriately. The user of such container shall be guilty of a violation of
this Chapter if the ashes and/or tires are not removed from the container by the next trash pick-up
day. (Ord. 587, 4-19-1993)
8-3-10: CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS:
Debris resulting from the construction, reconstruction or repairs of premises shall not be placed with
other refuse for collection but shall be disposed of directly by the person or persons owning,
occupying or leasing the premises. (Ord. 578, 10-21-1991)
8-3-11: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) and
may be confined in the County jail for a period not more than six (6) months or any combination of
such fine and jail. (Ord. 578, 10-21-1991)
Chapter 4
JUNK; REFUSE ACCUMULATION
8-4-1: UNLAWFUL TO KEEP JUNK; DEBRIS:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to keep, or permit to be kept, or to place or
cause to be placed any junk or debris upon premises owned or occupied by him or upon any of the
streets, alleys or other public grounds of the City of Gooding. (Ord. 440, 10-19-1970)
8-4-2: DEFINITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 149/336
Junk is hereby defined to be any used material or any parts of material or units which have become
useless for the purpose for which said material was originally fabricated or manufactured and shall
include, but not be limited to, automobiles not licensed for the current year, any portions or parts of
automobiles, machinery or equipment, irrespective of whether the same have any salvage value,
broken and used furniture and bathroom fixtures, any unsightly accumulations of garbage, rubbish,
debris, or any stagnant water, refuse vegetable decay or decaying substance, garbage or filth of any
kind. (Ord. 468, 8-5-1974)
8-4-3: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The keeping by any person of junk, as herein defined, on premises owned or occupied by him or the
placing thereof on streets, alleys or public places is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 440, 10-
19-1970)
8-4-4: EXAMINATION; NOTICE TO ABATE:
Whenever the Chief of Police or Street Commissioner shall be notified of the existence of any
nuisance, he shall immediately make or cause to be made an examination of the yard, lot, place or
premises on which it is charged that such a nuisance is suffered or permitted, and if he finds such
nuisance to exist he shall forthwith give or cause to be given to either the owner, agent or occupant of
such yard, lot, place or premises, a notice to remove or abate such nuisance within twenty four (24)
hours. If such nuisance shall not be removed or abated within twenty four (24) hours after such notice,
the Chief of Police or Street Commissioner shall cause the nuisance to be removed or abated. The
Chief of Police or Street Commissioner is hereby authorized to remove any obstruction that it may be
necessary to remove in order to reach and remove or abate such nuisance. (Ord. 440, 10-19-1970)
8-4-5: FAILURE TO ABATE:
Whenever any such nuisance shall be in or upon any private property and the owner, agent or
occupant thereof shall fail or refuse to remove or abate the same, after due notice to do so, the same
shall be removed or abated by the Chief of Police or Street Commissioner and the expense and cost
thereof shall be paid by such owner, agent or occupant, which expense shall be collected by suit in the
name of such Chief of Police or Street Commissioner. (Ord 440, 10-19-1970)
Chapter 5
DEAD ANIMALS
8-5-1: OWNER TO BURY:
Every person in charge of any animal which dies shall remove or cause to be removed the body of
such animal within three (3) hours after death; to be buried in some place designated by the Mayor
and Council, and all such animals shall be covered and concealed from public view while being
removed. (5-401; 1947 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 150/336
8-5-2: TIME FOR REMOVAL:
Every person in charge of any animal which dies shall remove or cause to be removed the body of
such animal within three (3) hours after death. (5-402; 1947 Code)
Chapter 6
SEWERAGE SYSTEM
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the public and inhabitants of the city, and for the purpose of controlling
the use and connection to and for providing an equitable distribution of the costs and expenses of
maintenance, operation, upkeep and repair of the entire sewerage system, which includes the sewer
collection system and sewage disposal facilities of said city, to charge and collect service charges or
fees upon all lots, lands, property and premises served or benefitted by the sewerage system of the
city, which system and facilities consist generally of all pipelines, conduits, catch basins, manholes,
cleanouts, sewer mains, intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, lift stations, pumps, structures,
mechanical equipment and facilities for the treatment and disposal of sewerage or sewage
byproducts; to provide for industry cost recovery from all industrial users; and to provide for the
control, use and administration of the installation of private sewerage disposal systems where a public
sanitary sewer is not available. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be
as follows:
ACT: The federal water pollution control act, entitled "public law 92-500", and its amendments of 1972
as administered by the United States environmental protection agency (EPA).
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade
(20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the point of connection with the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
CITY: The city of Gooding, Gooding County, Idaho, or its authorized or designated agent,
representative or deputy thereto.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 151/336
FLOW (Q): The volume of sewage being discharged into the sewage system .
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY: Financial recovery by the City, from the industrial users of the
sewerage system, of that portion of the U.S. government grant amount allocable to the treatment of
wastes from such users pursuant to section 204(b) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A. Any nongovernmental user of publicly-owned treatment works identified in the
"Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972", Office of Management and Budget, as amended
and supplemented under the following divisions:
1. Division A _ Agriculture, forestry and fishing
2. Division B _ Mining
3. Division D _ Manufacturing
4. Division E _ Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary services
5. Division I _ Services
B. An industrial user is also defined as:
1. A nongovernmental, nonresident user which discharges more than the equivalent of twenty
five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of sanitary waste and which is identified in the
"Standard Industrial Classification Manual" under Divisions A, B, D, E and I.
2. A user which discharges any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or which has any other
adverse effect on the treatment works.
3. A commercial user of an individual system.
C. A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business
as distinct from sanitary sewage.
MULTIPLE BUILDING DEVELOPMENT: Includes the various types of developments that would have
common or joint ownership areas such as condominiums, townhouses, mobile home parks or courts,
shopping centers, etc.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
groundwater.
OWNER: A person owning real estate which is, or proposes to be, connected to the sewage system.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution with a
pH value of seven (7) being neutral.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 152/336
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch ('/2") in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is
controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters
are not admitted.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The point at which the building sewer connects to the public sewer.
SEWAGE OR WASTEWATER: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm
waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT OR WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY: Any devices and
system used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of Municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature to implement section 201 of the Act.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER USER: Any individual, firm, company, association, society or corporation or group who has
connected to the sewerage system.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SHALL: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes for
more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN: Sometimes termed storm sewer, means a sewer which carries storm and surface
water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted water such as
cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids, organic or inorganic, that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as
nonfilterable residue.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-3: TO WHOM CHAPTER APPLICABLE:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all property within the corporate limits of the City, and any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 153/336
special users outside of the corporate limits of the City, including all property owned or occupied by
the United States of America, Gooding County and the State of Idaho. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-4: REQUIRED USE OF SEWERS:
A. The owner or occupant of any house, building or property used for residential, commercial,
industrial, governmental or recreational use, or other purpose, situated within the City which is
abutting on or having a permanent right of access to any street, alley or right of way in which there
is located a public sewer of said City is hereby required to cease using any other method of
disposing of sewage, waste or polluted water, and at his expense, to connect such building directly
with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, within fifteen (15) days
after date of official notice from the City to do so; provided, however, that said sewer is within three
hundred feet (300') of any property line of the building to be served or common property line in a
multiple building development.
B. The developer of a new subdivision shall, at his expense, construct the necessary extensions of the
public sewer system to provide public sewer facilities for each lot in his subdivision.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
D. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 538, 5-3-
1982)
8-6-5: USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS:
The use of the public sewers of the City shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any connection any storm water, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the City. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, complying with the requirements of
section 308 of the Act and on approval of the City, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or
wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 154/336
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to,
cyanides in excess of two-tenths (0.2) mg/I as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public
sewer.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel
of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow of sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the City that such wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In
forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the City will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees (150°)
Fahrenheit, (65° centigrade).
2. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oil, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
one hundred (100) mg/I or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees (150°) Fahrenheit,
(0° and 65° centigrade).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the City.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting any excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any
such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the City for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the City as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the City in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 155/336
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths (9.5).
9. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth,
lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulphate).
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
c. Unusual BOD, chemical demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the sewage treatment works.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
10. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree
that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
E. Options:
1. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 8-6-6
of this Chapter, and which in the judgment of the City, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may:
a. Reject the wastes.
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
d. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Section 8-6-18 of this Chapter.
2. If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the City and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
F. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the City and shall be located readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
These interceptors shall be adequately maintained and are subject to periodic inspection by the
City.
G. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his
expense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 156/336
H. When required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City. The manhole shall be installed by the
owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him as so to be safe and accessible at all times.
I. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference
is made in this Chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples
taken at said manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
J. No statement contained in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by
the industrial concern.
K. Any property owner or sewer user violating the provisions of this Section shall, upon notice by the
City, immediately install such preliminary treatment through separators, traps and/or chemical,
physical or biochemical processes as will make and assure that the sewage contributed from such
property or premises will meet the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-6: INJURY TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM UNLAWFUL:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewerage
works. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-7: PERMISSION TO DISCHARGE OBJECTIONABLE WASTE OR WATER:
The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having: a) biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) greater than four hundred (400) mg/I; b) chemical oxygen demand (COD) greater than nine
hundred (900) mg/1; or c) suspended solids (SS) in excess of three hundred (300) mg/l, shall be
subject to the review and approval of the City. Where necessary, in the opinion of the City, the owner
shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to
four hundred (400) mg/I, the COD to nine hundred (900) mg/I and the SS to three hundred (300) mg/I.
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the City and of the Idaho Department of Health and
Welfare, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 157/336
8-6-8: BUILDING SEWERS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
All materials and workmanship in the installation of building sewers and service connections shall
conform to the following regulations:
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
City. The permit is not to be issued until all sewer connection charges and fees have been paid in
full.
B. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: a general permit for residential and
commercial sewer service and industrial user permits for sewer service to establishments
producing industrial wastes.
1. General permits shall be applied for by the owner or his agent on a form provided by the City
Clerk. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information, considered pertinent in the judgment of the City at the time the application is filed.
Also, the owner or his agent shall pay to the City, at the time the application is filed, a hookup
fee, which shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
2. Industrial user permits shall be applied for by the owner or his agent by letter to the City Council
accompanied by an executed copy of the industrial user agreement, together with any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City. Industrial
user permits shall be approved by the City Council based on recommendation by the Engineer
for the City. Approval shall be contingent upon the availability of excess capacity in the sewage
treatment plant, the provisions of this Chapter and any other considerations the City Council
deems appropriate. The amount of the permit, inspection fee and hookup fee for an industrial
wastes sewer service will vary with each permit and shall be established by the City at the time
of the application.
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer and service
connection shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the City
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer and the marking of the service connection for same to the public sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer and service connection shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no separate
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard
or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and being tested as required by the City, to meet all requirements of this Chapter.
F. The materials of construction of the building sewer and service connections, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform
to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes as have been or may be adopted by the
City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 158/336
G. Building Sewer Specifications:
1. The building sewer from the building drain to the public sewer and the service connection
thereto shall not be smaller than four inches (4") diameter sewer pipe. The minimum grade or
slope of the building sewer shall be as follows:
a. Four inch (4") diameter sewer pipe shall be laid on a grade of not less than one-eighth inch
('/8") per foot.
b. Six inch (6") diameter sewer pipe shall be laid on a grade of not less than one-eighth inch
('/8") per foot.
c. Eight inch (8") diameter sewer pipe shall be laid on a grade of not less than four feet (4') per
one thousand feet (1,000').
2. The alignment of the building sewer from the outlet of the building drain to the public sewer
connection shall be straight, with no bends, warps or sags permitted except with the permission
of the City. The trench bottom shall be cut to proper grade so that when the pipe is laid, the body
or barrel of the pipe shall be on solid material. Bell holes are to be excavated in the trench
bottom at all pipe joints.
H. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
I. Service Connection:
1. The service connection to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and
Plumbing Codes as adopted by the City. In addition, the materials and workmanship of the
service connection shall meet the following requirements:
a. A precast service connection fitting shall be installed as an increment of the sewer pipe line or
installed as external fabrication to the sewer pipe line, said fabrication to be installed within the
center one-third ('/3) of an individual laying the length of the public sewer pipe, as a precaution
in preventing and breaking the bell or the spigot end of the sewer pipe. The service connection
fitting shall be installed as a watertight connection to the public sewer, care being taken not to
extend the building sewer line into the public sewer line, therefore, creating a possible
restriction. The invert of the building sewer line at the service connection fitting shall be at an
elevation above the invert of the public sewer at least equal to two-thirds (2/3) of the diameter
of the public sewer. All foreign material shall be removed from the sewer pipe and there shall
be a permanent connection which is airtight and watertight between the public sewer line and
the building sewer line.
b. The building sewer service connection fitting to reinforced sewer pipe lines shall be made as
specified herein, except that in cutting a hole in reinforced pipe for installation of the service
connection tee, extreme care shall be exercised to avoid damage to the pipe. The hole for the
tee shall be carefully chipped first to expose reinforcing steel and the steel cut by torch or saw.
No chisel cutting of the reinforcing steel of any character will be permitted.
2. In lieu of a standard service connection fitting, a riser service connection may be made to sewer
lines that are deep below ground surface. The branch or riser shall be connected the same as a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 159/336
tee, except that it shall be set vertically over the public sewer pipe, and extended vertically such
that the top of the riser is not to be less than five feet (5) below the surface of the ground.
J. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer.
K. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
L. The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall be made by a plumber holding a
validated State plumbing license. (Ord.
538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-9: INDUSTRIAL USERS:
A. All industrial users of the sewerage system shall comply with any applicable requirements of
section VIII of the Act. There shall be two (2) classes of industrial users: major contributing industry
and minor contributing industry. They are defined as follows:
1. A major contributing industry is one that:
a. Will contribute greater than ten percent (10%) of the design hydraulic flow of the treatment
works;
b. Will contribute greater than ten percent (10%) of the design pollutant loading the treatment
works;
c. Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under
section V of the Act; or
d. Has significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
sewerage system, or in the quality of its effluent.
2. A minor contributing industry shall be all industries not included in the major contributing industry
classification as defined herein.
B. All major contributing industries' wastes shall be monitored by the City or industry on a regular
basis at intervals not less than monthly, and more frequently as the characteristics of the specific
industrial discharge may dictate. Minor contributing industries shall be monitored by the City or
industry as the characteristics of the specific industrial discharge may dictate as determined by the
City.
C. All major contributing industries shall submit to the City on the first day of the months of June and
December, a statement in writing regarding specific actions taken to achieve full compliance with
the requirements of this Act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 160/336
D. Each contributing industry shall report any substantial (exceeding 10% plus or minus) change in
flow or characteristics of wastewater being discharged into the sewerage system. The report shall
include quantity and quality of effluent and duration and frequency of discharge. (Ord. 538, 5-3-
1982)
8-6-10: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF CITY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE:
A. The City, through its authorized representative, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The City shall have no
authority to inquire into processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to
the public sewers or natural waterways.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to hereinabove, the authorized
representative of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the sewer user and the sewer user shall be held harmless for injury or death to any City authorized
representative and the City shall indemnify the sewer user against loss or damage to its property
by any authorized City representative and against liability claims and demands for personal injury
and property damage asserted against the sewer user and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the sewer user to
maintain safe conditions as required in this Chapter or as reasonably required by a prudent man
standard.
C. The City, through its authorized representative, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying within said easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-11: INSPECTION:
No connection of any kind to the public sewer line shall be made and no sewage permitted to flow
through such connection except pursuant to inspection and of approval by the City. (Ord. 538, 5-3-
1982)
8-6-12: REJECTIONS OR DISAPPROVALS:
The City may reject any material or workmanship for cause, and upon such order, rejected material
shall be removed and replaced with approved material. Disapproved workmanship shall cause the
removal and replacement of all materials involved, including appurtenances, excavation, backfilling
and other work items. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-13: BACKFILLING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 161/336
Backfilling of building sewers and service connections within the limits of public rights of way or
easements shall conform to special specifications promulgated by the City, for sewer installation, and
shall be subject to inspection by and approval of the City. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-14: SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS:
A. All proposed extensions of the Municipal sewerage system to serve undeveloped areas within the
existing corporate limits, newly annexed areas or areas outside the corporate limits shall comply
with the overall master plan for the city's municipal sewerage system. Costs for all extensions
which lie outside the boundary limits of the property for which the extension is requested shall also
be the responsibility of the owner or his agent. The city may, if it has uncommitted funds in its
sewer construction account, participate in a portion of the cost of any oversized sewer lines. When
it is necessary to install oversized lines as part of an extension, the cost of all oversized lines will
normally be the responsibility of the owner or his agent.
B. Unless a special permit is granted by the city, all municipal sewerage system extensions into newly
developing areas shall be installed prior to the construction of any new streets.
C. All design and construction of any extensions to the municipal sewerage system shall comply with
the official specifications for sewerage system extensions as adopted by the city.
D. The plans for all extensions to the sewerage system shall be prepared and signed by a registered
professional engineer as per the licensing requirements of the Idaho Code. Three (3) copies of the
said plans shall be filed with the city. Two (2) copies of the plans shall be filed with the Idaho
department of health and welfare for their review and approval as required by the Idaho Code. In
approving a plan for extension to the municipal sewerage system, the city reserves the right to
stipulate other requirements such as a special permit fee, rights of way limits, sequence of
construction, time limits for having existing service disrupted, the filing of a performance bond and
other similar measures as may be required to protect the public. No work shall commence on any
such extension of the municipal sewerage system until the extension project has been approved
by the city.
E. After the construction of any municipal sewerage system extensions, it shall be the obligation of the
owner, or his agent, to have a registered professional engineer certify to the city and to the Idaho
department of health and welfare that the said system extensions were installed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications on file with the respective agencies. Following
certification by the registered professional engineer and acceptance by the city, the entire
extension of the municipal sewerage system, including the city sewer service lines, shall become
the property of the city and it shall be the city's responsibility to maintain and operate the system
thereafter.
F. If it is necessary for the city to permit a sewer service connection and/or sewer service line at any
time after the extension has been originally accepted by the city, the owner, or his agent, shall be
required to pay the sewer hookup fee as well as the standard permit and inspection fees as may
be established by the city for such purpose. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 162/336
8-6-15: BASIS FOR SEWER CHARGES:
There is hereby established a system of connector charges, permits and inspection fees, industrial
cost recovery charges, periodic service charges and other fees for the use of, and for service
rendered by the sewerage works of the city, and which charges, rates and fees shall be as near as
possible, uniform as to the different fees provided by this chapter and are hereby levied and assessed
against each lot, parcel of land, building or property having any connection with the sanitary sewerage
works of the city or otherwise discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastewater or other liquids into
the sanitary sewerage works of said city. (Ord. 674, 4-18-2011)
8-6-16: SEWER USER CHARGES AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES:
The sewer user charges and sewer connection fees and charges shall be based on an equivalent
connection. An equivalent connection shall be established as an average single-family residence in
the city. All single-family residences and single-family apartment units shall be one equivalent
connection. The city council shall establish by action of the council duly entered in its minutes, an
equivalent connection for all commercial, industrial or special users currently or subsequently using
the sewer system. The equivalent connection shall be determined based on flow volume (Q), BOD
and suspended solids (SS) characteristics of the discharged waste. The city hereby expressly
reserves the right to change or revise all equivalent connection determinations hereinbefore provided
by action of the council duly entered in its minutes. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-17: SEWER CONNECTION, PERMIT AND INSPECTION:
A. To obtain municipal sewer service, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. A permit and inspection fee shall
be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. Also, the owner or his agent shall pay to the
city, at the time the application is filed, a connection charge in the amount as provided for in
section 8-6-16 of this chapter.
B. The materials of construction of the sewer service line and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling of the trench and surface replacement shall all
conform to the requirements of specifications and codes as have been or may be adopted by the
city.
C. A separate and independent city sewer service connection shall be provided for each building.
D. The applicant for the city sewer service connection shall notify the city when the connection of the
sewer service connection and line to the public sewer main is ready for inspection. (Ord. 538, 5-3-
1982)
8-6-18: SEWER USER CHARGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 163/336
A. The owner, or his agent, of all properties connecting to the public sewer of the city under the terms
of this chapter shall pay a sewer user charge of three dollars seventy five cents ($3.75) for each
equivalent connection or fraction thereof as may be assigned to the property by the city. The sewer
user charge will be reviewed on or before August 20 each year to determine if the charge is
adequate for maintaining and operating the sewage collection and treatment system.
B. The city hereby expressly reserves the right to change or revise the rates hereinbefore provided by
action of the council duly entered in its minutes. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-19: SEWER CONNECTION CHARGE:
(Rep. by Ord. 674, 4-18-2011)
8-6-20: INDUSTRIAL USER CHARGES:
All industrial user charges shall be established by separate agreement between each separate
contributing industry and the city council. All charges so established shall be in proportion to the
benefits derived by the user from the sewerage system and shall be in accordance with pertinent
federal regulations as are defined herein as the act. The charges so established shall generate
sufficient revenue to pay the industrial user portion of the bonded indebtedness, operating and
maintenance of the sewerage system and reserve fund as required to pay for future improvements to
the sewage treatment plant, all as required by the act. The charges shall be based on the amount of
flow (Q), the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), the suspended solids (SS) and any other pertinent
components of the wastes that the industrial user is contributing to the sewerage system. All
contributing industrial user charges shall be reviewed annually and revised as necessary to ensure
that each contributing industrial user pays its allocable share. If the discharge of a contributing
industrial user changes significantly greater than ten percent (10%) plus or minus, (by strength,
volume, delivery flow rate or other pertinent component characteristics) such industrial user's charge
shall be adjusted accordingly to assure that the user continues to pay its allocable share. (Ord. 538, 5-
3-1982)
8-6-21: SPECIAL SEWER USER CHARGE FOR OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE
LIMITS:
The city may permit the use of the sewerage works by individual properties that are partially or entirely
outside the corporate limits of the city. Each request for such service must be approved by the city
council and all regulations of this chapter must be complied with by such special sewer user. The
sewer user will be considered a special user as long as the property being served remains outside the
corporate limits of the city. In addition to all other charges and fees as are required to be paid by any
sewer user, including industrial users, the special users may be charged a supplemental monthly user
charge that will be to reimburse the city for any other costs to the city that are attributable to
administering, operating and/or maintaining the said special sewer user service. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
8-6-22: MONTHLY USER CHARGES; WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE:
(Rep. by Ord. 674, 4-18-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 164/336
8-6-23: DELINQUENCY NOTICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 674, 4-18-2011)
8-6-24: SEWERAGE SYSTEM FUND:
A. All fees and charges received and collected under authority of this chapter shall be deposited and
credited to a special fund to be designated as the sewerage system fund. The accounts of said
fund shall show all receipts and expenditures for the maintenance, operation, upkeep and repair of
the sewerage works and any payments into sinking funds as may be established for the purpose
of:
1. Paying principal of and interest on the general obligation sewer bonds of the city which shall
from time to time be outstanding;
2. Industrial cost recovery funds for payment to EPA;
3. Sewerage capital improvement fund for industrial cost recovery payments that are to be used
exclusively for future expansion, upgrading or reconstruction on the sewage system eligible for
EPA assistance; and
4. Other special funds as may be established by the city council.
B. As provided by law, when budgeted and appropriated, the funds and credits to the account of the
sewerage system fund shall be available for the payment of the requirements for the maintenance,
operation, repairs and upkeep of the sewerage works of the city, and to the extent legally available,
for payment into a sinking fund established for the payment of the principal of and interest of the
general obligation sewer bonds of the city which shall from time to time be outstanding. (Ord. 538,
5-3-1982)
8-6-25: UNAVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC SEWER:
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of this chapter, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private sewer disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter
and in accordance with the following special provisions:
A. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first
obtain a written permit from the city. The application for said permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by plans, specifications and other
information as may be deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee of twenty dollars
($20.00) shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
B. A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not be effective until the installation is completed
to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is
ready for final inspection and before any underground works are covered. The inspection shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 165/336
made by the city within seventy two (72) hours after receipt of notice from applicant, Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays being excluded in calculating the elapsed time.
C. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
of the rules and regulations and recommendations of the Idaho department of health and welfare
and/or Central district health department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
D. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to property served by a private sewage disposal
system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter and
any septic tank, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled
with suitable material.
E. The owners shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facility in a sanitary manner at
all times and at no expense to the city.
F. Septic tank pumpings shall not be deposited in any manhole, cleanout or sewer opening. The
pumpings may be dumped at the sewage treatment plant at a point designated by the city. The
number of gallons dumped and the nature of the wastes shall be provided to the plant operator
prior to the dumping. A fee for the septic tank dumping shall be determined by the city.
G. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the department of health and welfare of the state. (Ord. 538,
5-3-1982)
8-6-26: PENALTIES:
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the city with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and provided a reasonable time limit, but in any
event not to exceed ninety (90) days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation, beyond the time limit provided for hereinabove in this
section, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment
not exceeding thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. Each day in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 538, 5-3-1982)
Chapter 7
WATER SYSTEM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 166/336
8-7-1: ENFORCEMENT:
All provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the discretion vested in the superintendent of
waterworks and the clerk, such discretion shall be subject to control of the council. (1947 Code § 1-
803)
8-7-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
A. Application For Use Of Water: Application for the use of water from the municipal waterworks
system must be made at the office of the clerk on printed forms furnished for that purpose. Every
such application must be made by the owner or tenant of the property to be benefitted, stating the
lot and block on which it is to be used, and he must agree to conform to the rules and regulations
established from time to time as a condition for the use of water. (1947 Code § 1-801)
B. Use To Be Stated: It shall be unlawful for any person supplied with water from the city mains to be
entitled to use it for any purposes other than those stated in his application or to supply it in any
way to other persons. Should the owner or occupant of any premises desire additional outlets or
fixtures or desire to use water for a purpose not stated in the original application, a new application
must be made and a new permit obtained from the water commissioner. (1970 Code)
8-7-3: SHUT OFF FOR REPAIRS:
The water may at any time be shut off from the mains without notice for the purpose of making repairs,
extensions or other necessary purposes and persons having boilers supplied by direct pressure from
the mains are cautioned against danger of explosion or collapses and the city shall not be responsible
for the safety of boilers on the premises of any water consumers. (1947 Code § 1-802)
8-7-4: REPORT REQUIRED:
Every person who shall make any connection, attachment or extension, shall make a report in writing
to the water commissioner within three (3) days after the same shall have been done, giving the name
of the owner, the number of hydrants, faucets, bathtubs, water closets and other connections made
with the pipes of the water system. (1970 Code)
8-7-5: EXTENT OF SERVICE:
The service pipes must be so arranged that the supply to each separate house or premises may be
controlled by a separate stop cock placed within or near the curb. Where water is already supplied
through one service to several houses, families or persons, the water commissioner may at his
discretion either decline to furnish water until separate services are provided or continue the supply on
condition that one person shall pay for all on the same service. (1970 Code)
8-7-6: WATER RATES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 167/336
A. Schedule: A schedule of fees, rates or charges shall be adopted by the council for the use of water
from the municipal waterworks system, which schedule shall be filed with the clerk, and which may
be amended or altered by the council by resolution, from time to time. (Ord. 466, 6-17-1974)
"Commercial water rates" shall be those rates charged to any business conducted in the city.
"Domestic water rates" shall be those rates charged to dwelling houses. (1970 Code)
B. Deposit Required: Upon making application for the use of water, the applicant must make a cash
deposit with the clerk in such amount, as the mayor and council may, from time to time, determine
and establish as the amount of minimum deposit which may be required for residential and
commercial uses. Such amount so deposited shall be in the form of a guaranty of payment of all
water charges prior to the tenth day of each month or at such time as the user may remove from
said premises. The deposit shall be kept by the clerk at all times. However, the mayor and council
may, from time to time, determine and establish regulations for the return of deposits prior to the
time the user may remove from the premises. (Ord. 569, 4-2-1990)
C. Meter Installation Charges: The mayor and council shall, from time to time, prescribe and
determine the amount to be charged for the installation of water meters of various sizes and that a
schedule of such rates shall be maintained and available for inspection by the clerk. (Ord. 457, 2-
19-1973)
D. Charges Payable To Clerk: All charges will be due and payable at the office of the clerk on the first
day of each month, and if any charges or rates are not paid within ten (10) days from the time they
are due and payable the water shall be shut off from the premises, and shall not be turned on
again until such charges or rates are paid, together with a sum to be determined from time to time
by the mayor and city council in addition to the expense of turning the water on again. (Ord. 548, 6-
17-1985, eff. 7-1-1985)
8-7-7: WATER USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. The Gooding city council shall have the right and authority to regulate the hours and days of use of
city supplied domestic water for sprinkling of lawns, gardens, pastures or any other kind of
sprinkling or watering outside the home. Such regulation will be by resolution passed by the
council upon a determination of a scarcity of water and/or to prevent an undue burden on the city's
domestic water supply.
B. The failure of any person and/or other entity, to discontinue sprinkling after passages of such
resolution, or who shall use water for domestic irrigation upon hours or days not permitted, or who
irrigates with an open hose during the times of restricted sprinkling, for domestic irrigation, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.00) or incarcerated for a period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days
or both by fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 620, 7-2-2001)
8-7-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 168/336
A. Tampering Or Obstructing: It shall be unlawful for any person except a fireman in the performance
of his duty to open or in any way tamper with any fire hydrant connected with the water system
unless permission first be obtained from the water commissioner. No person shall place upon or
about any water gate connected with the water system any material substance whatsoever which
will prevent access at all times to such hydrant or gate and no vehicle shall be allowed to stand
within eight feet (8') of such hydrant. The use of private hose in time of or during an alarm of fire is
strictly prohibited unless for protection of property.
B. Waste Of Water: It shall be unlawful for any person to waste water. All outlets must be kept closed
except during the time which water is being drawn for necessary use. Letting the water run to
prevent freezing in cold weather or to keep the water cool in warm weather is prohibited. The
owner of any premises shall keep his faucets, closet and other fixtures and his pipes to the curb
line in good repair and free from leaks.
C. Contamination: It shall be unlawful for any person to contaminate or befoul any reservoir, stream or
watershed, spring or other source from which the supply of water for the city is obtained, nor any
pipe, fountain or any other device forming a part of the city water system. (1970 Code)
D. Injuring Equipment: Any person who shall interfere with, molest or injure the waterworks system of
the city or any part thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1947 Code § 1-807)
8-7-9: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
Each property owner or water user shall maintain in good condition his service line and curb box from
the main to his premises. (1970 Code)
Chapter 8
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
8-8-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health of domestic water users receiving their water
supply from the city. (Ord. 523, 3-17-1980)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
BACKFLOW: The flow of nonpotable water, liquids, gases or other foreign substances into the pipes
of a potable water system from any source or sources.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: The device to counteract back pressure or to prevent back
siphonage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 169/336
CROSS CONNECTIONS: Any actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a
public or consumers potable water system in any other source or system through which it is possible
to introduce into any part of the potable system used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other
than the intended potable water, with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and any other temporary or
permanent devices which or because of which "backflow" can or may occur are cross connections.
(Ord. 523, 3-17-1980)
8-8-3: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
No domestic water service connection shall be installed or hereafter maintained unless the water
supply is protected by backflow prevention devices as required by the rules and regulations of the
Idaho department of health and welfare, as the same now exists or as may be hereafter amended or
supplemented. Any cross connection now existing or hereafter installed is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be abated. (Ord. 523, 3-17-1980)
8-8-4: SERVICE:
Service to any property, landowner or water consumer receiving a water supply from the city's water
supply system shall be contingent upon compliance with all the requirements of the rules and
regulations of the Idaho department of health and welfare and of this chapter pertaining to cross
connections. Service shall be discontinued to any premises, water consumer or property owner for
failure to comply with such regulations of the Idaho department of health and welfare and of this
chapter pertaining to cross connections, and any discontinued service will not be reestablished until
the city, or its designated agent has approved compliance by that particular premises or water
consumer or landowner. (Ord. 523, 3-17-1980)
8-8-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations as adopted by the city, in
connection herewith, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 523, 3-17-1980)
8-8-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any one or more sections, subsections, or sentences of this chapter are for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter and the same shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 523, 3-17-1980)
Chapter 9
PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
8-9-1: CODE ADOPTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 170/336
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-901, the 2007 edition of the Idaho standards for public works
construction is adopted as the official public works code of the city of Gooding, state of Idaho.
The adopted versions of the foregoing code shall be deemed superseded by successive versions of
such codes as they are adopted or approved by the Idaho standards for public works construction
board, or the state of Idaho, effective on the date any such codes are made effective by the public
works construction board. (Ord. 659, 11-19-2007)
8-9-2: AMENDMENTS:
At this time there will be no exceptions to the codes as adopted. (Ord. 659, 11-19-2007)
Title 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
RESERVED
Chapter 2
SIDEWALKS
9-2-1: AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL TO ORDER SIDEWALKS REPAIRED OR
CONSTRUCTED:
The Council may at any regular meeting, or at any special meeting called for that purpose by a vote of
three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the Council, or by a vote of a majority of the Council when there
has been filed with the Clerk a petition signed by a majority of the property owners of not less than
one side of a block, by an order entered on the minutes of such meeting direct the construction of
sidewalks on any street, block or part of a block assessing the cost thereof on the property in front of
which the same shall be laid, directing the owner thereof to construct the same at his expense; and
the Council may in like manner order the alteration or repair of any sidewalks now or hereafter
constructed. (8-101; 1947 Code)
9-2-2: CONTENTS OF ORDER:
When the construction or repair of any sidewalk is ordered, the order therefor shall state the material
of which the same shall be constructed or repaired, the date on or before which the same shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 171/336
completed, and in case any sidewalks are to be constructed, the order shall contain complete
specifications thereof as to width, position, material and so forth, and whether or not a curb shall be
constructed. (8-102; 1947 Code)
9-2-3: NOTICE; SERVICE:
Whenever any sidewalks are to be constructed or repaired, the Clerk shall prepare a notice to be
served upon the owner of the property abutting upon the sidewalks to be repaired or constructed,
directing such owners to construct or repair such sidewalk within fifteen (15) days from the date of the
notice and report the completion thereof to the Clerk or Street Commissioner. Such notice shall be
served by the Chief of Police or Street Commissioner by delivering a copy thereof to the owner of the
abutting property, or his agent, if such owner or agent can be found within the City, but if not to be
found within the City, then, if his place of residence be known, by sending a copy of the order by
registered mail to his place of residence, but if such owner or agent cannot be found within the City
and his place of residence is unknown, such notice shall be served by the publication of a copy
thereof for two (2) successive weeks in the official newspaper of the City, the last publication of which
must be at least twenty (20) days before the time mentioned in the notice for the completion of the
construction or repair of the sidewalks herein mentioned. (8-103; 1947 Code)
9-2-4: COUNCIL TO ADVERTISE FOR BIDS:
If, at the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the time of personal service, mailing or the first publication
of said notice, any sidewalk ordered to be constructed or repaired is not completed, according to the
order thereof, the Council shall proceed to advertise by sealed bids for the construction or repair
thereof, by publication for at least one week in the official newspaper, stating in such notice the
particular pieces of sidewalk to be constructed or repaired and referring to the original order for such
construction or repair, for the specifications thereof and to proceed to let the contract for such
construction or repair to the lowest bidder, unless in the judgment of the Council such bid is too high.
Provided, however, that whenever the estimated costs of the construction of any piece of sidewalk or
the repair thereof does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) the same may be constructed under the
direction of the Street Commissioner without advertising for bids. (8-104; 1947 Code)
9-2-5: NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY:
After any sidewalk or portion of any sidewalk has been constructed or repaired as provided in this
Chapter, the Council shall declare the owner of the abutting property delinquent, and the Clerk shall
be instructed to give such delinquent owner notice, in the same manner as provided for the service of
notice for the construction or repair, that he is delinquent stating the amount and that unless the same
is paid together with cost of service if served by publication, within thirty (30) days of the notice, that
twenty five percent (25%) will be added to the amount of delinquency as a penalty. At the expiration of
thirty (30) days from the date of the service of the notice, provided the same has been served
personally or by mail or thirty (30) days after the time of the first publication if served by publication,
the Council shall proceed to add twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of such delinquency as a
penalty to the actual cost of construction or repair of such sidewalks, charges for publication, if any,
and penalty against the property abutting thereto, and the Clerk shall forthwith certify the action of the
Council, together with a description of the property with the assessments and the amount thereof to
the County Auditor, who shall add the amount of such delinquency to the amount of State and County
taxes assessable against such property, and if such property is not liable for State and County taxes
he shall enter the name of the delinquent owner for the amount of such delinquent sidewalk taxes
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 172/336
only, and he shall collect such delinquent taxes at the time and in the manner provided by law for the
collection of State and County taxes and turn the amount collected over to the Treasurer. (8-105; 1947
Code)
9-2-6: COUNCIL MAY EXTEND TIME:
The Council may for good cause shown extend the time within which any sidewalk shall be
constructed or repaired, but no such extension of time shall exceed sixty (60) days. (8-106; 1947
Code)
9-2-7: PERMIT REQUIRED TO BUILD SIDEWALK:
Before building any sidewalk under the provisions of this Chapter, the owner of abutting property shall
make application for and secure a permit from the Clerk. Fee for said permit shall be one dollar
($1.00). (8-108; 1947 Code)
9-2-8: CEMENT:
All cement to be used for the construction of sidewalks or curbs shall be of some well known and
reliable brand, and shall conform to the standard specifications of the American Society for Testing
Materials. (Ord. 297, 6-7-1948)
9-2-9: CONCRETE SIDEWALKS:
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed in lengths not to exceed fifty feet (50') with a joint of one-half inch
(1/2") thick and four inches (4") in width across the width of the walk, and at a right angle with the
line of the walk. The finished walk shall be four inches (4") in depth.
B. All walks shall be at least five feet (5') wide, except where otherwise ordered by the City Engineer.
The slope thereof shall correspond to a fall of three-fourths inch (3/4") for each five feet (5) of width
of the sidewalk; provided that in strictly residential districts sidewalks need not be sloped. Edges of
all sidewalks shall be finished and rounded to a one inch (1") radius. (Ord. 297, 6-7-1948)
9-2-10: SIDEWALK LINES:
A. Stakes for lines and grade will be set by the City Engineer at no cost to the contractor. The upper
edge of the finished walk shall be built to true lines conforming with the grade and property lines as
set and irregularities in the line of surface shall be straightened.
B. The line of the walk may be shifted on the order of the City Engineer to avoid valuable trees or
other obstacles. (Ord. 297, 6-7-1948)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 173/336
9-2-11: FORMS:
Lumber used for forms shall be sound, unwarped materials not less than one and three-fourths inches
(13/4") in thickness. (Ord. 297, 6-7-1948)
9-2-12: PREPARING CONCRETE:
The concrete shall be made as follows: One part Portland Cement to two and one-half (21/2) parts
sand, and four and one-half (41/2) parts gravel by measure. The material may consist of river run or
gravel if it fulfills the following requirements: It shall all pass a two and one-half inch (21/2") screen and
shall be of such proportions of sand and gravel that thirty three and one-third percent (331/3%) shall
pass through a sieve having sixteen (16) meshes per square inch. All proportions shall be by measure
and for each cubic yard of concrete five (5) sacks of cement shall be used. A sack to contain one
cubic foot. (Ord. 297, 6-7-1948)
9-2-13: LAYING CONCRETE FOR SIDEWALKS:
A. Upon the foundation prepared shall be laid a bed of concrete four inches (4") in thickness of the
same mix throughout. The concrete shall be placed as expeditiously as possible in the forms.
B. Retempering of concrete will not be permitted. All concrete which has begun to set before ramming
is completed shall be removed from the work.
C. Before adding any new concrete mixture to that which had already been laid for one hour or more,
the surface of the old work shall be thoroughly cleaned and coated with a thin grout of equal parts
of Portland Cement and sand before the new mixture is added. No concrete shall be laid when the
temperature at any time of the day or night falls below thirty six degrees (36?) Fahrenheit. (Ord.
297, 6-7-1948)
9-2-14: FINISH:
A. After being pured and struck off, the concrete shall be worked and puddled until the coarse
aggregate is a mixture of one part cement to two (2) parts fine screened sand. This is to be floated
into the surface and the walk left with a fine sand float finish.
B. The walk must be creased into squares, a crease every six feet (6'). The edges are to be rounded
to a radius of one inch (1"). (Ord. 297, 6-7-1948)
9-2-15: PROTECTION:
It shall be covered with canvas, sand, earth, straw or other material to thoroughly protect it from the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 174/336
elements, and must be kept wet for at least forty eight (48) hours when it may be allowed to set
thoroughly with frequent sprinklings for four (4) days. (Ord. 297, 6-7-1948)
9-2-16: CLEANING SIDEWALKS AND STREETS:
The earth or other covering shall be removed and the sidewalk shall be thoroughly cleaned. All excess
materials and all rubbish shall be removed from the area. (Ord. 297, 6-7-1948)
9-2-17: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
All sidewalks hereafter constructed in that portion of the City south of Little Wood River and east of the
east sidewalk on Main Street shall be located and constructed contiguous to and in actual contact with
the adjacent curb. (Ord. 318, 1-29-1951)
9-2-18: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
All east-west sidewalks hereafter constructed in that portion of the City south of Little Wood River and
west of the west sidewalk on Main Street shall be located and constructed contiguous to and in actual
contact with the adjacent curb. (Ord. 318, 1-29-1951)
9-2-19: CURB CONSTRUCTION:
All curbs that are constructed shall be sixteen inches (16") deep, six inches (6") in width at the top and
batter out at the rate of one inch (1") in one foot (1'), and shall be beveled or rounded on the upper or
outer edge and at the intersection of streets the corner shall be a quadrant with three feet (3') radius.
Expansion joints one-half inch (1/2") in thickness shall be placed every fifty feet (50'), and at the
tangent points on curves, extending entirely through the curb, and at right angles thereto. (Ord. 297, 6-
7-1948)
Chapter 3
STREETS
9-3-1: HEAVY EQUIPMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to run or otherwise move any traction or similar engine across or
over any culvert or bridge in any of the streets or alleys without first covering such bridge or culvert
with good substantial plank of not less than four inches (4") in thickness so placed and arranged as to
prevent the weight of such engine from resting on or being sustained by such bridge or culvert. (1947
Code § 7-201)
9-3-2: EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 175/336
Any person who shall make any excavation or cause any excavation to be made in any public place,
or bordering on any public place, or who shall obstruct any street or alley, or cause any street or alley
to be obstructed in any manner, shall each night before dark cause a red light danger signal, or as
many such lights as may be necessary to properly warn the public of such excavation or obstruction,
and which lights shall be by such part kept burning until daylight the next morning. (1947 Code § 7-
202)
9-3-3: PICKETING IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tie, picket or fasten any animal in the streets or alleys of the city
for the purpose of feeding or grazing, or to tie, fasten or picket any such animals in such manner that
they will feed or graze in or upon any of the streets or alleys. (1947 Code § 7-204)
9-3-4: REMOVAL OF TRASH:
Whenever any person who is the owner or proprietor or entitled to the possession of any house,
building lot or tract of land shall fail or neglect to remove the rubbish, snow, weeds, filth or any
obstruction to the streets, alleys or sidewalks, the same shall be done at the expense of the city and
the amount thereof charged against the property which amount shall be added to the taxes against
the said property and certified by the clerk to the county assessor and tax collector. (1947 Code § 7-
205)
9-3-5: REMOVING OR DUMPING GRAVEL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to pile, dump, deposit, lay or place any gravel, sand, rocks, dirt or
clay upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys or sidewalks or to remove any of said substances from
any of the streets, avenues or alleys thereof, without first obtaining the consent of the mayor and
council so to do. (1947 Code § 7-206)
9-3-6: DEPOSITING SNOW IN PUBLIC STREETS:
A. No person shall plow, push, throw, or otherwise remove snow from private property and/or public
rights of way, and accumulate it or otherwise place it on a public street, alley, or thoroughfare in the
city of Gooding.
B. Snow accumulations on public sidewalks and parking areas in the business district may be moved
or shoveled directly into the gutters contiguous to the sidewalk.
C. Any person violating any term or provision of this section shall be guilty of an infraction punishable
by a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), including court costs and fees. (Ord. 673, 2-7-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 176/336
Chapter 4
DITCHES
9-4-1: DITCHES TO BE KEPT CLEAN:
Any owner, agent, tenant, or occupant of any real property shall at all times keep gutters or ditches in
front of or adjoining such property in a clean condition, free from the obstruction of weeds, and of
sufficient depth and width to at all times readily convey irrigating or surface water without any overflow
upon streets, alleys, sidewalks or private property; provided, however, that this section shall not apply
to any property within the fire limits of the city. (1947 Code § 9-301)
9-4-2: INJURING DITCHES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure any irrigation ditch that may be located on any street within
the corporate limits of the city or to drive any stock through or over any such ditch unless he drives
over some bridge or culvert, or to tie any stock out so they will walk into such ditch or on the banks
thereof, or to do any other act that will result in injury to said ditch or ditches. (1947 Code § 7-302)
9-4-3: CULVERTS TO BE MAINTAINED:
It is hereby made the duty of any person who shall run water for irrigation or for any other purpose
across any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks, to construct and keep in repair a good and substantial
culvert of sufficient capacity for carrying said water and to cover such culvert where the same crosses
any street, alley or sidewalk. (1947 Code § 7-303)
9-4-4: PERMISSION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or construct any ditch, lateral or culvert or to lay any pipe on
or across any street or alley without first obtaining permission from the water commissioner or the
mayor. (1947 Code § 9-304)
9-4-5: TAMPERING WITH HEADGATES:
No person except the water commissioner shall obstruct or dam up any ditch or culvert or shall
remove or change any headgate or check in any ditch without the consent of the owner thereof. (1947
Code § 9-306)
9-4-6: WATER IN STREETS:
No person shall cause or permit any water used by him for the purpose of irrigation or for any other
purpose to flow in or upon or across any public highway, street or alley or upon the premises of
another, in any manner not authorized by law or the provisions of this code. (1947 Code § 9-307)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 177/336
9-4-7: EARTHEN DAMS:
No person shall cause any earthen dam or any other obstruction in any of the irrigating ditches, and all
persons entitled to the use of water from any such ditch shall place therein for his use and for the
purpose of diverting his water, a wooden or cement headgate or check. (1947 Code § 9-308)
9-4-8: DIVERSION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Requirements: No land shall be entitled to receive or shall receive irrigation water from the ditches
and distribution system located in and operated by the city unless and until such land be leveled
and graded in such manner and to such extent that irrigation water can be diverted from the
nearest ditch of the irrigation system so being operated by the city in a feasible manner, and in
such manner as not to unreasonably impede the flow of water in such ditch, and in such manner
as not to require the water in such ditch to be backed up to an unreasonable extent or forced onto
lands not then being irrigated.
B. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to lands which have been actually
receiving irrigation water from and through the said city system. (Ord. 321, 4-16-1951)
9-4-9: IRRIGATION WATER DISTRICTS:
The water commissioner is hereby authorized to divide the city into districts for irrigating purposes and
to specify the hours and conditions for the use of water for irrigation in each district. The water
commissioner shall from time to time publish in a local newspaper notice of such regulations which
shall become effective ten (10) days after the date of publication. (1970 Code)
Chapter 5
FENCES ON CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY1
9-5-1: LICENSE:
The City building inspector is authorized to grant a fence license upon application of the property
owner. (Ord. 632, 8-18-2003)
9-5-2: APPLICATION:
The application will contain the name, address and reason desiring to erect a fence on a City right-ofway.
(Ord. 632, 8-18-2003)
9-5-3: CRITERIA FOR LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 178/336
The criteria for granting or denying a fence license are as follows:
A. Meet all requirements for that zone (except setbacks);
B. Does not create a hazard;
C. Does not confer ownership, only a revocable license that can be revoked at any time by the City of
Gooding. (Ord. 632, 8-18-2003)
9-5-4: REMOVAL OF FENCE:
Should the City determine that the right-of-way needs to be used, the City may remove the fence at
the homeowner's expense. (Ord. 632, 8-18-2003)
9-5-5: APPEAL:
In the event a fence license is denied by the building inspector, a homeowner may appeal that
decision to the City Planning and Zoning Commission and its recommendation shall be referred to the
City Council for final action. (Ord. 632, 8-18-2003)
Chapter 6
WEEDS
9-6-1: NUISANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, lessee, tenant, or other person occupying or having charge
or control of any premises to permit weeds to remain upon said premises or any area between the
property lines of said premises and the centerline of any adjacent street or alley, including, but not
specifically limited to, sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements, rights of way and all other areas, public or
private. All "weeds" as hereinafter defined are declared a nuisance and are subject to abatement as
hereinafter provided.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, lessee, tenant, or other person occupying or having charge
or control of any premises to permit the accumulation of cut weeds, grass, brush, tree limbs or garden
spoils. This accumulation is deemed to be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of inhabitants
of the city of Gooding and is declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 654, 11-20-2006)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
NOTICE: Written notice as specified in section 9-6-3 of this chapter sent by regular mail, postage
prepaid, to the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the premises or by personal service. If by mail,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 179/336
the public works department shall prepare and maintain a certificate of mailing indicating the date on
which the letter was sent, the addressee and the address to which notice was sent. The addressee
will be presumed to have received the notice three (3) days after mailing.
WEEDS: Any of the following:
A. Brush, woody vines and volunteer trees shall be classified as weeds.
B. Plants and indigenous grasses which may attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a
fire menace to adjacent improved property.
C. Plants which are located in an area which harbors rats, insects, animals, reptiles, or any other
creature which either may or does constitute a menace to health, public safety or welfare.
D. Plants and indigenous grasses on or about residential property which, because of their height,
has a blighting influence on the neighborhood. Any such plants and indigenous grasses shall be
presumed to be blighting if they exceed eight inches (8") in height.
E. All noxious weeds as identified by state statute title 22 chapter 24. (Ord. 654, 11-20-2006)
9-6-3: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
A. The city council hereby designates the public works director as the public officer charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter. The public officer or an authorized assistant shall
notify, in writing, the owner and occupant or agent in charge of any premises in the city upon which
weeds exist in violation of this chapter, by mail or by personal service. Such notice shall advise as
follows:
1. How the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property is in violation of the city weed
control law.
2. The owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property to cut and remove the weeds within ten
(10) days of the receipt of notice.
3. The owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property that he may request a hearing before
the governing body within five (5) working days of the receipt of notice.
4. If the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property does not cut and remove the weeds
within ten (10) days, the city or its authorized agent will cut the weeds and assess the cost of the
cutting to the property.
5. The owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property will be given an opportunity to pay the
assessment, and, if it is not paid, it will be added to the property tax as a special assessment.
6. No further notice shall be given prior to removal of weeds.
7. The public officer should be contacted if there are any questions regarding the order.
B. If there is a change in the record owner of title to property subsequent to the giving of notice
pursuant to this section, the city may not recover any costs or levy an assessment for the costs
incurred by the cutting or destruction of weeds on such property unless a new record owner of title
to such property is provided notice as required by this section. (Ord. 654, 11-20-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 180/336
9-6-4: ABATEMENT; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
Upon the expiration of ten (10) days after receipt of the notice required by section 9-6-3 of this
chapter, and in the event that the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the premises shall neglect or
fail to comply with the requirements of section 9-6-1 of this chapter, the public officer or an authorized
assistant shall cause to be cut, destroyed and/or removed all such weeds and abate the nuisance
created thereby at any time during the current calendar year.
The public officer or an authorized assistant shall give notice to the owner, occupant or agent in
charge of the premises by registered mail of the costs of abatement of the nuisance. The notice shall
state that payment of the costs is due and payable within thirty (30) days following receipt of the
notice.
If the costs of removal or abatement remain unpaid after thirty (30) days following receipt of notice, a
record of the costs of cutting and destruction and/or removal shall be certified to the city clerk who
shall cause such costs to be assessed against the particular lot or piece of land on which such weeds
were so removed. The city clerk shall certify the assessment to the county clerk at the time other
special assessments are certified for spreading on the tax rolls of the county or at such other times as
the city clerk shall specify. (Ord. 654, 11-20-2006)
9-6-5: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The public officer, and the public officer's authorized assistants, employees, contracting agents or
other representatives are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property at all reasonable
hours for the purpose of cutting, destroying and/or removing such weeds in a manner not inconsistent
with this chapter. (Ord. 654, 11-20-2006)
9-6-6: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or to attempt to prevent the public officer or the
public officer's authorized representative from entering upon any such lot or piece of ground or from
proceeding with such cutting and destruction. Such interference shall constitute an ordinance violation
and shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 654, 11-20-2006)
Chapter 7
TREES
9-7-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the GOODING TREE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 668, 1-5-2010)
9-7-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 181/336
regulating and encouraging the planting, protection, maintenance, and removal of new and existing
trees on public lands; increase the size and diversity and improve the condition of Gooding's urban
forest; and enhance the desirability of Gooding as a place to live and do business. (Ord. 668, 1-5-
2010)
9-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as:
CERTIFIED ARBORIST: A person who is certified by the International Society of Arboriculture.
PARK(S) AND PUBLIC PLACES: All public parks, greenways, squares, commons, cemeteries, and
lands owned by the city distinguished by individual names.
PRIVATE TREE(S): All trees growing on private property within the city limits.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any dangerous or unsafe tree or portions thereof on streets, in parks, on other
public places or posing a hazard thereto. Any destructive or communicable disease or pestilence
which endangers the growth, health, life or well being of trees and other plants in the city.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Property owned by the city of Gooding whether in fee simple absolute, or
implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future use, for purposes of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, or for public easements.
PUBLIC TREE(S): All trees located on public property, including public rights of way.
TREE: Any woody plant which normally attains a height of fifteen feet (15') or more at maturity. Such
plants may have single or multiple trunks, are often unbranched for several feet above the ground,
and have a definite crown.
TREE CARE GUIDELINES: The "American National Standard For Tree Care Operations: Tree Shrub
And Other Woody Plant Maintenance Standard Practices" (ANSI A-300) published by the American
National Standards Institute. Also tree care information developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture and the National Arborist Association.
TREE TOPPING: Severe cutting back of limbs within a tree crown to buds, stubs, or laterals not large
enough to assume a terminal role within the crown and to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. (Ord. 668, 1-5-2010)
9-7-4: TREE BOARD:
There is hereby created and established a tree board for the city of Gooding, which shall consist of
four (4) members, citizens and residents of this community, who shall be appointed by the mayor with
the approval of the city council.
A. Term Of Office: The term of the four (4) persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three (3)
years, except that two (2) of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only two (2)
years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall
be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 182/336
B. Compensation: Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
C. Operation: The committee shall choose its own officers, keep a record of its proceedings and report
to the mayor and council as requested. Majority of the members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business. (Ord. 668, 1-5-2010)
9-7-5: AUTHORITY AND POWERS:
A. The city shall have control of all trees, shrubs, and other plantings on public property within the city
limits. The city shall have the power to plant, maintain, remove, and replace such trees, shrubs,
and other plantings.
B. The planting, maintenance, and removal of trees in parks and public places shall be the
responsibility of the city. All tree work shall be accomplished by city employees under the direction
of the public works director or by certified arborists who are contracted by the city to perform such
work or by public utility companies performing work necessary to protect their utility lines.
C. The tree board is authorized to develop and maintain a plan for the planting, management, and
protection of public trees within the city. Such plan shall constitute the official comprehensive city
tree plan for the city of Gooding. (Ord. 668, 1-5-2010)
9-7-6: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
A. Private property owners shall maintain any trees upon their private property, which may affect
public property, in a safe and healthy condition in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Planting, maintenance, and removal of trees within city rights of way by private property owners
shall not be allowed without the prior written approval of the city and must conform to provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 668, 1-5-2010)
9-7-7: PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE:
A. The "Master List Of Public Trees" shall be the official guideline for the selection and planting of
trees on public property. It shall include tree species recommended and species prohibited for
planting on public property and tree spacing suggestions.
B. The tree board shall maintain and periodically update the "Master List Of Public Trees".
C. Maintenance of all public trees shall conform to "tree care guidelines" as defined in section 9-7-3 of
this chapter. The city shall make information on tree care available to the public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 183/336
D. Except as otherwise determined by the city, branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be
pruned to provide sufficient vertical clearance of seven feet (7') above sidewalks and twelve feet
(12') above streets so as not to interfere with public travel. On designated truck routes the vertical
clearance shall be 14.5 feet above streets.
E. Trees and other landscaping shall be maintained to assure unobstructed corner visibility.
F. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a tree determined to be a public nuisance to abate the
nuisance by removal, pruning, or spraying as determined by the city or a certified arborist.
G. It is unlawful for any person or firm to top any public tree, without prior written approval of the city.
Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes and trees creating emergency hazardous
situations are exempt. Trees under utility wires or other obstructions where standard pruning
practices are impossible may be exempted from this section at the determination of the city. (Ord.
668, 1-5-2010)
9-7-8: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC TREES:
A. It is unlawful for any person to damage, transplant, remove, top, or mutilate any public tree. No
person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of eight feet
(8') from any public tree without first obtaining written permission from the city.
B. No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other
materials which may impede the free passage of air, water, and nutrients to the roots of public
trees, except by written permission from the city.
C. Except for authorized personnel in the event of an emergency, no person shall fasten any sign,
card, poster, wire, rope, or other material to or around or through any public tree, shrub, or its
protective barrier. (Ord. 668, 1-5-2010)
9-7-9: PENALTIES:
A. Where it has been determined that a public tree(s) has been damaged or removed unlawfully the
offending person or firm shall be assessed the cost of repair or replacement. The city shall
determine that cost using accepted plant appraisal methods as set forth in the current edition of the
"Guide For Plant Appraisal", published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
B. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other legal entity that violates any provision of this
chapter is guilty of an infraction and punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). All such violations, which are of a continuing nature, shall constitute a separate offense
for each day of such continuance. Any violation of this chapter shall also constitute a public
nuisance and may be enjoined and abated as provided by law. (Ord. 668, 1-5-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 184/336
Chapter 8
SKATE PARK
9-8-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to place the obligation for compliance with its requirements upon any
person falling within its scope, and nothing in this chapter is intended to impose any duty upon the city
of Gooding, it officers, or employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this chapter
shall be discretionary and not mandatory. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to
create or to form the basis for liability on the part of the city of Gooding, or its officers, employees, or
agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of any person subject to this chapter to
comply with this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the
implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of the city of Gooding by its officers,
employees, or agents. (Ord. 693, 8-3-2015)
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED HELMET: A head covering designed for safety that meets or exceeds bicycle helmet
safety standards adopted by standard Z-90.4 set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI),
or the Snell Foundation, which are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
SKATE AREA: That portion of the skate park made of concrete and used to skateboard or in-line
skate.
SKATE PARK: The city of Gooding skate park facility located at 917 4th Avenue West, Gooding,
Idaho, also known as the "Duke Morton Memorial Skate Park". (Ord. 693, 8-3-2015)
9-8-3: SKATE PARK RULES:
A. The skate park shall be open daily from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
Unless authorized by the city council no person shall go upon or remain in the skate park outside
of the posted hours.
B. The skate area is designed for use by skateboards and in-line skates only. No spectators, bicycles,
cross skates, foot scooters, other vehicles or pets are allowed in the skate area.
C. Any person under the age of thirteen (13) using the skate area shall wear an approved helmet and
shall have either the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely while the skateboard or inline
skates are in motion.
No person shall transport another person on or in tow of a skateboard or in-line skates in the skate
area.
A parent or guardian is responsible for requiring that a child under the age of thirteen (13) years
wears an approved helmet while skateboarding or in-line skating and is responsible for ensuring
that the neck or chin strap of the helmet is fastened securely.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 185/336
D. Alcohol, tobacco products, vaping, glass containers and chewing gum are not permitted in the
skate park.
E. No person shall dump or dispose of any litter or garbage in the skate park except in receptacles
which are provided therefor. Food and beverages are allowed in designated picnic areas only.
Graffiti, tagging, or vandalizing any portion of the skate park facility is prohibited and may be
punishable as a misdemeanor offense such as injury to public property.
F. No person shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language; or
engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to be a breach of the public peace in the
skate park.
No person shall cause, make or allow to be made from audio or similar equipment under such
person's control, loud music or loud noise in the skate park, so as to be audible greater than one
hundred feet (100') from the source. (Ord. 693, 8-3-2015)
9-8-4: PENALTY:
Unless set forth elsewhere in this chapter any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a civil infraction, and conviction thereof shall be punished by imposition of a monetary penalty
of not more than seventy five dollars ($75.00), exclusive of statutory assessments. Community service
hours may also be imposed at the discretion of the court. Loss of privileges to use or enter the skate
park may be imposed at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 693, 8-3-2015)
Title 10
TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS
10-1-1: TERMS DEFINED:
The following words and phrases when used in this Title shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles operated by the Fire Department, police vehicles
and such ambulances and emergency vehicles as are designed or authorized by the Commissioner of
Law Enforcement or the Chief of Police.
BICYCLE: Every vehicle propelled exclusively by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is twenty inches (20") or more in diameter.
BUS: Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the
transportation of persons.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 186/336
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a public thoroughfare when within any
six hundred feet (600') along such thoroughfare there are buildings in use for business or industrial
purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public
buildings which occupy at least three hundred feet (300') frontage on one side or three hundred feet
(300') collectively on both sides of the thoroughfare.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation
of property.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or
occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same
except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the
lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the
absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway.
B. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing
plows, mowing machines, and other implements of husbandry.
INTERSECTION: A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines
if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at,
or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
B. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more apart, then every crossing
of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a
separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways
thirty feet (30') or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be
regarded as a separate intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for
vehicular traffic.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by
electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on
not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
OWNER: A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an
agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the
conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such
conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this Title.
PARK: When prohibited means the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 187/336
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations
of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular
travel only by the owner or by those having express or implied permission from the owner.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than street cars, operated upon
stationary rails.
RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL: Any sign, signal or device erected and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto,
operated upon rails, except street cars.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a public thoroughfare not
comprising a business district when the property on such thoroughfare for a distance of three hundred
feet (300') or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for
business.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways,
the term roadway as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such
roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of
pedestrians and which set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is
protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the
transportation of children to or from school or privately owned and operated for compensation for the
transportation of children to or from school.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the
adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.
STOP: When required means complete cessation from movement.
STOP, STOPPING, OR STANDING: When prohibited means any stopping or standing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH ROADWAY: Every roadway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given
preferential right of way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting roadways is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 188/336
required by law to yield right of way to vehicles on such through roadway in obedience to a stop sign,
or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this Title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars and other conveyances either
singly or together while using any thoroughfare for purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated by
which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and
for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing
vehicle.
TRUCK: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for the transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and
not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a thoroughfare, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary tracks or rails. (1970 Code)
Chapter 2
ENFORCEMENT
10-2-1: AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic laws of the State and City.
B. Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal, provided that in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may
direct traffic as conditions may require.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in
directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (1970 Code)
10-2-2: OBEDIENCE TO REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required herein.
(1970 Code)
10-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 189/336
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction
of a police officer or Fire Department official. (1970 Code)
10-2-4: PUSH CARTS; ANIMALS:
Every person propelling any push cart or driving any animal-drawn vehicle or riding an animal upon a
roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this Title applicable to the driver of any vehicle except
those provisions which by their own nature can have no application. (1970 Code)
10-2-5: COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SIMILAR DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device
to go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when crossing such
person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians. This Section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street. (1970 Code)
10-2-6: EMPLOYEES TO OBEY REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service
of the United States government, this State, County or City and it shall be unlawful for any such driver
to violate any of the provisions of this Title, except as otherwise permitted. (1970 Code)
10-2-7: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call, or when in
the pursuit of an actual suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning
from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this Section, but subject to the conditions
stated.
B. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this Title.
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary
for safe operation.
3. Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property.
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
C. The exemption herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver
of any said vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal or bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may
be reasonably necessary and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp
displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 190/336
feet (500') to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a
police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
D. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall these provisions protect the
driver from consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1970 Code)
10-2-8: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an offense for any person to operate or for the owner thereof to
permit the operation upon the streets of the City of any motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer which is
not registered and which does not have attached thereto and displayed thereon the number plate or
plates assigned thereto for the current registration year which said plates have been provided for by
the laws of the State of Idaho. The operation of any vehicle not eligible for registration and licensing
on any street of the City is hereby declared to be unlawful. (Ord. 401, 1-21-1963)
10-2-9: RESTRICTED LICENSES:
Upon the issuance of an operator's or chauffeur's license, the City shall have authority whenever good
cause appears to impose restrictions suitable to the licensee's driving ability with respect to the type of
or special mechanical control devices required on a motor vehicle which the licensee may operate or
such other restrictions applicable to the licensee as may be determined to be appropriate to assure
the safe operation of a motor vehicle by the licensee, and such license shall either be issued as a
special restricted license or such restrictions may be set forth upon the usual license form1. (1970
Code)
10-2-10: WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
The provisions of Title 10 shall apply to all the public streets, walks and ways situate on lands owned
by the State of Idaho within the limits of the City of Gooding, Idaho. (Ord. 490, 12-6-1976)
10-2-11: WITHIN SCHOOL DISTRICT LANDS:
The provisions of Title 10 shall apply to all the public streets, walks, parking areas and ways situate on
lands owned by Joint School District No. 231, Gooding and Lincoln Counties, Idaho, within the limits of
the City of Gooding, Idaho. (Ord. 495, 4-18-1977)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
10-3-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 191/336
The Chief of Police shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as
required under the traffic regulations of the City to make effective the provisions of said regulations,
and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary. (1970
Code)
10-3-2: SPECIFICATIONS:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the approved specifications. All signs and
signals, required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type
and location throughout the City. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Title shall be official traffic control devices. (1970 Code)
10-3-3: OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable
thereto placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the City, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer; subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. (1970
Code)
10-3-4: WHEN DEVICES REQUIRED:
No provisions of this Title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if
at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular Section does not state
that signs are required, such Section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(1970 Code)
10-3-5: SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words "Go", "Caution" or "Stop" or
exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time or with arrows, the following colors only
shall be used and said terms and light shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians
as follows:
A. Green Alone Or "Go":
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited herein, may proceed straight through
or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 192/336
B. Yellow Alone Or "Caution" When Following The Green Or "Go" Signal:
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited
immediately and such vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection when the yellow or
"Caution" signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the
roadway and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
3. Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown
alone unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
C. Red Alone Or "Stop":
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until
green or "Go" is shown alone.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
D. Red With Green Arrow:
1. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the
movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
E. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an
intersection, the provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable except as to those provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on
the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or
marking the stop shall be made at the signal1. (1970 Code)
10-3-6: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever a pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such
signals shall indicated as follows:
A. Walk: Pedestrians facing such a signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the
signal, and shall be given the right of way.
B. Wait Or Don't Walk: It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to start to cross the roadway in the
direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 193/336
10-3-7: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
A. Flashing Red; Stop Signal: When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of
vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
B. Flashing Yellow; Caution Signal: When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
C. This Section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching
railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the traffic rules as set forth in this Title. (1970 Code)
10-3-8: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS:
A. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or
which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal.
B. No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic
sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
C. This Section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to
highways or signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs.
D. Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the
authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it
to be removed without notice. (1970 Code)
10-3-9: INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure,
knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription,
shield or insignia thereon or any part thereof. (1970 Code)
10-3-10: CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 194/336
The chief of police is hereby authorized to:
A. Designate and maintain by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
B. Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary
for the protection of pedestrians. (1970 Code)
10-3-11: TRAFFIC LANES:
A. The chief of police is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or
highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail
or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (1970 Code)
Chapter 4
SPEED LIMITS
10-4-1: SPEED LIMITS DESIGNATED:
A. Any person driving a vehicle or motor vehicle on any public street or alley of the city shall drive the
same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard
to the traffic, surface and width of the street or alley and any other conditions then existing, and no
person shall drive a vehicle or motor vehicle upon any street or alley of such city at such speed as
to endanger the life, limb or property of any person.
B. Subject to the foregoing provisions the maximum speed limit of vehicles and motor vehicles on all
of the public streets and alleys of the city shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour, unless otherwise
stated: (Ord. 580, 4-6-1992)
On Main Street between Eleventh Avenue south and Twenty First Avenue south, the maximum
speed limit shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour.
On south Gooding Main Street, from its intersection with U.S. Highway 26; south to the southern
Gooding city limits, the maximum speed limit shall be thirty five (35) miles per hour. (Ord. 613, 4-3-
2000; amd. Ord. 647, 10-3-2005)
Chapter 5
RULES OF THE ROAD
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 195/336
10-5-1: RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY:
A. Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway,
except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules
governing such movement.
2. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair.
3. Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable
thereon.
4. Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic.
B. Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and
place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right hand lane then available
for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a
left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. (1970 Code)
10-5-2: PASSING VEHICLES:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and upon
roadways width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each shall give to the other at
least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (1970 Code)
10-5-3: OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT:
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same
direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated:
A. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the
left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely
clear of the overtaken vehicle.
B. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle
shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase
the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (1970 Code)
10-5-4: OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT:
A. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the
following conditions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 196/336
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn.
2. Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction.
3. Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway of which traffic is restricted to one direction of
movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or
more lines of moving vehicles.
B. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions
permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the
pavement or main traveled portion of the roadway. (1970 Code)
10-5-5: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING:
No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing
another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the
right hand side of the roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction. (1970 Code)
10-5-6: DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER:
A. No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view is
obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might
approach from the opposite direction.
2. When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing any intersection or railroad
grade crossing.
3. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any bridge,
viaduct or tunnel.
B. The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway. (1970 Code)
10-5-7: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The Chief of Police may designate any street or alley under his jurisdiction for one-way traffic and
shall erect signs giving notice thereof.
A. Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the
direction designated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 197/336
B. A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. (1970
Code)
10-5-8: HIGHWAY LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the
following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply:
A. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be
moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with
safety.
B. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such
center lane is clear within a safe distance or in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane
is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is
signposted to give notice of such allocation.
C. Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating
these lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the
roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. (1970 Code)
10-5-9: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
A. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and
prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of
the highway.
B. The driver of any motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a
roadway, outside of a business or residence district, and which is following another motor truck or
motor vehicle drawing another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so
that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall
not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing
any like vehicle or other vehicle. (1970 Code)
10-5-10: DIVIDED HIGHWAYS:
Whenever any street has been divided into two (2) roadways by leaving an intervening space or a
physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic,
every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any such dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an opening in such
physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a cross over or intersection established by public
authority. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 198/336
10-5-11: TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
A. Right Turns: Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
B. Left Turns On Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, on approach for a left turn shall be made in
that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line where it enters the intersection
and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the
right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
C. Left Turns On Other Than Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one
direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand land lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
D. The Chief of Police is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and such
course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. When
authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, it shall be unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to
disobey the directions of such indications. (1970 Code)
10-5-12: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement
can be made with reasonable safety. (1970 Code)
10-5-13: TURNING MOVEMENTS; REQUIRED SIGNALS:
The driver of a vehicle or motor vehicle intending to turn at an intersection, shall do so as follows:
A. In making a right turn both the approach for the right turn and the right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway or street. Right hand turns may be
made against a red light upon the vehicle being brought to a complete stop before crossing the
stop line and crosswalk, provided that before or while proceeding the driver shall give the right of
way to vehicles lawfully in the intersection and to pedestrians traversing the crosswalk or
proceeding with the green light who have the superior right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 199/336
B. In making a left turn the approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the street nearest
the center line thereof, and entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway or street being entered, and the driver
shall yield the right of way to any vehicle or pedestrian approaching from the opposite direction
which is in the intersection or so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
C. When moving into a four-lane intersection, no vehicle shall make a left hand turn from a right hand
lane, and no right turn shall be made from a left hand lane.
D. No person shall turn a vehicle or motor vehicle from a direct course upon a street or at an
intersection until such movement can be made with reasonable safety, and then only after giving a
clearly visible signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the even any other vehicle or any
pedestrian may be affected by such movement.
E. A signal or intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last one
hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before turning.
No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an
appropriate signal in the manner herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when it
is reasonably possible to give such signal.
The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand or arm or by signal lamp or
signal device of a standard and approved type. When a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a
hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then said signal
must be given by such a lamp or device. (1970 Code)
10-5-14: HAND AND ARM SIGNALS; SIGNAL LAMPS:
All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle or
motor vehicle in the following manner and such a signal shall indicate as follows:
A. Left turn -- hand and arm extended horizontally.
B. Right turn -- hand and arm extended upward.
C. Stop or decreased speed -- hand and arm extended downward. (Ord. 370, 4-2-1956)
10-5-15: APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION:
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right of way to a vehicle which
has entered the intersection from a different street.
B. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets at approximately the same time,
the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 200/336
C. The right of way rules declared in subsections A and B hereof are modified at through streets and
otherwise as hereinafter stated in this Title. (1970 Code)
10-5-16: ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION:
A. Preferential right of way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by this Title and
after having stopped shall yield the right of way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection
from another roadway or which is approaching so closely on said roadway as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but said driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right of way to the vehicle so proceeding.
C. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary as provided in the
provisions of this Title, and shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian legally crossing the
roadway on which he is driving, and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Said driver having so yielded may
proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle
so proceeding; provided, however, that if such driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a
crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such
collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield the right of way. (1970 Code)
10-5-17: PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road or driveway shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said highway. (1970 Code)
10-5-18: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. The Fire Department, Police Department, ambulances when operated on official business and
when the operator thereof shall sound an audible signal by bell, siren or whistle, or a visible signal
by flashing lights, and funeral processions shall have the right of way on any street or through any
procession in the order herein named.
B. The driver of any vehicle upon the approach of any of the equipment set forth above or upon being
overtaken by any of the equipment mentioned in the foregoing paragraph, shall immediately draw
up said vehicle as near as practicable to the right hand curb in the direction of his travel and bring
the vehicle to a standstill until the said emergency equipment has passed; provided, however, that
if the overtaking vehicle be a vehicle of the Police Department, Fire Department or an ambulance
making an audible sound or displaying a flashing signal obviously indicating to the operator of a
motor vehicle that he should stop, such operator shall immediately bring such motor vehicle to a
complete stop until directed to move therefrom. (Ord. 424, 1-15-1968)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 201/336
10-5-19: SAFETY ZONES:
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. (1970 Code)
10-5-20: NO PASSING ZONES:
The City is hereby authorized to determine those portions of any street or highway where overtaking
and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may by
appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones, and
when such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every
driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. (1970 Code)
Chapter 6
PEDESTRIANS
10-6-1: PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals at intersections as provided in the provisions of
this Title, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to
the restrictions stated in this Chapter. (1970 Code)
10-6-2: PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALK:
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway which the vehicle is
traveling upon, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety
and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to
yield. This provision shall not apply under the conditions stated in Section 10-6-3B.
B. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle1. (1970 Code)
10-6-3: CROSSING STREETS:
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within on
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian
crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 202/336
C. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall
not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. (1970 Code)
10-6-4: DRIVER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due
care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the
horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused
or incapacitated person upon any roadway2. (1970 Code)
10-6-5: PEDESTRIANS USE OF CROSSWALK:
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. (1970 Code)
10-6-6: PEDESTRIANS ON ROADWAY:
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon
adjacent roadways.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall when
practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may
approach from the opposite direction. (1970 Code)
10-6-7: SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS:
A. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business
from the occupant of any vehicle.
B. No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the
watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.
(1970 Code)
Chapter 7
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10-7-1: TRAIN SIGNAL:
A. Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the
circumstances stated in this Section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty feet (50') but
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 203/336
not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he
can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of
a railroad train.
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the
approach or passage of a railroad train.
3. A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the
highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of
its speed or nearness to such crossing is an immediate hazard.
4. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad
crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. (1970 Code)
10-7-2: RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
A. The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of any school bus carrying any
school child, or any vehicle carrying explosive substances or inflammable liquids as a cargo or part
of a cargo, before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within
fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so
stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train, and for
signals indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed
until he can do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe to
do so, the driver of any said vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no
necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver shall nor shift gears
while crossing the track or tracks.
B. No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic control signal directs
traffic to proceed.
C. This Section shall not apply at street railway grade crossings within a business or residence district.
(1970 Code)
10-7-3: HEAVY EQUIPMENT CROSSINGS:
A. No person shall operate or move any crawler type tractor, steam shovel, derrick, roller or any
equipment or structure having a normal operating speed of ten (10) or less miles per hour or a
vertical body or load clearance of less than one-half inch (1/2") per foot of the distance between
any two (2) adjacent axles or in any event of less than nine inches (9"), measured above the level
surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying
with this Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 204/336
B. Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a station agent of such railroad and a
reasonable time be given to such railroad to provide proper protection at such crossing.
C. Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any such vehicle or equipment
shall first stop the same not less than fifteen feet (15') nor more than fifty feet (50') from the nearest
rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track
for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed
until the crossing can be made safely.
D. No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic signal, crossing gates or a
flagman or otherwise of the immediate approach of a railroad train or car. If a flagman is provided
by the railroad, movement over the crossing shall be under his direction. (1970 Code)
10-7-4: STOP AND YIELD SIGNS:
A. The Chief of Police may designate through roadways and erect stop signs or yield signs at
specified entrances thereto or may designate any intersection as a yield intersection and erect stop
signs or yield signs at one or more entrances to such intersection.
B. Every stop sign shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than eight (8") in height. Every yield
sign shall bear the word "yield" in letters not less than seven inches (7") in height. Every stop sign
and every yield sign shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by internal illumination or by a
floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by an efficient reflecting element in the face of the
sign.
C. Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no crosswalk, then as near as
practicable to the nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
D. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection or in the event there is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
E. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, or
a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. (1970 Code)
10-7-5: ALLEYS OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS:
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian as may
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 205/336
be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles approaching on said roadway. (1970 Code)
10-7-6: OVERTAKING SCHOOL BUS:
A. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway outside of a business or residence district upon meeting or
overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose
of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school
bus and shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or until signaled by the driver to
proceed.
B. Every bus for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereon a
plainly visible sign containing the words "School Bus" in letters not less than eight inches (8") in
height. When a school bus is being operated upon a highway for purposes other than the actual
transportation of children either to or from school, all markings thereon indicating "School Bus"
shall be covered or concealed.
C. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or
passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled access highway
and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and
when pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. (1970 Code)
10-7-7: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING:
A. Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave
standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the
highway when it is practical to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of said highway, but
in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for
the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available
from a distance of two hundred feet (200') in each direction upon such highway.
B. This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main
traveled portion of a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (1970 Code)
10-7-8: ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES:
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street in violation of any of the provisions
of this title, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main traveled part of
such street. (1970 Code)
10-7-9: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 206/336
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of
the following places:
On a sidewalk;
In front of a public or private driveway;
Within an intersection;
Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
On a crosswalk;
Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal
located at the side of a roadway;
Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic authority indicates a different
length by signs or markings;
Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
Within twenty feet (20') of a driveway entrance to any fire station, on the side of a street opposite
the entrance to any fire station, within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly
signposted;
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic;
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of curb of a street;
Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away
from a curb such distance as is unlawful1. (1970 Code)
C. 1. Wood River Road: It shall be unlawful to park, place, allow to be parked or placed, any vehicle,
except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety along or on the right of
way of Wood River Road.
2. Penalty: Any person who violates a term or provision of subsection C1 of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus court costs
and fees and/or incarceration of up to six (6) months in jail. (Ord. 660, 12-17-2007)
10-7-10: ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 207/336
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway
where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of such
vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb.
B. The Council may permit parking of vehicles with the left hand wheels adjacent to and within
eighteen inches (18") of the left hand curb of a one-way roadway. (1970 Code)
10-7-11: UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first
stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key and effectively setting the brake thereon,
and when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the roadway. (1970
Code)
10-7-12: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic, and it shall be unlawful for a person to stop, stand or park a vehicle
within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1970
Code)
10-7-13: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within the business district for a period of time
longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls. (1970 Code)
10-7-14: PARKING RESTRICTED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following upon any public street, alley, sidewalk
or other public property within the City:
1. Park, cause to be parked or allow to be parked any farm tractor, farm machinery, farm
implement or who parks, causes to be parked or allows to be parked any semi-trailer, truck or
other motor vehicle registered for more than one ton capacity on any publicly dedicated street,
alley or thoroughfare for a period longer than one hour, unless such vehicle is being actively
loaded or unloaded.
2. Park, cause to be parked or allow to be parked any farm tractor, farm machinery, farm
implement or park, cause to be parked or allow to be parked any semi-trailer, truck or other
motor vehicle registered for more than one ton capacity or any other vehicle or object on any
publicly dedicated street alley or thoroughfare where such parking, causing to be parked or
allowing to be parked obstructs traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 208/336
3. Place, allow to be placed, discard, maintain, park or store any abandoned, wrecked or junked
vehicle, major household furnishings or appliances or parts thereof as such are defined in
subsection B hereof. (Ord. 566, 1-15-1990)
4. Park, cause to be parked or allow to be parked any farm tractor, farm machinery, farm
implement; or who parks, causes to be parked or allows to be parked any semi-trailer, truck or
other motor vehicle registered for more than one ton capacity on any publicly dedicated street,
alley or thoroughfare, where such parking, causing to be parked or allowing to be parked,
obstructs any driveway, parking area or any other place of ingress or egress. (Ord. 566A, 2-5-
1990)
B. Definitions:
ABANDONED, WRECKED AND JUNKED: With reference to vehicles, an unsightly motor vehicle
which meets any one of the following qualifications:
A. Does not carry a current valid State registration and license plate.
B. Cannot be safely operated under its own power.
ALLOW TO BE PARKED: That situation where the owner of any farm tractor, farm machinery, farm
implement, semi-trailer, truck, motor vehicle or object, after having been given notice that such is
parked in violation of the provisions of this Section, fails to remove such farm tractor, farm
machinery, farm implement, semi-trailer, truck, motor vehicle or object within twenty four (24) hours
of notice of violation of the provisions of this Section or where the owner leaves any farm tractor,
farm machinery, farm implement, semi-trailer, truck, motor vehicle or object with any other party for
any purpose, including, but not limited to, consignment or repair, and such other party, after having
been given notice that such farm tractor, farm machinery, farm implement, semi-trailer, truck, motor
vehicle or other object is parked in violation of the provisions of this Section, fails to remove such
farm tractor, farm machinery, farm implement, semi-trailer, truck, motor vehicle or other object
within twenty four (24) hours of notice of violation of the provisions of this Section.
MACHINERY: All articles of industrial, farm or domestic machinery or equipment and any and all
metal or wooden machinery, motors, equipment or tools.
MAJOR HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS AND APPLIANCES: All articles usually referred to as major
household furnishings and appliances used in housekeeping, including, but not limited to, chairs,
tables, davenports, beds, refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, furnaces and grease, oil and paint
containers of five (5) gallons or over capacity.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power
designed to travel on the ground by wheels, treads, runners or slides and to transport persons or
property or pull machinery including, but not limited to automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles
and tractors.
NUISANCES: The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, major
household furnishings or appliances or machinery, or parts thereof, on public or private property
within the City is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of property, to promote
blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute attractive
nuisances creating a hazard to health and safety of minors, injurious to the health, safety and
general welfare; and the presence of such items on public or private property within the City except
as expressly permitted in this Chapter, is declared to constitute and be a public nuisance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 209/336
PERSON: Any individual, corporation or partnership.
STREET, ALLEY or THOROUGHFARE: The entire width between the boundary lines of adjacent
property of every way publicly maintained when any part is open to the use of the public for
vehicular travel. The terms "street", "alley" and "thoroughfare" are interchangeable with each other.
C. Removal: Items placed in violation of this Section shall be removed pursuant to the provisions of
City Code Section 10-7-18. (Ord. 566, 1-15-1990)
D. Punishment For Violations: Any person violating the provisions of subsections Al, A2 and A4 of this
Section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. Any person violating the provisions of subsection
A3 of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 566B, 3-19-1990)
10-7-15: PARKING OF TRUCKS IN BUSINESS DISTRICT:
Parking of trucks and/or truck trailers is hereby prohibited within the business district. (1970 Code)
10-7-16: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of
displaying such vehicle for sale or for washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (1970 Code)
10-7-17: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both
sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion,
interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any
school property as authorized herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any
such designated place. (1970 Code)
10-7-18: ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES; REMOVAL:
A. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle or farm machinery, equipment or implement parked
upon a street or alley in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, such officer is hereby authorized
to move such vehicle or farm machinery, equipment or implement, or require the driver or other
person in charge thereof to move the same.
B. Upon removal of a vehicle or farm machinery, equipment or implement, the officer shall impound
the same in a suitable place and shall as promptly as possible notify, in writing, the owner if
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 210/336
determinable, or other person in charge of the same, that the same has been impounded. Such
notice shall include:
1. Description of the unit, specifying the make, year, and model if possible.
2. The approximate place where the unit was found.
3. The place to which the unit was removed.
4. A statement that the unit can be sold for removal and storage charges if not claimed within thirty
(30) days from the date of giving of the notice.
C. The city of Gooding shall have a lien on such vehicle, farm machinery, equipment or implement for
the reasonable value of such services of removal and storage, and if such charges are not paid
within thirty (30) days of the date of removal the city may proceed to sell the property at public
auction by giving ten (10) days' public notice of the sale by advertising in some newspaper in the
county where such property is situated. The proceeds of the sale must be applied to the discharge
of the lien and costs. The remainder, if any, must be paid over to the owner of said motor vehicle,
farm machinery, equipment, or implement. (Ord. 487, 7-6-1976)
10-7-19: PARKING NEAR CONGESTED PLACES:
A. The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs, placed not
exceeding one hundred feet (100') in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles
would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay in traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, it shall be
unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1970 Code)
10-7-20: CURB LOADING ZONES:
The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb
loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and hours during
which the provisions of this section are applicable. (1970 Code)
10-7-21: LOADING ZONES:
The chief of police shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of
any person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to
indicate the ends of each such zone. Said permit fee shall be set and designated by the council. (1970
Code)
10-7-22: FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time
other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of materials in any place
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 211/336
marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are
in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes.
(1970 Code)
10-7-23: PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED:
Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be
the duty of the chief of police to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and such regulations
shall not be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
(1970 Code)
10-7-24: ANGLE PARKING:
A. In accordance with Idaho Code section 49-661, granting local jurisdictions the authority to
designate angle parking on any public thoroughfares; the city of Gooding hereby designates that
only angle parking is allowed on those sides of city streets that have been plainly marked, by city
personnel, for angle parking. All other parking shall be parallel parking except those areas where
no parking or restricted parking is indicated.
Provided, however, that anytime snow is piled in the middle of any street, it will not be necessary to
angle park on that street and parallel parking will be allowed during the time that snow is in the
middle of the street. (Ord. 696, 11-16-2015)
B. In order to be considered legally parked in an angle parking space, there must be a painted white
line on both sides of the parked vehicle. No vehicle may park contrary to the painted white line in
the designated angle parking areas.
C. Any other angle parking spaces on the streets of Gooding are subject to enforcement actions under
this section.
D. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to make a left turn to enter an angle parking space.
E. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to back out of any angle parking space across the centerline of the
road to enable the vehicle to proceed in the opposite direction of the angled parking space.
F. The violation of any portion of this section shall be considered an infraction and a fine in the amount
of fifty five dollars ($55.00) shall be assessed and the same shall be collected through the clerk of
the district court in the same manner as infractions for violations of state law are currently
collected. (Ord. 629, 12-16-2002)
Chapter 8
REMOVAL OF VEHICLES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 212/336
10-8-1: IMPROPERLY PARKED VEHICLES:
Any vehicle parked in violation of traffic regulations or any vehicle parked so as to obstruct the free
movement of traffic or to cause a traffic hazard may be immediately removed upon order of the Police
Department. Any such vehicle removed by the Police Department shall be kept under the control of
the Police Department until the owner or authorized agent pays a reasonable cost of removal and
storage in addition to the penalty provided for such improper parking. Any such vehicle shall be
deemed to be improperly parked after a period of three (3) minutes unless said vehicle is parked in a
regularly marked parking area, when it shall be deemed to be improperly parked after any period of
time longer than that designated by a meter or proper sign. If said vehicle is redeemed within five (5)
days said removal charges shall not exceed ten dollars ($10.00); however, if said vehicle is not
redeemed within five (5) days the cost of redemption shall include the actual cost and expense of said
removal in addition to a storage charge of one dollar ($1.00) per day and said costs and expenses
shall be a lien in favor of the City. (1970 Code)
10-8-2: WRECKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. The Police Department is hereby authorized in addition to any penalty that may be provided
therefor to remove any unidentified, stolen, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicle or other personal
property as herein defined, found upon any public thoroughfare or other property of the City and
shall keep the same in its custody and control at such place as may be designated by said Police
Department until redeemed by the owner; and all such unidentified, stolen, wrecked or abandoned
motor vehicles or other personal property which now is in the possession of the Police Department
shall be subject to the actual cost of removal or tow in from the public place and a storage charge
of two dollars ($2.00) per day as long as the same is in possession and custody.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in charge of a motor vehicle or other personal
property to leave or abandon the same upon the streets or public places. (1970 Code)
10-8-3: REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. If at any time a vehicle is parked upon private property without the consent of the owner of such
property, the Police Department is hereby authorized to remove said vehicle therefrom and to
cause the same to be stored; provided, the owner of such private property has first signed a
complaint against the owner or operator of said vehicle.
B. The City shall have a lien for all necessary costs of removing and storing such vehicle and said
vehicle may be held by the City until such lien is paid. (1970 Code)
10-8-4: LIEN ON IMPOUNDED PROPERTIES:
All motor vehicles and other personal property impounded or heretofore impounded by the Police
Department and unredeemed by the owner thereof for a period of sixty (60) days shall thereafter be
subject to sale by the Chief of Police to the highest bidder for cash as hereinafter provided, and the
proceeds of said sale shall be applied to the removal and storage charges accumulated against each
article, which shall be deposited with the Treasurer and credited with him and shall be kept in a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 213/336
separate fund for a period of one year from the date of receipt and if at the end of said year the former
owner of said property has not made satisfactory proof of claim, the balance of said proceeds of sale
shall be credited to the General Fund of the City. (1970 Code)
10-8-5: REDEMPTION AFTER SALE:
A. Any person claiming to be the owner of any impounded property shall make written application
therefor to the Police Department and shall furnish such additional proof as may be required to
establish said ownership. If he shall present to said Department the proof of his ownership of said
impounded property prior to the date of actual sale thereof, then the property itself shall be
delivered to said owner under these conditions; but if said property has been sold then the
Department shall endorse its findings of ownership with a copy of the written application, which
application and findings shall be addressed to the Clerk and if presented within one year after said
sale, then such balance of the proceeds of the sale, after deductions shall be paid to said owner.
B. Any appeal from the removal, storage and publication costs, if any, assessed by the Police
Department shall be in the same manner as provided by law. (1970 Code)
Chapter 9
EQUIPMENT
10-9-1: LIGHTED LAMPS:
Every vehicle upon a highway at any time from one-half ('/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour
before sunrise and at any other rime when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible
persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred feet (500') ahead shall display
lighted lamps and illuminating devices as hereinafter respectively required for different classes of
vehicles, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles. (1970 Code)
10-9-2: MOUNTED HEIGHT OF LAMPS:
A. Whenever a requirement is hereinafter declared as to the distance from which certain lamps and
devices shall render objects visible or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible, said
provisions shall apply during the times stated in this Chapter in respect to a vehicle without load
when upon a straight, level, unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a
different time or condition is expressly stated.
B. Whenever a requirement is hereinafter declared as to the mounted height of lamps or devices, it
shall mean from the center of such lamp or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle
stands when such vehicle is without a load. (1970 Code)
10-9-3: HEAD LAMPS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 214/336
A. Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall be equipped with at least
two (2) head lamps with at least one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle, which head
lamps shall comply with the requirements and limitations set forth in this Chapter.
B. Every motorcycle and every motor driven cycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two (2) head lamps which shall comply with the requirements and limitations of this Chapter.
C. Every head lamp upon every motor vehicle, including every motorcycle and motor driven cycle,
shall be located at a height measured from the center of the head lamp of not more than fifty four
inches (54") nor less than twenty four inches (24") to be measured as set forth in this Chapter.
(1970 Code)
10-9-4: TAIL LAMPS:
A. Every motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, and pole trailer and any other vehicle which is being drawn
at the end of a train of vehicles, shall be equipped with at least one tail lamp mounted on the rear,
which, when lighted as hereinbefore required, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail lamp
on the rearmost vehicle need actually to be seen from the distance specified. Provided, further,
every such above-mentioned vehicle, other than a truck tractor, shall be equipped with at least two
(2) tail lamps mounted on the rear, which when lighted as herein required, shall comply with the
provisions of this Section.
B. Every tail lamp upon every vehicle shall be located at a height of not more than seventy two inches
(72") nor less than twenty inches (20").
C. Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a
white light the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet (50') to
the rear. Any tail lamp or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear
registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the head lamps or auxiliary driving
lamps are lighted. (1970 Code)
10-9-5: STOP LAMPS; TURN SIGNALS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any new motor vehicle, including any motorcycle or motor
driven cycle unless it is equipped with at least one stop lamp. Stop lamps shall display a red or
amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than
one hundred feet (100') to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be actuated upon
application of the service (foot) brake, and which may but need not be incorporated with one or
more other rear lamps.
B. No person shall sell or offer for sale or operate on the highways any new motor vehicle, trailer or
semi-trailer unless it is equipped with mechanical or electrical turn signals meeting the following
requirements: Any motor vehicle may be equipped and when required shall be equipped with
lamps or mechanical signal devices showing to the front and rear for the purposes of indicating on
intention to turn either to the right or left. When lamps are used for such purpose, the lamps
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 215/336
showing to the front shall be located on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as
practicable and when in use shall display a white or amber light, or any shade of color between
white and amber, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') to the front in
normal sunlight, and the lamps showing to the rear shall be located at the same level and as
widely spaced laterally as practicable and when in use shall display a red or amber light, or any
shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred feet
(100') to the rear in normal sunlight. When actuated such lamps shall indicate the intended
direction of turning by flashing the lights showing to the front and rear on the side toward which the
turn is made. Where mechanical signal devices are used for such purpose, said devices shall be
self-illuminated when in use at the times mentioned in this Chapter.
C. No stop lamp or signal lamp or device shall project a glaring light. (1970 Code)
10-9-6: LAMPS ON PARKED VEHICLES:
A. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street during the hours between one-half ('/2) hour
after sunset and one-half ('/2) hour before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal
any person or object within a distance of five hundred feet (500') upon such street, no lights need
be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
B. Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the hours between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half
(1/2) hour before sunrise if there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a
distance of five hundred feet (500') upon such roadway, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall be
equipped with one or more lamps meeting the following requirements: At least one lamp shall
display a white or amber light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of the
vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of said lamp or
lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps meeting the
requirements of this Section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is
closest to passing traffic. The foregoing provision shall not apply to a motor driven cycle.
C. Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. (1970 Code)
10-9-7: DRIVING LAMPS REQUIRED:
A. At all times specified in the provisions of this Chapter, at least two (2) lighted lamps shall be
displayed, one on each side at the front of every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motor
driven cycle, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on
parked vehicles.
B. Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with head lamps as herein required is also equipped with any
auxiliary lamps or a spot lamp or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of intensity
greater than three hundred (300) candlepower, nor more than a total of four (4) of any such lamps
on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when upon a street or highway. (1970
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 216/336
10-9-8: BRAKES:
A. Brake Equipment Required:
1. Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor driven cycle, when operated upon a
roadway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and
hold such vehicle, including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes, each of which
means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two (2) wheels. If these two (2) separate
means of apply the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at
least two (2) wheels.
2. Every motorcycle and every motor driven cycle, when operated upon a highway, shall be
equipped with at least one brake which may be operated by hand or foot.
3. Every trailer or semi-trailer of a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds or more when
operated upon a roadway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of
and to stop and to hold such vehicle and so designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing
motor vehicle from its cab, and said brakes shall be so designed and connected that in case of
an accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied.
4. Every new motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer hereafter sold and operated upon the streets
shall be equipped with service brakes upon all wheels of every such vehicle, except any
motorcycle or motor driven cycle, and except that any semi-trailer of less than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) pounds gross weight need not be equipped with brakes.
5. One of the means of brake operation shall consist of a mechanical connection from the
operating lever to the brake shoes or bands and this brake shall be capable of holding the
vehicle, or combination of vehicles, stationary under any condition of loading on any upgrade or
downgrade upon which it is operated.
6. The brake shoes operating within or upon the drums on the vehicle wheels of any motor vehicle
may be used for both service and hand operation.
B. Performance Ability Of Brakes: Every motor vehicle or combination of vehicles, at all times and
under all conditions of loading, shall, upon application of the service (foot) brake, be capable of
decelerating and developing a braking force equivalent to such deceleration according to the
minimum requirements set forth herein, and also of stopping within the distances set forth herein:
Stopping distance
in
feet
Deceleration in
feet
per second
Equivalent braking
force in percentage
of vehicle or
combination weight
Passenger vehicles
not including
buses
25 17 53.0%
Single unit vehicles
with a manufac-
30 14 43.5%
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 217/336
turer's gross
vehicle weight
rating of 10,000
pounds
Single unit, 2-axle
vehicles with a
manufacturer's
gross vehicle
weight rating of
10,000 or more
pounds
40 14 43.5%
All other vehicles
and combinations
with a manufacturer's
gross
vehicle weight
rating of 10,000
or more pounds
50 14 43.5%
Compliance with standards set forth herein shall be determined either by actual road tests conducted
on a substantially level (not to exceed a plus or minus one percent [1%] grade) dry, smooth, hard
surfaced road that is free from loose material, and with stopping distances measured from the actual
instant braking controls are moved and from an initial speed of twenty (20) miles per hour, or else by
suitable mechanical tests in a testing lane which recreates such same conditions, or by a combination
of both methods.
C. Maintenance Of Brakes: All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so
adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the
vehicle. (1970 Code)
10-9-9: HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES:
A. Every motor vehicle when operated upon a public thoroughfare shall be equipped with a horn in
good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance
of not less than two hundred feet (200') but no horn or other warning device shall emit an
unreasonably loud or harsh sound or whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall when reasonably
necessary to insure safe operation give audible warning with his horn but shall not otherwise use
such horn when upon a thoroughfare.
B. No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell
except as otherwise permitted in this Section.
C. It is permissible but not required that any commercial vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal
device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 218/336
D. Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle, or bell capable of
emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than five hundred feet
(500') but such siren shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an
emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which
said latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound said siren when reasonably necessary to
warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. (1970 Code)
10-9-10: MIRRORS:
Every motor vehicle which is so constructed or loaded as to obstruct the driver's view to the rear
thereof from the driver's position shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a
view of the roadway for a distance of at least two hundred feet (200') to the rear of such vehicle. (1970
Code)
10-9-11: WINDSHIELD:
A. No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon
the front windshield, side wings or side or rear windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's
clear view of the roadway or any intersecting roadway.
B. The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or
other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or
operated by the driver of the vehicle.
C. Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order. (1970
Code)
Chapter 10
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
10-10-1: BACKING:
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to back the same unless such movement can be made
with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. (1970 Code)
10-10-2: MOTORCYCLES:
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon a permanent and regular seat attached thereto,
and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle
unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person. (1970 Code)
10-10-3: DRIVER'S VIEW:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 219/336
A. No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such
number of persons, exceeding three (3) as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of
the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B. No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or
to the sides, or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (1970 Code)
10-10-4: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS:
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle other than one on official business to follow any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet (500') or drive or park
such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (1970 Code)
10-10-5: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or permit any vehicle to be driven over any unprotected
hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official in command. (1970 Code)
10-10-6: DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSIONS:
It shall be unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated.
(1970 Code)
10-10-7: DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION:
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway
as practical and shall follow the preceding vehicle as close as is practical and safe. (1970 Code)
10-10-8: FUNERAL PROCESSION:
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the
outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be
determined and designated by the Chief of Police. (1970 Code)
10-10-9: PERMITS FOR PARADES; PROCESSIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any funeral procession or parade containing persons or vehicles to occupy,
march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police
and such other regulations as are set forth. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 220/336
10-10-10: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to
attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. (1970 Code)
10-10-11: DRIVING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent
or temporary driveway. No person shall park a vehicle within any sidewalk area. (1970 Code)
10-10-12: BOARDING OR ALIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
(1970 Code)
10-10-13: UNLAWFUL RIDING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise. (1970 Code)
10-10-14: BUS STOPS:
A. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to designate bus stops at such locations and in such
manner and number as may be necessary and of the greatest benefit and convenience to the
public. Every such bus stop shall be designated by appropriate signs.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such bus at any place for the purpose of taking on or
discharging passengers other than at a bus stop so designated except in case of emergency.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle at an authorized bus stop so
designated or between the right curb and any such stop, except that the operator of a passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop thereat for the purpose and while actually engaged in the discharge
or the pick up of passengers then in readiness at the curb. (1970 Code)
10-10-15: PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED MINOR TO DRIVE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age of
eighteen (18) years to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway when such minor is not authorized
under the provisions of this Title or by State law1. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 221/336
10-10-16: PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or
under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who is not authorized under the
provisions of this Title or by State law2. (1970 Code)
10-10-17: DRIVING WITHOUT OWNER'S CONSENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, not his own, without the consent of the owner
thereof, and with intent temporarily to deprive said owner of his possession of such vehicle, without
intent to steal the same. The consent of the owner of a vehicle to its taking or driving shall not in any
case be presumed or implied because of such owner's consent on a previous occasion to the taking
or driving of such vehicle by the same or a different person. It shall further be unlawful for any person
to assist in, or to be a party or accessory to or an accomplice in any such unauthorized taking or
driving3. (1970 Code)
10-10-18: UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to lend his operator's license to any other person or to knowingly
permit the use thereof by another4. (1970 Code)
10-10-19: ADOPTION OF IDAHO MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the use of streets
and public thoroughfares of the City those certain provisions of the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws as
hereinafter specifically set forth, and as the same may hereafter be revised by the Idaho Legislature,
or amended by the governing body and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as
Ordinances of the City of Gooding as fully as though set forth at length herein, such Sections of the
Idaho Code being as follows, to-wit:
49-710(b); 49-728; 49-730; 49-721(a); 49-721(b); 49-723; 49-106(c); 49-1006; 49-307; 49-1532;
49-319; 49-335(3); 49-335; 49-335(5); 49-307; 49-114; 49-114(b); 49-121; 49-125(2); 49-125(3);
49-115; 49-882(b); 49-822(c); 49-809; 49-804; 49-804(b); 49-818; 49-112; 49-107; 49-109; 49-132;
49-131; 49-118; 49-712; 49-788; 49-524; 49-809; 49-752; 49-724; 49-722; 49-146; 49-847. (Ord.
441, 12-21-1970)
10-10-20: HORSES AND MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC
PARKS AND MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or to drive or operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle,
motor bike, snowmobile or go-cart upon any of the public parks or the Municipal Golf Course of the
City of Gooding. (Ord. 479, 6-2-1975)
10-10-21: U-TURNS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 222/336
U-turns shall be illegal along any street within the City of Gooding when said street is marked by
properly posted signs indicating that no U-turns are allowed along the street. It shall be the duty of the
Chief of Police to mark any streets in the City of Gooding when the Chief of Police determines that a
traffic hazard exists if U-turns are allowed on the street in question. (Ord. 480, 9-15-1975)
Chapter 11
ACCIDENTS
10-11-1: INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES:
A. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible and
shall then forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at, the scene of the accident until he
has fulfilled the requirements of the provisions of this Chapter. Every such stop shall be made
without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
B. Any person failing to stop or to comply with said requirements under such circumstances shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. The license of any person so convicted shall be revoked for a period of one year.(1970 Code)
10-11-2: ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE:
A. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only. in damage to a vehicle which is
driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident
or as close thereto as possible but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the
scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of this Chapter. Every such stop shall
be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
B. Any person failing to stop or comply with said requirements under such circumstances shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1970 Code)
10-11-3: INFORMATION AND RENDER AID:
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or
damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person, shall give his name, address and
the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his
operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending
any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable
assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a
physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is
necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 223/336
10-11-4: STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop
and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name
and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a
conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and
of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. (1970
Code)
10-11-5: FIXTURES; PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE:
The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting only in damage to fixture or other property
legally upon or adjacent to a public thoroughfare, shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the
owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of his name and address and of the
registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his
operator's or chauffeur's license and shall make report of such accident when and as required in the
provisions of this Chapter. (1970 Code)
10-11-6: WRITTEN REPORTS:
A. The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or
total property damage to an apparent extent of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, shall within five (5)
days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the Police Department.
B. The Police Department may require any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident of which report
must be made as provided in this Section to file supplemental reports whenever the original report
is insufficient in the opinion of the Police Department and may require witnesses of accidents to
render reports to the Police Department.
C. Every police officer, who, in the regular course of duty, investigates a motor vehicle accident of
which report must be made as required in this Section, either at the time of and at the scene of the
accident or thereafter by interviewing participants or witnesses shall, within twenty four (24) hours
after completing such investigation, forward a written report of such accident to the State
Department of Law Enforcement. (1970 Code)
10-11-7: INABILITY TO REPORT:
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident
as required and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of
doing so, such occupant shall give or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver.
B. Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident as required
and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle then the owner of the vehicle involved in such
accident shall within five (5) days after learning of the accident make such report not made by the
driver. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 224/336
10-11-8: ACCIDENT REPORT FORMS:
A. The Police Department shall keep an adequate supply of forms for accident reports required
hereunder, appropriate with respect to the persons required to make such reports and the
purposes to be served. The written reports to be made by persons involved in accidents and by
investigating officers shall call for sufficiently detailed information to disclose with reference to a
traffic accident, the cause, conditions then existing and the persons and vehicles involved.
B. Every accident report required to be made in writing shall be made on the appropriate form
approved by the Police Department and shall contain all of the information required therein unless
not available.
C. Every such report shall also contain information sufficient to determine whether the requirements
for the deposit of security under any of the laws of this State are inapplicable by reason of the
existence of insurance or other exceptions specified therein. (1970 Code)
10-11-9: GARAGES TO REPORT:
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows
evidence of having been involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided in the
provisions of this Title or struck by any bullet, shall report to the Police Department within forty eight
(48) hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration number, and the
name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle. (1970 Code)
10-11-10: ACCIDENT REPORTS:
A. All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages shall be without prejudice
to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the Police Department or other
governmental agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes, or for the
administration of the laws relating to the deposit of security and proof of financial responsibility by
persons driving the vehicles or owners of the motor vehicles, except that the Department may
disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known
or when such person denies his presence at the scene of such accident.
B. No such report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident,
except that the Police Department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has, or claims to
have, made such a report or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified
accident report has or has not been made to the Police Department, solely to prove a compliance
or a failure to comply with the requirement that such a report be made to the Police Department.
(1970 Code)
10-11-11: FALSE ALARMS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to give, signal, or transmit, or for any person to cause or permit
to be given, signaled or transmitted, in any manner, an alarm calling for the assistance of a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 225/336
policeman, ambulance, or a fire truck, when such person or persons know that there is no
necessity for the assistance of such policeman, ambulance or fire truck.
B. For the purpose of this Section, an alarm shall be deemed and construed as being any act as
follows: the giving, signaling or transmission to any public fire station, police station, sheriff's office,
or ambulance headquarters, whether by telephone, spoken word or otherwise, information to the
effect that there is a necessity for a police officer, fire truck or ambulance at or near the place
indicated by the person giving, signaling or transmitting such information. (Ord. 484, 1-19-1976)
Chapter 12
PENALTIES
10-12-1: PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGES OR
OF DRUGS AND ANY OTHER INTOXICATING SUBSTANCES:
A. It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating beverages to drive or be in
actual physical control of any motor vehicle within this City whether upon a highway, street or
bridge or upon public or private property open to public use.
B. In any criminal prosecution for a violation of subsection A of this Section relating to driving a motor
vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages, the amount of alcohol in the
defendant's blood at the time of the alleged offense as shown by chemical analysis of the
defendant's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance shall give rise to the following
presumptions:
1. If there was at the time .08 percent by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, such fact shall
not give rise to any presumption that the defendant was or was not under the influence of
intoxicating beverages, but such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant;
2. If there was at that time more than .08 percent by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it
shall be presumed that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating beverages;
3. Percent by weight of alcohol in blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred
(100) cubic centimeters of blood, chemical analysis of blood, urine or breath for the purpose of
determining the blood alcohol level shall be performed by a laboratory operated by the Idaho
Department of Health and Welfare or by a laboratory approved by the Idaho Department of
Health and Welfare under the provisions of approval and certification standards to be set by that
Department.
4. The foregoing provisions of subsection B of this Section shall not be construed as limiting the
introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question whether or not the
defendant was under the influence of intoxicating beverages.
C. It is unlawful for any person who is a habitual user of, or under the influence of any narcotic drug, or
who is under the influence of any other drug or any combination of intoxicating beverage and any
drug to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving a motor vehicle, to drive a motor
vehicle within this City, whether upon a highway, street or bridge or upon public or private property
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 226/336
open to public use. The fact that any person charged with a violation of this subsection is or has
been entitled to use such drug under the laws of this State shall not constitute a defense against
any charge of violation of this subsection.
D. It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of any other intoxicating substance or any
combination of any intoxicating beverage, any drug and any other intoxicating substance to a
degree which renders him incapable of safely driving a motor vehicle, to drive a motor vehicle
within this City whether upon a highway, street or bridge or upon public or private property open to
public use. (Ord. 527, 12-15-1980)
10-12-2: RECKLESS DRIVING:
A. Reckless Driving: Any person who drives any vehicle upon a public thoroughfare carelessly and
heedlessly, or without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so as to
endanger any person or property, or who passes when there is a line in his lane indicating a sight
distance restriction, shall be deemed guilty of reckless driving.
B. Inattentive Driving: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in a negligent
manner over and along the public thoroughfares of this City. For the purpose of this Section to
"operate in a negligent manner" shall be construed to mean the operation of a vehicle upon the
public thoroughfares in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any persons or
property.
The offense of operating a vehicle in a negligent manner shall be considered to be a lesser offense
than, but included in, the offense of operating a vehicle in a reckless manner, and any person
charged with operating a vehicle in a reckless manner may be convicted of the lesser offense of
operating a vehicle in a negligent manner. (1970 Code)
10-12-3: OFFENSES:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the driver of
any vehicle, to require or knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle upon a highway in any
manner contrary to law. (1970 Code)
Chapter 13
ARRESTS
10-13-1: ARREST FOR FELONY:
Whenever a person is arrested for any violation of this Title declared herein to be a felony, he shall be
dealt with in like manner as upon arrest for the commission of any other felony. For the purposes of
this Section, any offense which may be punishable by imprisonment in a State penitentiary is a felony.
(1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 227/336
10-13-2: SERIOUS OFFENSES:
A. The authority to make an arrest is the same as upon on arrest for a felony when any person is
charged with any of the following offenses:
Negligent homicide.
Driving, or being in actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor.
Driving a vehicle while under the influence of any narcotic drug, or driving a vehicle while under the
influence of any other drug to a degree which renders the person incapable of safely driving a
vehicle.
Failure to stop, or failure to give information or failure to render reasonable assistance in the event
of an accident resulting in death or personal injuries.
Failure to stop, or failure to give information in the event of an accident resulting in damage to a
vehicle or to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a roadway.
Reckless driving.
B. Whenever any person is arrested as authorized in this Section, he shall be taken without
unnecessary delay before the proper magistrate as specified in Section 10-13-8, except that in the
case of either of the two (2) last offenses stated above a police officer shall have the same
discretion as is provided in other cases in Section 10-13-4 of this Chapter. (1970 Code)
10-13-3: APPEARANCE BEFORE MAGISTRATE:
Whenever any person is halted by a police officer for any violation of this Title not amounting to a
felony, he shall be taken without unnecessary delay before the proper magistrate in any of the
following cases:
A. When the person demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate.
B. In any other event when the person is issued a traffic citation by an authorized person and refuses
to give his written promise to appear in court as hereinafter provided. (1970 Code)
10-13-4: OPTION TO APPEAR BEFORE MAGISTRATE:
Whenever any person is halted by a police officer for any violation of this Title and is not required to be
taken before a magistrate as hereinbefore provided, the person shall in the discretion of the officer
either be given a traffic citation as hereinafter provided or be taken without unnecessary delay before
the proper magistrate as specified in Section 10-13-8 in any of the following cases:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 228/336
A. When the person does not furnish satisfactory evidence of identity or when the officer has
reasonable and provable grounds to believe the person will disregard a written promise to appear
in court.
B. When the person is charged with a violation relating to a vehicle transporting explosives.
C. When the person is charged with a violation of sections relating to the refusal of a driver of a
vehicle to submit such vehicle to an inspection and test.
D. When the person is charged with a violation of sections relating to the failure or refusal of a driver
of a vehicle to submit the vehicle and load to a weighing or to remove excess weight therefrom.
(1970 Code)
10-13-5: ARREST OF NONRESIDENT:
A. All of the provisions of this Chapter apply both to residents and nonresidents of this City, except the
special provisions in this Section which shall govern in respect to nonresidents under the
circumstances herein stated.
B. A police officer at the scene of a traffic accident may arrest without a warrant any driver of a vehicle
who is a nonresident of this City and who is involved in the accident when, based upon personal
investigation the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the person has
committed any offense under the provisions of this Title in connection with the accident, and if the
officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe the person will disregard a written promise
to appear in court.
C. Whenever any person is arrested under the provisions of this Section, he shall be taken without
unnecessary delay before the proper magistrate as specified in Section 10-13-8. (1970 Code)
10-13-6: NOTICE TO APPEAR IN COURT:
A. Whenever a person is halted by a police officer for any violation of this Title punishable as a
misdemeanor and is not taken before a magistrate as hereinbefore required or permitted, the
officer shall prepare in quadruplicate a written traffic citation containing a notice to appear in court,
the name and address of the person, the State registration number of his vehicle, if any, the
offense charged, the time and place when and where the person shall appear in court, and such
other pertinent information as may be necessary.
B. The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least five (5) days after the alleged violation
unless the person charged with violation shall demand an earlier hearing.
C. The place specified in the notice to appear must be before a magistrate as designated in Section
10-13-8.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 229/336
D. The person charged with a violation may give his written promise to appear in court by signing at
least one copy of the written traffic citation prepared by the officer, in which event the officer shall
deliver a copy of the citation to the person and thereupon, the officer shall not take the person into
physical custody for the violation.
E. Any officer violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in
office and shall be subject to removal from office. (1970 Code)
10-13-7: AUTHORITY OF OFFICER:
Except for the felonies and offenses enumerated in subsection 10-13-2A, a police officer at the scene
of a traffic accident may issue a written traffic citation, as provided in Section 10-13-6, to any driver of
a vehicle involved in the accident when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable
and probable grounds to believe that the person has committed any offense under the provisions of
this Title in connection with the accident. (1970 Code)
10-13-8: APPEARANCE BEFORE MAGISTRATE:
Whenever any person is given a written traffic citation containing a notice to appear, he shall appear at
the specified time and place before the proper judge. (1970 Code; amd. Ord. 497, 7-18-1977)
10-13-9: FAILURE TO OBEY CITATION:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his written promise to appear in court given to an officer
upon the issuance of a traffic citation regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which such
citation was originally issued.
B. A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. (1970
Code)
10-13-10: PROCEDURE NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall govern all police officers in making arrests without a
warrant for violations of this Title, but the procedure prescribed herein shall not otherwise be exclusive
of any other method prescribed by law for the arrest and prosecution of a person for an offense of like
grade. (1970 Code)
10-13-11: EVIDENCE OF CONVICTION:
No evidence of the conviction of any person for any violation of this Title shall be admissible in any
court in any civil action. (1970 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 230/336
10-13-12: CREDIBILITY OF WITNESS:
The conviction of a person upon a charge of violating any provision of this Title less than a felony shall
not affect or impair the credibility of such person as a witness in any civil or criminal proceeding. (1970
Code)
Chapter 14
RECORDS
10-14-1: TRAFFIC CITATIONS; FORM:
A. The Police Department shall provide in appropriate form traffic citations containing notices to
appear which shall be issued in books with citations in quadruplicate.
B. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the issuance of such books and shall maintain a record
of every such book and each citation contained therein issued to individual members of the Police
Department and shall require and retain a receipt for every book so issued. (1970 Code)
10-14-2: TRAFFIC CITATIONS; DISPOSITION AND RECORDS:
A. Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator of any provision of this Title
shall deposit the original or a copy of such traffic citation with the court having jurisdiction over the
alleged offense.
B. Upon the deposit of the original or a copy of such traffic citation with the court, said original or copy
of such traffic citation may be disposed of only by trial in said court or other official action by the
Judge of said court, including a forfeiture of bail or by the deposit of sufficient bail with or payment
of a fine to the court by the person to whom such traffic citation has been issued by a police officer.
C. It shall be unlawful for any police officer to dispose of a traffic citation or copies thereof or of the
record of the issuance of the same in a manner other than as required herein.
D. The Chief of Police shall require the return to him of a copy of every traffic citation issued by an
officer under his supervision to an alleged violator of any traffic law and of all copies of every traffic
citation which has been spoiled or upon which any entry has been made and not issued to an
alleged violator.
E. The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in connection with every traffic
citation issued by an officer under his supervision a record of the disposition of the charge by the
court in which the original or copy was deposited. (1970 Code)
10-14-3: CANCELLATION OF CITATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 231/336
Any person who cancels or solicits the cancellation of any traffic citation, in any manner other than as
provided in this Title, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1970 Code)
10-14-4: RECORD OF TRAFFIC CASES:
A. The Police Judge shall keep or cause to be kept a record of every traffic complaint, traffic citation,
or other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or presented to said court and shall keep a
record of every official action by said court including but not limited to a record of every conviction
forfeiture resulting from every said traffic complaint or citation deposited with or presented to said
court.
B. Within ten (10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person upon a charge of violating
any provision of this Title, the magistrate or clerk of the court of record in which such conviction
was had or bail was forfeited shall prepare and immediately forward to the State Department of
Law Enforcement an abstract of the record of said court covering the case in which said person
was so convicted or forfeited bail, which abstract must be certified by the person so required to
prepare the same to be true and correct. Report need not be made of any conviction involving the
illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
C. Said abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the Department of Law Enforcement and
shall include the name and address of the party charged, the number, if any, of his operator's or
chauffeur's license, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the
date of hearing the plea, the judgment, or whether bail forfeited, and the amount of the fine or
forfeiture as the case may be.
D. The court of record shall also forward a like report to the State Department of Law Enforcement
upon the conviction of any person of manslaughter or other felony in the commission of which a
vehicle was used.
E. The failure, refusal, or neglect of the judicial officer to comply with any of the requirements of this
Section shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom. (1970
Code)
Title 11
ZONING
Chapter 1
ZONING
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title shall be known and may be cited as the "ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 232/336
GOODING". (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-1-2: PURPOSE, AND INTERPRETATION:
A. Purpose: This Title is enacted for the purpose of promoting public health, safety, and general
welfare; to conserve and protect property and property values; to secure the most appropriate use
of lands; to control the density of population; to prevent traffic congestion; and to facilitate
adequate and economical provisions for public improvements and services; all for the desirable
future physical development of the City of Gooding; to provide a method of administration and to
prescribe means of enforcement of provisions hereafter described.
B. Interpretations: For the purpose of this Title certain terms or words shall be interpreted as follows:
1. The word "person" includes firm, association, organization, partnership(s), trust, company or
corporation, as well as an individual.
2. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural number includes the singular.
3. The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a permission requirement, and
the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
4. The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel", and "tract". (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure thereon.
AIRPORT: Any runway, landing area, or other facility designed or used either publicly, privately, or
commercially by any person for all landing and taking-off of aircraft, including all associated taxiways,
aircraft storage and tie-downs areas, hangers, passenger terminals, and other buildings.
ALLEY: Any public space or thoroughfare sixteen feet (16') or less in width which has been dedicated
or deeded to the public travel and which affords secondary access to abutting property.
ALTERATION: As applied to a building or structure shall mean a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts or an enlargement whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or in the
moving from one location of position to another.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure of three (3) or more dwellings
which is arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit and has completed kitchen and
bathroom facilities permanently installed.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A multiple-family dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units
(apartments) in which all units exclusive of a unit, which may be occupied by the owner, are rented or
leased.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 233/336
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR GARAGE OR BODY SHOP: The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service painting, and steam cleaning of vehicles.
BASEMENT: A dwelling unit all or partly underground but having at least one-half (1/2) of its height
below the average level of the adjoining ground.
BATHROOM: A separate room containing a water closet, lavatory and/or bathtub or shower.
BED AND BREAKFAST: See DWELLING, ROOMING HOUSE.
BOARD: A board consisting of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Gooding.
BUILDING: The word "building" shall mean a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or
roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property, including roofed structures on wheels or other
supports used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional,
assembly, educational or recreational purposes. For the purpose of this definition "roof" shall include
an awning or other similar covering, whether or not permanent in nature.
BUILDING CODE: The latest approved edition of the Uniform Building Code.
BUILDING, HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed
finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for all roofs.
BUILDING LINE, SETBACK: See SETBACK, BUILDING LINE.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which
said building is situated.
BULK STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES: See UNIFORM BUILDING CODE AND
FIRE CODES. (Title 4 and Title 7 respectively of this Code.)
CERTIFICATE OF ELEVATION: The document required for flood insurance when a building is in the
flood zone.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: Final approval inspection by Building Official to allow occupancy.
CHILD CARE: See DAY CARE.
CITY DESIGNEE: The person or persons appointed by the City to perform assigned tasks or
responsibilities.
CLINIC, OUTPATIENT: A building used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing infirm or
injured persons, and those who are in need of dental, medical or surgical attention, but does not
provide board, room or regular hospital care and services.
CLUB: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by an organization association of
persons for the social, literary, political, educational, or recreational purpose and their guests, but still
not including any organization, group or association whose principal activity is to render a service
usually and ordinarily carried on as a business.
COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE OR ACTIVITY: Any sales, service, or entertainment operation,
including but to limited to personal services (shoe repair, watch repair, beauty and barber shops) and
professional services (medical practitioners, lawyers, architects).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 234/336
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission, as created by ordinance, consisting of
members appointed by the City Council.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the board including such things
as the general location and extent of present, and proposed physical facilities including residential,
industrial land commercial uses, major transportation, parks, schools, and other community facilities.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD: Storage of goods, materials, and equipment not fully enclosed by a building.
COURT: An unoccupied open space, other than a yard on the same lot with a building, which is
bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls of such building.
COURT, INNER: A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a building or by exterior walls and
lot lines on which walls are allowable.
COURT, OPEN: A court enclosed by exterior walls of a building or by exterior walls and lot lines on
which walls are allowable, with one side or end open to a street, driveway, alley or yard.
DAY CARE CENTER: A home or place in which five (5) or more children, not related by blood or
marriage to the person or persons operating such center, are regularly received and provided with
part-time supplemental parental care during any part of the twenty four (24) hour day when the
parents are not on the premises.
DENSITY: A unit of measurement: the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Gross Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be developed, including public
right of way.
Net Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage involved includes only
the land devoted to residential, excluding public right of way.
DESIGN REVIEW ORDINANCE: The Design Review ordinance of the City, as adopted by the City, or
as may hereafter be amended and/or codified.
DIRECT ILLUMINATION: For the purpose of the sign regulations of this Title "direct illumination" shall
refer to internally lit and neon signs.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units including
apartment houses, town-houses and condominiums with varying arrangements of entrances and party
walls. Multi-family housing may include public housing and industrialized units.
DWELLING, ROOMING HOUSE (BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE, DORMITORY): A
dwelling or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel or restaurant where meals and/or lodging are
provided for compensation for three (3) or more unrelated persons where no cooking or dining
facilities are provided in the individual rooms.
DWELLING SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of a single dwelling unit only, separated from
other dwelling units by open space.
DWELLING TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of two (2) dwelling units which may be either
attached side by side or one above the other.
DWELLING UNIT: Means one or more rooms designed for, or used as a residence for not more than
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 235/336
one family, including all necessary household employees of such family, and constituting a separate
and independent housekeeping unit, with a single kitchen permanently installed. The term does not
imply or include such types of occupancy as a lodging of boarding house, club, sorority, fraternity or
hotel.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for the use of another, and for a specified purpose, of
any designated part of his property.
ENVIRONMENTAL AUTHORITY: The federal, state or local agencies governing quality control.
ERECTED: The word "erected" includes built, constructed, reconstructed, or moved upon, or any
other physical operations on the premises required for building. Excavations, fill, drainage, and the like
shall be considered a part of erection.
ESCROW BOND (PERFORMANCE BOND, SURETY BOND): A financial guarantee by a subdivider
or developer with the City in the amount of the estimated construction cost, guaranteeing the
completion of physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the time prescribed
by the agreement.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or
municipal departments or commissions of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including
poles, wires mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not
including buildings reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities
or municipal departments or commissions or for the public health or safety or general welfare.
FENCE: A natural or artificial barrier intended to be an enclosure or to delineate a boundary.
FLOOD PLAIN: The Flood Plain Map is on file at City Hall. It includes the area established by FEMA in
which a flood will occur in one hundred (100) years.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors including the
exterior walls of the building or portion thereof.
FLOOR AREA, NET: That portion of the gross floor area of the building occupied by the listed use or
uses and shall include hallways, storage and packaging space, dressing or rest rooms and laboratory
or work room; provided, however, that floor space within the building reserved for parking or loading of
vehicles, and basement space used only for building maintenance and utilities shall be excluded.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building or portion thereof in which a motor vehicle containing flammable or
combustible liquid or gas in its tank is or intended to be stored, repaired or kept.
HEALTH AUTHORITY: The local District Health Department or the State Department of Health and
Welfare that has jurisdictional authority.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: See BUILDING HEIGHT.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business-related activity conducted entirely within a dwelling, which is
incidental and secondary to the use of a dwelling as a residence. The purpose of this Title in reference
to home occupations is to regulate those activities that represent a departure from the daily routine
associated with a residential use and could, therefore impact the neighborhood.
HOSPITAL: A building housing any facility, however named, whether operated for profit or not,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 236/336
devoted primarily to the medical or surgical care of patients for twenty four (24) or more hours.
HOTEL: A building which is used for short term occupancy, offering sleeping accommodations to the
public on a nightly basis and access to all sleeping rooms through a main entrance, and which may
provide food, entertainment, or various personal services.
INDIRECT ILLUMINATION: For the purposes of the sign regulations of this Title "indirect illumination"
shall refer to a source of light separate from the sign itself.
INDUSTRIAL USE: Any manufacture, processing, or testing of goods and materials, including the
production of power, where the by-products of such use include noise, smoke, odor, glare, gas,
vibration, dust, light, or traffic, which may have a detrimental effect on neighboring property.
INSTITUTION: A building and/or land designed to aid individuals in need of mental, therapeutic,
rehabilitative counseling, or other correctional services.
JUNK: Any worn-out, cast-off, or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction, recycling,
or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion in some use.
JUNK BUILDINGS, JUNK SHOPS, JUNK YARDS: Any land, property, building, or combination of the
same, on which junk is stored or processed.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more domestic animals of more than four (4)
months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold.
KITCHEN: Includes a sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working
space of not less than thirty inches (30") in front. Light and ventilation conforming to code.
LANDSCAPING: Outdoor plants such as trees, grass, shrubs, and flowering plants.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING USES: Warehousing, wholesaleing, manufacturing and/ or processing of
goods and materials which do not emit offensive odor, dust, smoke, glare, gas, light, noise, or
vibration which cannot be confined to the site itself.
LOADING SPACE: Space logically and conveniently located for pickup and deliveries, scaled to
delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when required parking spaces
are filled.
LOT: Plot, parcel, or tract of land with fixed boundaries of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are
herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street or an approved private
street, and may consist of:
A. A single lot of record;
B. A combination of complete lots of record.
LOT COVERAGE: The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on a lot to the horizontally
projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be construed to the portion nearest the street. For the
purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to
streets shall be considered frontage and yards shall be provided as indicated under "YARDS" in this
Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 237/336
LOT LINE, FRONT: The property line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner lot only one street shall
be considered the front lot line and the main or front entrance to the primary building on the lot shall
face such lot line. For building located on a corner with more than one business within the building the
lot front is the side where the businesses' street is listed.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than the front or rear lot lines.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF: The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any portion of the right of way of
any public or private street.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot, which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder,
or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded.
LOT TYPES: Terminology used in this Title with reference to corner lots, interior lots and through lots
is as follows:
Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with only one street.
Reversed Frontage Lot: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the general pattern in the area.
A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot.
Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots
abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.
LOT WIDTH: The distance parallel to the front lot line, measured between side lot lines through that
part of the building or structure where the lot is the narrowest.
MAJOR ADDITION: Any extension, having a floor area of two hundred (200) square feet or greater, to
an existing building. Extensions to a dwelling, which do not increase the total number of dwelling units,
shall not be considered as major additions.
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision and intended for exclusive manufactured
home residential use.
MANUFACTURED HOMES: Shall be, and is hereby, defined as follows: A structure built since June
15, 1976, that bears the seal of H.U.D. indicating it has met the Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (H.U.D. Standards)
and is used as a permanent dwelling. Manufactured homes shall comply with the following
development standards.
A. Shall be at least twenty four feet (24') wide, with a minimum floor area of nine hundred sixty
(960) square feet.
B. Shall have a nonmetallic, wood shake or asphalt shingle roof with a minimum slope of three feet
(3') per twelve feet (12') and a minimum six inch (6") eave.
C. Shall have a horizontal aluminum, simulated wood or wood siding.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 238/336
D. Shall have a concrete foundation which surrounds the entire perimeter of the structure and
completely encloses the space between the siding and the finished grade.
E. Shall be permanently affixed and set upon a foundation base having an anchoring system that
is totally concealed under the structure. The running gear and towing hitch shall be removed.
F. Shall obtain a building permit from the City Building Inspector to insure that the manufactured
home is placed on site to H.U.D. Standards set forth in circular Letter No. 2-83, dated April 8,
1983, or as later amended, published by the Boise Service Office of H.U.D. regulating the
perimeter foundation, the anchoring of the structure to its foundation and other building
requirements.
G. Shall meet all other State of Idaho requirements.
MANUFACTURING, EXTRACTIVE: Any mining, quarrying, excavation, processing storing, cleaning or
marketing of any mineral resource.
MANUFACTURING HEAVY: Manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing, testing and similar
industrial uses which are generally major operations and extensive in character require large sites,
open storage and service areas, extensive services and facilities, ready access to regional
transportation and normally generates some nuisances such as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare,
air pollution and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site or tract of land of one site or more under single ownership, upon
which ten (10) or more mobile homes are parked for living quarters, including any roadway, building,
structure, vehicle, recreational facility, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of such park.
MOBILE HOMES: "Mobile homes" shall be, and are hereby defined as follows: A structure that is
transportable in one section, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, not to include recreational
vehicles or travel trailers. Trailers must meet post 1976 HUD requirements.
MOTEL: A building or group of buildings, which are used for short-term occupancy, offering sleeping
accommodations to the public on a nightly basis.
NONCONFORMING USE: An existing nonconforming use at the time of adoption of this Title or a
legal building, structure, or use of land which:
A. Exists, or for which a valid building permit exists at the effective date of this Title, and violates
any of the provisions of this Title; or
B. Exists, or for which a valid building permit exists, at the effective date of any amendment to this
Title, and which violates any of the provisions of such amendment.
NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS: Land, building, structure, or a combination hereof for storage,
cultivation, transplanting of live trees, shrubs, or plants offered for retail sale on the premises,
including products used for gardening or landscaping.
NURSING HOME: Any building housing any facility, however named, whether operated for profit or
not, the purpose of which is to provide skilled nursing care and related medical services for more than
five (5) individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or requiring care because of old
age.
OPEN SPACE: An area substantially open to the sky, which may be on the lot with a building. The
area may include, along with the natural environmental features, water areas, swimming pools, tennis
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 239/336
courts or any other recreational facilities that the Board deems permissible. Streets, parking areas,
structures for habitation, and like shall not be included.
OUTDOOR STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS: Storage of goods,
materials, equipment, manufactured property and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.
OWNER: The individual, firm, association, syndicate partnership, or corporation having proprietary
interest in the land.
PARAPET or PARAPET WALL: That portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level.
PARKING LOT AREA: An area including access or maneuvering area, ramps or columns exclusively
as storage space for motor vehicles.
PARKING, OFF-STREET: For the purpose of this Title, an off-street parking space shall consist of an
area adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with
properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, but shall be located totally
outside of any street or alley right of way.
PERFORMANCE BOND: See ESCROW BOND.
PERMIT: A document issued by the Administrator and/or Building Inspector authorizing the uses of
land and structures, and the characteristics of the uses; including but not limited to Special Use
Permit, Certificate of Occupancy.
PERSONAL SERVICE: Any enterprise conducted for gain, which primarily offers services to the
general public such as shoe repair, watch repair, barbershops, beauty parlors and similar activities.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): An area of land in which a variety of open space,
residential, commercial, and industrial uses, developed under single ownership or control, are
accommodated in a pre-planned environment with more flexible standards, such as lot sizes and
setbacks, than those restrictions that would normally apply under these regulations.
PLAT: The drawing, mapping, or planning of a subdivision, cemetery, town site, or other tract of land or
a replatting of such including certifications, descriptions and approvals.
Final Plat: The final and formal presentation by maps and drawings of an approved subdivision
development, the original and one copy of which is filed with the County Clerk and Recorder.
Preliminary Plat: The first formal presentation by maps or drawings of a proposed subdivision, as
required in these regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD: A road, street, alley, or bridge that is not laid out or established by the State of Idaho
or a subdivision of the State or dedicated to the State or a subdivision of the State and accepted by
such entity.
PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES: The use of offices and related spaces for such professional services
as are provided by medical practitioners, lawyers, architects, engineers and similar professions.
PUBLIC USES: Public parks, school, administrative and cultural buildings and structures, not including
public land or buildings devoted solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials
and public service facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: See ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 240/336
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: Churches, sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges, hospitals and other
facilities of an educational, religious, charitable, philanthropic or nonprofit nature.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular type unit designed as temporary
dwelling for recreational, camping or travel use which is either self propelled, self-contained, or
mounted on or drawn by another vehicle; including all recreational vehicles, camping trailers, truck
campers, and motor homes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Any site or tract of land upon which two (2)
or more recreational vehicles used for human habitation are parked, either free of charge or for
revenue purposes; including any roadway, building, structure vehicle or enclosure used or intended for
use as part of the facilities of such park.
RECYCLING PLANT: Treatment facility, which converts, purifies and/or processes waste or garbage
into useful products.
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES: Research, development, and testing related to such fields as chemical,
pharmaceutical, medical, electrical, transportation and engineering.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a dedicated street of partial street and adjacent property, in
either case, reserved or held in public ownership for future street extension or widening.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house, where meals are
provided for compensation, including among others, such as cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch room,
tea room and dining room.
RIDING STABLES AND SCHOOLS: A facility where horses are boarded, bred, or raised by the
owners of the premises for a fee. Also includes facilities that rent horses for riding. Typical uses
include boarding stables or public stables.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it
normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, and may
include special features (required by the topography or treatment) such as grade separation,
landscaped area, viaducts and bridges.
ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale of agricultural or
manufactured products whether produced on the site or imported or otherwise brought to the site for
resale.
SCREENING: Earth mounds or berms, sight obscuring fence and walls and landscaping used singly
or in combination to block direct visual access to an object.
SEAT: For the purpose of determining the number of street parking spaces for certain uses, the
number of seats is the number of seating units installed or indicated, or each twenty four (24) lineal
inches of benches, pews or space for loose chairs.
SERVICE STATION, GAS STATION, FILLING STATION: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil,
grease, batteries, tires and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and
where other services including minor motor vehicle repairs are done. Uses permissible at service
stations do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting,
welding, storage of automobiles not in working condition or other work involving noise, glare, fumes,
smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in service stations. A service
station is not an automotive repair garage or body shop. Service stations shall comply with Health
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 241/336
Authority standards.
SETBACK AREA: The space on a lot required to be left open and unoccupied by building or
structures, either by the front, side or rear yard requirements of this Title, or by delineation on a
recorded subdivision map.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and/or
managed as a unit related in location, and type of shops to the trade area and unit services.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the right of way outside the roadway, which is improved for the use of
pedestrian traffic.
SIGN: Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of individuals.
Illuminated: Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other artificial light including reflecting or
phosphorescent light.
Lighting Device: Any light string of lights or group of lights located or arranged so as to cast
illumination on a sign.
Off-Premises: Any sign unrelated to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or
service sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
On-Premises: Any sign related to a business or profession conducted, or a commodity or service
sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
Projecting: Any sign which projects from the exterior of a building.
SPECIAL USE: A special use permitted within a zoning district other than a principally permitted use,
requiring a special use permit and approval of the Board.
STORY: That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling immediately above it.
STREET: A right of way, which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term "street" also includes the terms highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place and other such terms.
Alley: A minor street providing secondary access to the back or side of a property otherwise abutting
a street.
Arterial: A street designated for the purpose of carrying fast and/or heavy traffic.
Collector: A street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic from minor streets to other collector
streets and/or arterial streets.
Minor: A street, which has the primary purpose of carrying traffic abutting properties.
Private: A street that is not designated for public use or maintenance, which provides vehicular and
pedestrian access.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or
attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include
buildings, manufactured homes, walls, fences and billboards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 242/336
SUPPLY YARDS: A commercial establishment storing and offering for sale building supplies, steel
supplies, coat, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and similar goods.
TOWN HOUSES: See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
TRAVEL TRAILER: See RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER PARK.
URBAN AREA: Cities and city impact area.
USE: The specific purposes for which land or a building is designated, arranged intended or for which
it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE: A variance is a modification of requirements of this Chapter as to lot size, lot coverage,
width, depth, front yard side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space, heights of buildings, or other
ordinance provision affecting the size or shape of a structure or the size of lots. A variance shall not be
considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon showing of undue
hardship because of characteristics of the site and that the variance is not in conflict with the public
interest.
VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: A place used for the care, grooming, diagnoses, and
treatment of sick ailing, infirm, or injured animals, and those who are in need of medical or surgical
attention, and may include overnight accommodations on the premises for the treatment, observation,
and/or recuperation. It may also included boarding that is incidental to the primary activity.
VICINITY MAP: A drawing which sets forth by dimensions or other means the relationship of the
proposed development to other nearby developments or landmarks and community facilities and
services within the general area in order to better locate and orient the area in question.
WALKWAY: A public way, for pedestrian use only, whether or not along the side of a road.
WALL: A continuous structure designed to enclose an area, to be the surrounding exterior of a
building.
WRECKING YARD: Any premises, excluding fully enclosed buildings, where more than two (2) motor
vehicles not in operating condition are standing more than thirty (30) days, or where used motor
vehicles or parts thereof are dismantled and stored.
YARD: A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or
portion of a structure from three feet (3') above the general ground level of the graded lot upward;
provided accessories, ornaments, and lawn furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height
limitations and requirements limiting obstruction or visibility.
Front: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot and from the front lot line to
the front of the principal building.
Interior Side: A yard extending from the principal building to the side lot line on both sides of the
principal building between the lines establishing the front and rear yards.
Rear: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a lot and from the rear lot line to the
rear of the principal building.
Side Street: A yard extending from the principal buildings to the secondary street that adjoins the lot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 243/336
between the lines establishing the front and rear yards.
ZONING PERMIT: See PERMIT. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 2
DISTRICTS; MAPS
11-2-1: USE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of this Title, the City is hereby divided into four (4) use districts which shall be known
in the order of restrictiveness, as:
R-1 Limited One Family District
R-2 One and Two Family District and Multi-Family District
C Commercial
I Industrial
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-2-2: MAPS AND BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the use districts within the City limits are hereby established as shown on a map
entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Gooding, 2002" on file in the office of the Clerk, which map, with all
explanatory matter thereon, shall be deemed to accompany, be and is hereby made a part of this Title.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 3
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
11-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone is to preserve residential neighborhoods, to
prevent over-crowding of the land and to encourage the development of low density areas which are
best suited for residential purposes, and discourages uses that are in conflict with the residential
nature of the property. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-3-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are allowed in the R-1 Zone:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 244/336
A. Single-family dwellings;
B. Home gardening and other horticultural uses not operated as a commercial enterprise and where
no building is involved, excluding livestock;
C. Accessory uses;
D. Schools;
E. Churches;
F. One sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area pertaining to the lease or sale of buildings or
premises where the sign is located. This provision shall also apply to political signs during
campaign periods. Signs for home occupations shall be limited to four (4) square feet in area, shall
be unlighted and attached flush to the building;
G. Parks and playgrounds. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-3-3: SPECIAL USES:
The Planning Commission may, after notice and public hearing permit the following uses where such
uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare. The Commission shall
have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect the
best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood from damage, hazard, nuisance or other
detriment:
A. Nonprofit community clubhouse;
B. Rest and convalescent home;
C. Building for governmental or public utility functions;
D. Hospitals;
E. Clinics of the healing arts in residential style when adjacent to the hospitals;
F. Duplex;
G. Boarding and rooming house;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 245/336
H. Homes for ambulatory aged, rest home, elderly housing; I. Mobile home parks;
J. Nursery school/daycare;
K. Temporary buildings as uses necessary for construction purposes for a period not to exceed one
year;
L. Home Occupations.
All other uses not mentioned but similar in nature to the special uses listed above may be considered
under a special use permit upon permission of the City. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-3-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure or portion thereof hereafter erected shall not exceed three (3) stories or thirty
feet (30') in height. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-3-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following are setback requirements in the R-1 Zone:
A. Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected nearer than twenty feet (20') from the right-ofway
line of the street/avenue; provided, when lots comprising fifty percent (50%) or more of the
frontage between two (2) intersecting streets are already developed with buildings having front
yards with a variation of not more than thirty feet (30') in depth, the average of such front yards
shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage. In no case shall a front yard of
more than thirty feet (30') in depth be required.
B. Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than five feet (5') to any side property line, except
corner lots shall maintain a twenty foot (20') side yard adjacent to the street which intersect the
street upon which the building fronts.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than five feet (5') with existing
alley, twelve feet (12') without existing alley.
D. Fences: Fences shall not exceed six feet (6) in height when located behind the front setback line
and may be placed upon the property line. Fences located in the front yard area as defined above
may not exceed four feet (4') in height and must be placed no closer than six inches (6") inside of
the right of way. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-3-6: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 246/336
The following are area requirements in the R-1 Zone:
A. The minimum lot area for each residential structure shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet and a
lot width at the established front lot line of not less than fifty feet (50').
B. Not more than forty five percent (45%) of the lot area may be covered by buildings or structures.
C. Not more than one home shall be placed on any parcel having fifty feet (50') for front line.
D. Each home must have at least fifty feet (50') for front line. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-3-7: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted if constructed either at the same time or subsequent to the main
building. Such uses shall be limited to one story in height and shall not encroach upon the front, side
yard or rear yard setback (no closer than 5'). (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-3-8: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The following are off-street parking requirements in the R-1 Zone:
A. For each single-family residence, two (2) spaces sufficient in size for a garage, carport or
driveways;
B. Other uses as defined in Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 4
R-2 COMBINED RESIDENTIAL ZONE
11-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-2 Combined Residential Zone is to provide medium density residential
development, well designed and properly located in the community pattern adjacent to shopping,
recreation, cultural and other community facilities. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-4-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are allowed in the R-2 Zone:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 247/336
A. Those permitted uses allowed in the R-1 District as regulated therein;
B. Two-family and multiple-family dwellings limited to not more than four (4) units;
C. Accessory uses on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or structure thereon;
D. Libraries;
E. Museums. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-4-3: SPECIAL USES:
The Planning Commission may, after proper notice and public hearing as prescribed in Chapter 11 of
this Title, permit the following uses where such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare. The Commission shall have the authority to impose such conditions and
safeguards as it deems necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or
neighborhood from damage, hazard, nuisance or other detriment:
A. Those uses requiring special use permits and as regulated therein in the R-1 District;
B. Multiple-family dwellings exceeding four (4) units;
C. Manufactured home parks;
D. One sign not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area pertaining to the identification, rent, sale
or lease of the building or premises where the sign is located. Signs shall be nonrevolving and
indirectly lighted. Signs may be permitted to exceed this size if allowed by special use permit;
E. Mobile Homes.
All other uses not mentioned but similar in nature to the special uses listed above may be considered
under a special use permit upon permission of the City. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-4-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure or portion thereof hereafter erected shall not exceed three (3) stories or thirty
feet (30') in height. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 248/336
11-4-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following are setback requirements in the R-2 Zone:
A. Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected nearer than twenty feet (20') from the right-ofway
line of the street provided, when lots comprising fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage
between two (2) intersecting streets are already developed with buildings having front yards with a
variation of not more than fifteen feet (15') in depth, the average of such front yards shall establish
the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage. In no case shall a front yard of more than
thirty feet (30') in depth be required;
B. Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than five feet (5') to any side property line, except
corner lots shall maintain a twenty foot (20') side yard adjacent to the street which intersects the
street upon which the building fronts;
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than five feet (5') with an alley and
twelve feet (12') without an alley;
D. Fences: Fences shall not exceed six feet (6') in height when located behind the front setback line
and may be placed upon the property line. Fences located in the front yard area as defined above
may not exceed four feet (4') in height and must be placed no closer than six inches (6") inside of
the right of way. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-4-6: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The following are area requirements in the R-2 Zone:
A. The minimum lot area for single-family and two-family dwellings, six thousand (6,000) square feet;
B. The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit above that required for two-family dwellings shall be
one thousand (1,000) square feet of land area for each additional unit;
C. Not more than forty five percent (45%) of the lot area may be covered by buildings or structures;
D. The minimum lot area and minimum park area requirements for manufactured home parks shall
comply with minimum lot and area requirements in Chapter 14 of this Title;
E. Not more than one home shall be placed on any parcel with a fifty foot (50') front line. (Ord. 626,
10-7-2002)
11-4-7: ACCESSORY USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 249/336
Accessory uses are permitted if constructed either at the same time or subsequent to the main
building. Such uses shall be limited to one story in height and shall not encroach upon the front or side
yards or rear yard setback. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-4-8: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The following are off-street parking requirements for the R-2 Zone:
A. For up to four (4) units on a single lot, two (2) spaces for each unit as defined in Chapter 12 of this
Title, sufficient in size for a garage, carport or driveway;
B. For other uses and additional residential units in the R-2 Zone, refer to Chapter 12 of this Title.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 5
COMMERCIAL ZONE
11-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the commercial zone is to establish distinct zones regulated to fulfill general retail
needs and travel or highway related service requirements within the community and cultural needs of
the community. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are allowed in the C zone:
Those uses allowed in the R-1/R-2 district.
Accessory uses to the uses allowed.
Automobile sales and service.
Automobile sales lot.
Automobile service stations.
Boarding and rooming houses.
Bowling alley, dance hall or similar commercial establishments for public gatherings or recreational
use.
Clinics.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 250/336
Club or lodge.
Commercial and private off street parking lots for passenger automobiles.
Cultural facilities.
Government or public utility facilities of a nonindustrial character.
Mortuaries.
Nursery schools, schools for students of art, dancing, dramatics, music, business, or secretarial work.
Professional offices/financial.
Radio, television and FM broadcasting stations.
Recreational vehicle park.
Restaurants and other eating establishments.
Retail stores and personal service shops, including shopping centers.
Taverns or lounges.
Theater, indoor.
Trailer sales and rental. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002; amd. Ord. 652, 8-21-2006)
11-5-3: SPECIAL USES:
The planning commission may, after proper notice and public hearing, permit the following uses where
such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare. The commission
shall have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect
the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood from damage, hazard, nuisance or
other detriment:
Auction establishment.
Automobile and truck repair shop.
Boarding kennel.
Commercial storage buildings for belongings and effects.
Drive-in theater.
Hospital.
Recycling collection center.
Rest and convalescent home.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 251/336
School, public.
All other uses not mentioned but similar in nature to the special uses listed above may be considered
under a special use permit upon permission of the city. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-5-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building, structure, or portion thereof hereafter erected, shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in height
unless approved by variance. A variance shall be required to exceed this height. Provided, however,
this height restriction shall not apply to utility poles, traffic signs and/or traffic lights. Utility poles, or
traffic lights and signs exceeding seventy feet (70') shall require a review and approval by city council
by variance. This exemption only applies to utility poles, signs and lights on public rights of way placed
there by the state highway department or public utility. (Ord. 686, 1-21-2014)
11-5-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. No front or side yard shall be required, except that when a building or group of buildings abuts upon
a residential district, a yard shall be provided on the side of a lot abutting the residential district
having a width of not less than ten feet (10').
B. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than fifteen feet (15') when abutting upon a
residential zone. The rear yard may be used for off street parking and loading.
C. Residential uses within this zone shall have the same setback and side yard and fence
requirements as set forth in the R-1/R-2 zone. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-5-6: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be no minimum lot sizes except that residential uses shall have the same area
requirement as set forth in the R-1/R-2 zone. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-5-7: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted if constructed either at the same time or subsequent to the main
building. Such uses shall be limited to two (2) stories in height and shall not encroach upon required
setback areas. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-5-8: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Off street parking requirements are defined in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 252/336
Chapter 6
INDUSTRIAL ZONE
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
The Industrial Zone is established to provide for and encourage the grouping together of light
industrial uses capable of being operated under such standards as to location and appearance of
buildings and the treatment of the land about them, that they will be unobtrusive and not detrimental to
surrounding commercial or residential uses. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-6-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are allowed in the I Zone:
A. Manufacturing, assembling, fabricating, processing, packing, repairing, or storage uses which have
not been declared a nuisance by statute, resolution, or any court of competent jurisdiction and
provided these uses shall not cause:
1. Dust, smoke, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, or odor beyond the boundaries of the site on which
such use is conducted that is declared unduly hazardous or injurious to other properties in the
vicinity or to the general public as shall be determined by the Commission,
2. Hazard of fire, explosion, or other physical damage to any adjacent building or plant growth.
B. Wholesale, warehousing, storage, and distribution;
C. Contracting equipment, maintenance or operating equipment of public agencies or public utilities or
materials and equipment. of a similar nature including lumber, coal, sand and gravel yards;
D. Food processing;
E. Laundry and dry cleaning of an industrial character;
F. Broadcasting tower for radio or television;
G. Single-family home owned by industrial user on property. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-6-3: SPECIAL USES:
The Planning Commission may, after proper notice and public hearing permit the following uses where
such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare. The Commission
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 253/336
shall have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect
the best interest of the surrounding property or neighborhood from damage, hazard, nuisance, or
other detriment.
A. Boarding kennel;
B. Storage, for wholesale or for distribution in bulk, of any flammable liquid above or below ground;
C. Grain elevator and bulk storage such as for potatoes, hay and other similar uses;
D. Sewage treatment plant and similar facilities;
E. Railroad boxcars, motor vehicle cargo containers or other containers normally used for the
shipment of freight, cargo or other items, by rail, ship or motor vehicular transportation, wherein the
applicant desires to cause the same to be located upon property within the City for storage or other
purposes. Said containers are specifically prohibited from being located within any other zone
within the City;
F. Recycling collection center;
G. Auction establishments; 0203
H. Those uses allowed and special uses permitted in the Industrial Zone; except residential unless the
use meets the requirements of subsection 11-6-2G;
I. Bulk storage of corrosive acid or alkali, creosote, fertilizer, fireworks, and highly combustible
materials.
All other uses not mentioned but similar in nature to the special uses listed above may be considered
under a special use permit upon permission of the City. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-6-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure or portions thereof hereafter erected shall not exceed five (5) stories or thirty
feet (30'), whichever is greater unless permitted to exceed this height by special use permit. A special
use permit shall be required to exceed this height. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-6-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following are setback requirements for the Industrial Zone:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 254/336
A. Front Yard: The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') when a lot abuts,
touches or adjoins, or is across the street from a residential district, otherwise no front yard
setback is required.
B. Side Yard: The side yard shall be minimum of fifteen feet (15') when a lot abuts, touches or adjoins
a residential district, otherwise no side yard setback is required.
C. Rear Yard: The rear yard shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') when a lot abuts, touches, or
adjoins a residential district, unless abutting a six foot (6) setback is required along alley right of
way, otherwise no rear yard setback is required. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-6-6: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be a minimum lot size of one-quarter ('/,) acre unless allowed to be less by special use
permit. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-6-7: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-6-8: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Refer to Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 7
HEAVY INDUSTRY
11-7-1: PURPOSE:
To provide an opportunity for those industries which are not permitted under Title 11, Chapter 6 of this
Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-7-2: SPECIAL USES:
Any use not listed in Title 11, Chapter 6 of this Title shall be considered a special use and shall require
a special use application. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-7-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 255/336
For height regulations, refer to Section 11-6-4 of this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-7-4: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
For setback requirements, refer to Section 11-6-5 of this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-7-5: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
For area requirements, refer to Section 11-6-6 of this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-7-6: ACCESSORY USES:
For accessory uses, refer to Section 11-6-7 of this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-7-7: OFF-STREET PARKING:
For off-street parking requirements, refer to Section 11-6-8 of this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 8
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE
11-8-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Zone to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by methods and provisions
designed for:
A. Restriction or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 256/336
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwater or
which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-8-2: APPLICABILITY:
This Zone shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of City of Gooding,
Gooding County, Idaho. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-8-3: FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration on its Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Title. (Ord. 626,
10-7-2002)
11-8-4: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
A building permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of
special flood hazard. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth
in and for all other development including fill and other activities. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-8-5: BUILDING PERMIT DEFINED:
All references within this Chapter to "building permits" shall include the purchase of a permit for
development as the term "development" is defined under this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-8-6: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The Building Inspector shall administer and implement this Zone by granting or denying building
permit applications in accordance with its provisions. Duties of the City designee shall include but not
be limited to:
A. Permit Review:
1. Review all building permit applications to determine that all permit requirements of this Zone
have been satisfied;
2. Review all building permit applications to determine that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is
required;
3. Review all building permit applications to determine if the proposed development is located in
the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of Section 11-
8-8 are met.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 257/336
B. Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has not been provided the City
Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway
data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer subsections A, B, and C
of Section 11-8-8.
C. Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
1. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study or required as in
Section 11-8-7, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement;
2. For all new or substantially improved flood proof structures:
a. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level),
b. Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in subsection B3 of Section 11-8-8.
3. Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho State Department of Water Resources prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration;
4. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse
so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Interpretation Of FHBM Boundaries: Make interpretation where needed, as to exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards. The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such appeals shall
be granted consistent with the standards, rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-8-7: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
2. All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement, and shall be installed using methods and protectives that minimize flood damage.
Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors (reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas"
Guidebook For Additional Techniques).
B. Construction Materials And Methods:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 258/336
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and
protectives that minimize flood damage.
3. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
C. Utilities:
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwater into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwater.
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision Proposals:
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
4. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another
authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less.
E. Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood
Insurance Study or from another authoritative source, applications for building permits shall be
reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of
reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks,
photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet (2') above
grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-8-8: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance
Study For the City of Gooding," dated 1985, on file at the City Hall, Gooding, Idaho, and declared to
be part of this Chapter, with accompanying flood insurance maps, the following provisions are
required:
A. Residential Construction:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 259/336
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including the basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
2. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade;
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
B. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
1. Be flood proof so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy;
3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards, proactive for meeting provisions of this
subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and
plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection C2 of Section
11-8-6;
4. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not flood proof, must meet the same standards for
space below the lowest floor as described in Section 11-8-8;
5. Applicants flood proofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums
will be based on rates that are one foot (1') below the flood proof level (e.g. a building
constructed to the base flood level will be rated as 1' below that level).
C. Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones
R-1, R-2, C, I-L, as set forth on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance
with the provisions of Section 11 -8-7A.
D. Floodway: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 11-8-3 are areas
designated as floodway. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwater, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 260/336
1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge;
2. Prohibit the placement of any manufactured homes, except in an existing manufactured or
mobile home park or existing manufactured or mobile home subdivision. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-8-9: FLOODPLAIN COMPLIANCE DISCLAIMER:
The City in issuing a building permit for construction within this Zone makes no representation to the
applicant of the City's compliance with federal and state laws because a report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study For the City of Gooding," with accompanying flood insurance maps, has not been
completed and submitted to the City by the Federal Flood Insurance Program; therefore, the City
makes no representation pertaining to the issuance of permits within floodplain or the ability of the
applicant to obtain federally sponsored financing for construction or sale of a building or that the
applicant will be able to obtain national flood insurance. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 9
AREA OF CITY IMPACT1
11-9-1: AREA OF IMPACT:
The Area of City Impact shall be governed by the agreement mutually agreed upon by the City of
Gooding and Gooding County and adopted by separate ordinance, on file with the City Clerk of the
City of Gooding. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 1O
GENERAL REGULATIONS
11-10-1: PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the duty to recommend the required setback line for
public or semi-public buildings after a public hearing, if they can show it is necessary, that such action
will not be detrimental to the other uses in the area, and will be in accordance with the general
purpose of this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-2: EXISTING YARD AREAS:
The yard areas of buildings existing at the time of the adoption of this Title shall not be diminished
below the requirements herein provided for buildings hereafter erected except as provided in this Title,
and such required areas shall not be included as part of the required areas of any building hereafter
erected. (Ord. 626,10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 261/336
11-10-3: EASEMENTS:
It is not intended by this Title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenants or other
agreements between parties; however, where this Title imposes a greater restriction upon the height
of buildings or requires larger lots or yards than are imposed or required by existing ordinances or by
permits, easements, covenants or agreements, this Title shall control. This Title shall be construed
literally to secure the beneficial interest and purposes thereof. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-4: COMPLETION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS:
If a zoning designation changes while a building is being constructed under an existing building
permit, no changes or alterations shall be required of the structure in order to meet requirements of
the new zone. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-5: ADDRESSING:
Addresses of buildings and properties shall be issued by the City Treasurer. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-6: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Temporary buildings, construction trailers, equipment, and materials used in conjunction with
construction work may be permitted only in any district during the period the construction work is in
progress; however, such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the construction
work. Storage of such facilities or equipment beyond the completion date of the project shall require
approval by the City Council. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-7: TRASH AREAS:
All trash and/or garbage collection areas for commercial, industrial, and R-1 and R-2 uses shall have
adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas, and shall provide adequate area for
garbage containers as recommended by the City. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-8: PARKING AND STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES:
Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or
stored on any residentially zoned property, nor on any street or right of way, other than in completely
enclosed building or carport. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-9: FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES AND HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Family child care homes and home occupations may be considered to be permissible accessory uses
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 262/336
in the residential districts if they are approved after applying the following additional review procedures
and the applicable accessory use standards:
A. Notice of the application shall be published and mailed by First Class mail to owners of property,
which abut the external lot of boundary lines of the property under consideration.
1. Applicant shall provide the City with a list of property owner names from the tax records of
Gooding County.
2. Properties across a street or alley or kitty corner to the subject property shall be deemed
abutting properties. Fifteen (15) days from the date of publication referenced in subsection B of
this Section shall be allowed for response to said notice.
B. Notice of the application shall be published in the official newspaper of the City for two (2)
consecutive weeks and fifteen (15) days after second publication shall be allowed for a public
hearing.
C. The applicant shall be required to pay any additional sewer, water and trash charges or fees, if any
are required.
D. Pay a fee established by resolution of the City Council.
E. If there is an objection to the proposed use filed within the time for response, a hearing, after notice,
shall be held by the Commission. The Commission shall, after the hearing, recommend to the
Council what action it feels should be taken. The Council shall then grant or deny the application
after making findings of fact. Any aggrieved party may appeal the decision to the District Court
within thirty (30) days of the Council's decision and if not so appealed the decision shall be final.
F. If there are no objections filed within the time for filing the same, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may grant the request. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-10: GROUP CHILD CARE HOMES AND DAY CARE CENTERS:
Group child care homes and day care centers are not accessory uses and are regulated as special
uses. (See Chapter 11 of this Title for special use procedures.)
A. Family Child Care Home Standards: It is the intent of this provision to provide for accessory family
day care homes which will not adversely impact surrounding properties due to children's noise,
traffic and other activities, and which are located away from and properly screened from adverse
impacts to the health, safety and welfare of the children. The following conditions shall apply:
1. Secure and maintain a child care license from the Idaho State Department of Health and
Welfare--Child Care Licensing Division if required.
2. Acquire approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission who will then make their
recommendation to the City Council after the review process.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 263/336
3. Provide one off-street parking space per employee, which may be the driveway to the home.
4. Provide for child pick-up area located off of arterial or collector streets.
5. Provide for screening of adjacent properties to protect children from adverse impacts and to
provide a buffer between properties.
6. Provide for a fence of appropriate height/construction, to enclose play areas, protecting children
from traffic on arterial or collector streets.
B. Violation of any of the above conditions shall be cause to revoke approval of a family child care
home. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-11: HOME OCCUPATION STANDARDS:
It is the intent of this provision to permit home occupations in residential dwellings, which do not
change the appearance of the residence nor, the condition of its residential character. The following
conditions shall apply:
A. No persons other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such
occupation;
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to
its use for residential purposes by its occupants and not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;
C. No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises except such as is produced by the
occupants on the premises or those products incidental to the service being offered and no
mechanical or electrical equipment shall be installed or maintained other than such as is
customarily incidental to domestic use;
D. No significant traffic shall be generated by such home occupation, and any need for parking
generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall meet the off-street parking requirements
as specified in this Title and shall not be located in a required front yard;
E. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation, which creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odor, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot if the
occupation is conducted in a single-family residence;
F. In no way shall the appearance of the residence be altered nor the occupation be conducted in a
manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character in the use of
construction, lighting, and in the emission of noise, fumes, odors, vibrations or electrical
interference;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 264/336
G. One sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, non-illuminated and mounted flat against the
wall of the principal building, or placed in one window of the principal dwelling shall be allowed. A
sign permit is required.
H. Violation of any of the above conditions shall be cause to revoke approval for a home occupation.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-12: PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES:
A. No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous,
injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable conditions which could adversely affect the
surrounding areas or adjoining premises except that any use permitted by this Title may be
undertaken and maintained if acceptable limits as established by the following performance
requirements:
1. Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials shall
be protected by adequate fire-fighting and fire-prevention equipment and by such safety devices
as are normally used in the handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed
from adjacent activities to a distance, which is compatible with the potential danger involved as
specified in the Uniform Fire Code;
2. Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbances: No activity shall emit harmful radioactivity at any point
adversely affecting the operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the creator of
such disturbance;
3. Noise: Objectionable noise, which is due to volume, frequency, or beat, shall be muffled or
otherwise controlled. Air-raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are
exempt from this requirement;
4. Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments on an
adjoining lot or property;
5. Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements and regulations established by the
Idaho Department of Health and Welfare;
6. Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is visible from any property outside
and industrial district or from any street;
7. Erosion: No erosion by man, wind, or water shall be permitted which will carry objectionable
substances onto neighboring properties;
8. Water Pollution: The health authorities shall subject to the requirements and regulations
establish water pollution.
B. Enforcement Provisions: The City designee, may require the submission of statements and plans
indicating the manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in the processing
and in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits and tolerances;
C. Measurement Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of the existence of any
dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to applicable standard measurement
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 265/336
procedures published by the American Standards Institute, New York, the Manufacturing Chemists'
Association, Inc., Washington D.C., the United States Bureau of Mines, and the Health Authority.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-10-13: PROVISIONS FOR UNIQUE LAND USES:
Certain unique land uses pose special problems that may have unique influences on surrounding land
uses. The following performance standards for such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition
to all other provisions of this Title, such as land use and zoning:
A. Animal Clinic, Animal Hospital, Veterinary Office And Kennel:
1. Will be located at least five hundred feet (500') from any residence including motels and hotels
except for an owner's residence. The Commission may modify these requirements if the animals
are completely housed in soundproof structures that completely screen them from view of the
abutting residential property; and
2. Will comply with all regulations relative to such an operation, and maintain adequate
housekeeping practices designed to prevent the creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a
minimum the factors or noise and odor.
B. Meat Packing And Processing Plant:
1. Will be located not less than six hundred feet (600') from any residence except for an owner's
residence. Such facilities shall have a minimum setback of thirty feet (30') from any property line;
2. Will be designed and located with full consideration to their proximity to adjacent uses, to their
effect upon adjacent and surrounding properties, and to the reduction of such nuisance factors
as odor; and
3. Will be adequately maintained with housekeeping practices to prevent the creation of a
nuisance, and shall also be subject to the requirements of the Health Authority as to the
elimination of waste materials and maintenance of water quality control.
C. Bulk Storage Of Flammable Liquids And Gases, Above Ground And For Resale:
1. Will be located and constructed according to the regulations of the Uniform Fire Code;
2. Will erect subject to the approval of the Gooding Fire Chief; and
3. Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off-street parking facilities subject to the
approval of the Gooding Fire Chief.
D. Chemicals, Pesticide And Fertilizer Storage And Manufacturing:
1. Will have adequate fire protection, storage area, handling and disposal as approved by the
Gooding Fire Chief; and
2. Will be located and constructed according to the regulations of the Uniform Fire Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 266/336
E. Contractor's Yard (Agency Maintenance Yard):
1. Will be located a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') from any residence except for
an owner's residence;
2. Will have a screening fence around areas utilized for storage of equipment; and
3. Will be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental to contracting work. There
shall be no general industrial or commercial uses.
F. Drive-In Establishment: Will avoid the direction of night lighting toward any residence.
G. Drive-In Restaurant:
1. Will be enclosed on the property line with landscaping and fencing, except for ingress and
egress, to prevent trash from moving onto other properties;
2. Will have a six foot (6) high sight-obscuring fence along the property lines that adjoin residence;
3. Will provide for adequate trash receptacles;
4. Will avoid the direction of night lighting toward any residence.
H. Filling, Grading, Lagooning, Dredging Or Other Earth-Moving Activity:
1. Will result in the smallest amount of bare ground exposed for the shortest time feasible;
2. Will provide temporary ground cover such as mulch;
3. Will use diversions, silting, basins, terraces and other methods to trap sediment;
4. Will provide lagooning in such a manner as to avoid creation of fish trap conditions;
5. Will not restrict a channel or natural drainage way;
6. Will construct and stabilize sides and bottom of cuts, fills, channels and artificial watercourses to
prevent erosion or soil failure;
7. Will not have below-grade excavation except for drainage way within fifty feet (50') of any lot line
or public right of way; and
8. Will restore topsoil or loam to a depth of not less than four inches (4").
I. Gravel Pits, Rock Quarries, Sand And Clay Pits And Other Natural Resources of Commercial Value:
1. The extent and method of rehabilitation shall be determined in advance by approval of the City
Council, with due consideration given to what is suitable and compatible with surrounding area;
2. Upon depletion of the area, all temporary buildings and structures (except property line fences
and structures for the loading, measuring or weighing of salable material in storage) shall be
entirely removed from the property; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 267/336
3. Safety fences shall be erected around all pits that create a safety hazard.
J. Mobile Home Parks: Mobile home parks will follow the regulations set out in Chapter 14 of this Title.
K. Outdoor Storage Of Commercial And Industrial Materials:
1. Will be screened from view from any existing adjoining residence or residentially zoned area
whether or not an alleyway or streets separate such property;
2. Will not be located in any front yard setback area.
L. Public And Semi-Public Parks, Playgrounds And Schools:
a. To foster the appropriate location and layout of public parks and playgrounds and recreational
areas.
b. To harmonize the various features and facilities of parks and playgrounds with surrounding
area, so as to produce sound, stable residential neighborhoods.
c. To foster a coordination of public recreational facilities on the part of the City, the school
districts and other public and semi-public agencies.
2. Special Use:
a. Required. A special use permit issued by the City is required for establishing new locations
and site plans of a public or semi-public park, playground or school.
b. Application And Plan: An application for approval of a special use permit shall be
accomplished by plans showing the general layout and location of roadways, entrances, exits,
walks, paths, buildings, structures, landscaped areas, off-street parking, drainage, water
supply, sewerage and other features of design.
c. Planning And Zoning Commission: Prior to the issuance of a special use permit, the overall
plan of said park, playground or school shall be prepared and submitted to the Commission for
review and recommendation to the City Council.
d. Public hearings to be held pursuant to Chapter 11 of this Title.
3. Standard Requirements:
a. Trees, shrubs, grass and other forms of landscaping shall be provided in sufficient quantities
to insure a park-like appearance. Plant materials shall be selected in accordance with the
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Committee or Urban Forestry Committee, City
of Gooding.
b. Facilities involving lights shall be located and the lights shall be designed and located so that
glare and discomfort will not be unreasonably detrimental to surrounding residences.
c. Off-street parking areas and other facilities which attract or are intended to accommodate
spectators, shall be screened or located so that the detrimental effects of noise and traffic on
any surrounding residential area will be kept to a minimum. Further, no required front yard of
the lot on which the building is located shall be used for organized play or parking purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 268/336
d. The entire layout and design shall be arranged to harmonize with the objectives and
characteristics of the zone in which they are located.
e. Adequate ingress and egress and off-street parking shall be provided for vehicles and
pedestrians which the park playground or school is intended to serve.
M. Recreational Vehicle Parks: See Chapter 15 of this Title.
N. Riding Stables And Riding School:
1. Will not locate all stables or loafing sheds nearer than three hundred feet (300') from any
residence except for an owner's residence. All facilities shall be set back a distance of thirty feet
(30') from any property line;
2. Will be designed and located with full consideration being given to their proximity to adjacent
uses and their effect upon adjacent and surrounding properties as to the storage of horse trailers
and the factors of noise and odor;
3. Will require that the owner or operator of such use shall have a continuous obligation to maintain
adequate housekeeping practices to prevent the creation of a nuisance;
4. Will have a minimum total area for the riding stable and or school of ten (10) acres.
O. Rifle And Pistol Range:
1. Will be designed with a backstop or designed to avoid a line of fire that is directed towards any
residence or business within one mile;
2. Will incorporate landscaping that is compatible with the surrounding landscaping; and
3. Will provide supervision and security measures during periods of use.
P. Transfer Station:
1. Will conform to time limits for daily operation as defined by the Council;
2. Will provide a performance bond for privately owned sites to insure compliance with the
provisions of the certificate of zoning compliance;
3. Will provide for a paved street to the facility; and
4. Will be supervised during the hours of operation.
Q. Wrecking Yard:
1. Will be completely enclosed by a solid six foot (6) high site-obscuring fence berm and/or berm;
2. Will not result in the storage of automobile, junk, or salvage material that is visible from any
public right of way;
3. Will not result in storage of automobiles that exceeds the height of the fence; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 269/336
4. Will have such landscaping that is appropriate with the surrounding area.
R. Nursery, Horticulture Use:
1. Will locate all nursery, horticulture, and greenhouse not nearer than three hundred feet (300')
from any residence except for an owner's residence. All facilities shall be set back a distance of
thirty feet (30') from any property line.
2. Will be designed and consideration be given to proximity of adjacent uses and their effect upon
adjacent and surrounding properties as to vents, cooling units, fans in greenhouses. Placement
of planting materials and fertilizer or compost materials shall be done in a manner to reduce
odors.
3. Will require that the owner or operator of such will have a continuous obligation to maintain
adequate housekeeping practices and husbandry to prevent the creation of a nuisance.
4. Will have a minimum of one quarter (1/4) acre for a nursery, greenhouse. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 11
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
11-11-1: APPLICATION; FILING; CONTENTS:
An application, whose form shall be prescribed by the City, for special use permit shall be filed with the
Clerk by at least one owner or lessee of property for which such special use is proposed. It shall be
submitted on a form approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-11-2: GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SPECIAL USES:
The Commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed special use in
terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use at the
proposed location:
A. Will, in fact, constitute a special use as established in this Title for the zoning district involved, in
that it is not already defined as a permitted use in Chapters 3 through 7 of this Title;
B. Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives or with any specific objective
of the Comprehensive Plan and/or this Zoning Title;
C. Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious and appropriate in
appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such use will not
change the essential character of the same area;
D. Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 270/336
E. Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets,
police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer and schools, or
that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to
provide adequately any such services;
F. Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and
will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community;
G. Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that
will be detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare by reason of excessive
production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors;
H. Will have vehicular approaches to the property, which shall be so designed as not to create an
interference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares;
I. Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic or historic feature of major
importance. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-11-3: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS MAY BE
REQUIRED:
In granting any special use, the Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions, bonds and
safeguards in conformity with this Title. Violations of such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the special use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-11-4: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED; NOTICE OF TIME AND PLACE:
Prior to granting a special use permit, at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard shall be held before the Commission. At least fifteen (15) days prior
to the hearing, notice of the time and place and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the
official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction. Notice may also be made
available to other newspapers, radio or television stations serving the jurisdiction for use as a public
service announcement. Notice of the hearing shall also be provided by the applicant by regular mail to
property owners and residents within the land being considered, three hundred feet (300') beyond the
external boundaries of the land being considered, and any additional area that may be substantially
impacted by the proposed special use as determined by the Commission. Property owners or
residents who reside outside the postal service zip code mailing limits of the City, and whom the
Commission determines may be impacted by the proposed change, shall be given notice of the public
hearing by certified mail. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or
residents, in lieu of the mailing notification, three (3) notices in the newspaper or paper of general
circulation is sufficient; provided, the third notice appears at least ten (10) days prior the public
hearing. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-11-5: COMMISSION ACTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 271/336
A. Within forty five (45) days after the public hearing, the Commission shall review the application for
special use permit as presented. If the application is recommended to be approved or approved
with modifications, the Commission shall direct the conditions specified by the Commission for
approval.
B. Upon granting of a special use permit, conditions may be attached to a special use permit
including, but not limited to, those:
1. Minimizing adverse impact on other developments;
2. Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
3. Controlling the duration of development;
4. Assuring that development is maintained properly;
5. Designating the exact location and nature of development;
6. Requiring the provisions for on-site or off-site public facilities or services;
7. Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required in an ordinance.
C. Prior to granting a special use permit, the Commission may request studies from the planning staff
or public agencies concerning social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed
special use. A special use permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to
grant other special use permits. A special use permit is not transferable from one parcel of land to
another.
D. The Commission shall insure that any favorable recommendations for special use permits are in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and established goals and objectives. (Ord. 626, 10-7-
2002)
11-11-6: COUNCIL ACTION:
A. Within forty five (45) days after receiving the recommendations of the Commission, the Council
shall review and either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application as presented.
If the application is approved or approved with modifications, the Council shall direct the Building
Inspector to issue a special use permit listing the specific conditions specified by the Council for
approval.
B. Upon granting or denying any application the Council shall specify:
1. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reasons for approval or denial;
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 272/336
11-11-7: APPLICANT NOTIFICATION:
Within five (5) days after a decision has been rendered, the Clerk shall provide the applicant with
written notice of the action on the request. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 12
OFF-STREET PARKING
11-12-1: USE OF BUILDING:
When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises is increased through the addition of
dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified as requiring
parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such
increased intensity of use. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-12-2: CHANGE OF USE:
Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking
or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-12-3: ACCESS:
Access from a public street to parking spaces in a lot as required herein for commercial and industrial
uses shall not be less than twelve feet (12') wide and not more than forty feet (40') wide at the curb
line. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-12-4: NONCONFORMING:
No lawfully existing building shall be deemed to be a nonconforming building solely because of the
lack of any such required spaces; provided, that space being used for off-street parking or loading in
connection with any such building at the time of the effective date of this Title shall not be further
reduced in area or capacity. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-12-5: FRACTIONAL SPACES:
When the calculation of the required number of spaces called for herein results in a fractional number,
fractions equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall be adjusted to the next higher whole number of
spaces. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-12-6: USE NOT LISTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 273/336
Parking space requirements for a use not specifically mentioned shall be the same as for a use
specified which has similar traffic-generating characteristics. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-12-7: TOTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Except as required for dwellings and motels, off-street parking facilities for several buildings,
structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided so that the total number of spaces so located
together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each of the buildings or uses.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-12-8: SURFACING:
Every open off-street parking area having more than four (4) contiguous parking spaces shall be hard
surfaced, including access driveways according to the standard established by the City. (Ord. 626, 10-
7-2002)
11-12-9: LIGHTING:
Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties.
Parking areas shall be effectively screened on any side adjoining property in a residential zone by a
wall, fence or hedge to a height of six feet (6) except in the front yard setback area of the adjoining
residential property, in which case the maximum height shall be four feet (4'). (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-12-10: REQUIREMENTS:
Parking spaces as hereinafter set forth shall be provided for all uses allowed and special uses
permitted in any zone, provided that a greater or fewer number of spaces may be required or allowed
in any case where a special use permit is involved:
A. For each dwelling unit to include multiple-family dwelling units, two (2) spaces, sufficient in size for
a garage or carport for each family living unit.
B. For each guest bedroom in a hotel, motel, club, lodging house, one parking space.
C. For each four (4) beds in a convalescent, nursing, or rest home, sanitarium, drug and alcohol
treatment centers or home for the care of children or the aged - one parking space; plus one
parking space for each two (2) doctors assigned full time to the staff, plus two (2) parking spaces
for each three (3) other employees.
D. For a hospital - one parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of net floor area plus
one parking space for each regular employee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 274/336
E. For a church, auditorium, theater, or sports arena - one parking space for each five (5) seats in the
principal assembly room or area.
F. For floor space used by the public or by members in a social hall, dance hall, nightclub, pool hall,
restaurant, or other similar enterprise or establishment - a number of parking spaces equal to
twenty percent (20%) of the capacity in persons. For the purposes of this Section, capacity in
persons shall mean the gross floor area divided by fifteen (15) square feet.
G. For a bowling alley - five (5) parking spaces for each lane.
H. For a drive-in theater - a reservoir space at the entrance containing one parking space for each ten
(10) vehicles accommodated within.
I. Business offices, not otherwise specified - one parking space for each two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of net floor area.
J. Medical or dental office or clinic - one parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of
net floor area.
K. Mortuary - fifty (50) parking spaces.
L. Retail stores, banks and shops other than as specified below - one parking space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of net floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet; and for
drive-in banks - three (3) additional parking spaces for each teller window.
M. Any home being used as a lawful home occupation shall have two (2) additional parking spaces.
N. For manufacturing establishments - one parking space for each employee, based on the greatest
number of employees at any one time.
O. For every building hereafter erected containing more than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in
area and which is designed to be occupied by any use requiring regular receipt or dispatch of
merchandise by truck, there shall be provided and maintained with adequate design to provide
safe and efficient means of access and maneuvering, one loading space not less than thirty (30)
feet in length, and ten feet (10') in width, exclusive of access platforms and maneuvering areas.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-12-11: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING:
A. Size And Dimension: The size and design of off-street parking shall be in accordance with the
standards as shown.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 275/336
B. Screening, Landscaping And Drainage:
1. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be required for all off-street parking areas for multi-family
residential, commercial, industrial and technical developments;
2. Underground Sprinkling Systems: Underground sprinkling systems are required to maintain
screening, planting strips, and other landscaping;
3. Screening: Whenever a commercial off-street parking area is located in or adjacent to a
residential district, it shall be effectively screened on all sides which adjoin or face any property
used for residential purposes by a wall, fence, or planting screen to a height of six feet (6')
except in the front yard setback of the adjoining residential property, in which case the maximum
height shall be four feet (4').
a. Suitable landscaping and ground cover shall be provided and maintained on a continuing
basis within the planting strip. Planting screens or hedges shall not exceed two feet (2') in
height where location is such that sight lines are necessary for vehicular movement across
pedestrian ways.
b. At least one tree of not less than three inches (3") diameter size class shall be provided for
every one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of pavement area.
4. Drainage: A drainage plan designed by an architect or an engineer shall be submitted and
required for all off-street parking areas and shall be approved by the City Engineer.
C. Lighting: The illumination of a parking lot shall be designed so that the light from lighting fixtures in
the parking lot does not reflect direct rays or spill over into adjacent residential districts. All parking
lot lighting arrangements shall be installed as approved by the City Engineer. The following
standards shall apply to all off-street parking lots.
1. All lighting fixtures shall not be placed higher than thirty feet (30') above the finished grade;
2. Fixtures shall be of the nonspill type and hooded to prevent glare;
3. Candle power per fixture shall be in accordance with the standards established by the City; and
4. Minimum security lighting shall be provided, as approved by the City Engineer.
D. Paving: All open off-street parking areas shall be paved in accordance with the standards
established by the City, as approved by the City Engineer.
E. Striping: Parking spaces shall be marked with striping, which outlines each parking space and
designates direction of traffic. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 13
SIGNS
11-13-1: INTENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 276/336
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote and protect the public health, welfare, and safety by
regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising, outdoor advertising signs, and outdoor signs of
all types. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business
climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, and preserve the scenic and
natural beauty of designated areas. It is further intended to reduce sign or advertising distracting and
obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs
over-hanging or projecting over public right of way, provide more open space, curb the deterioration of
the natural environment, and enhance community development. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-13-2: PUBLIC SIGNS EXCLUDED:
For the purpose of this Chapter, "sign" does not include signs erected and maintained pursuant to and
in discharge of any governmental function, or required by any law, ordinance, or governmental
regulation. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-13-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS AND DISTRICTS:
The regulations contained in this Section shall apply to all signs and all use districts.
A. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed to permit the beams
and illumination there from to be directed or beamed upon a public thoroughfare, highway,
sidewalk, or adjacent premises to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance.
B. No sign shall employ any parts or elements, which revolve, rotate, whirl, spin or otherwise make
use of motion to attract attention.
C. All fittings, and materials used in the construction, connection and operation of electrically
illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the provisions of the local electric code in effect.
D. No projecting sign shall be erected or maintained from the front or face of a building a distance of
more than two feet (2'), including those projecting from the face of any theater, hotel or motel
marquee. In general, projecting signs are not encouraged.
E. No sign shall be placed on the roof of any building except those signs whose supporting structure is
screened so the sign appears to be a continuation of the face of the building.
F. No portable or temporary sign shall be placed on the front of the face of a building, or on any
premises except as herein provided.
G. No sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers,
spinners, or other similar moving devices. Such devices, as well as strings of lights, shall not be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 277/336
used for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention when not part of a sign without a special
permit.
H. No sign erected or maintained in the window of a building, visible from any public or private street
or highway, shall occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the window surface.
I. No sign of any classification shall be installed, erected, or attached in any form, or manner to a fire
escape or any door or window giving access to any fire escape.
J. Should any sign be or become unsafe or be in danger of falling, the owner thereof or the person
maintaining the same, shall, upon receipt of written notice from the Mayor or Chief of Police,
proceed at once to put such sign in a safe and secure condition or remove the sign.
K. No sign shall be placed in any public right of way except publicly owned signs. Official signs
directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property but bearing no advertising matter shall
be permitted on any property.
L. Signs along interstate and primary highways shall conform to the Idaho State Transportation
Department regulations. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-13-4: MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA:
The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular, geometric
forms conspiring all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter
displayed. Frames and structural members not being advertising matter shall not be included in the
computation of surface area. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-13-5: PERMITTED SIGNS:
The City Building Inspector may permit the following signs upon the issuance of a building permit
issued by the City Building Inspector after approval of the City Council or upon a recommendation for
issuance of a building permit by the Mayor and City Council:
A. Signs advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the premises upon which the sign is located, shall not
exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, except in all resident districts where the area of the sign
shall not be more than six (6) square feet.
B. Unattached nameplates not to exceed four (4) square feet in area.
C. Signs denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises, not to exceed two (2)
square feet in area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 278/336
D. Temporary signs not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area announcing special public or
institutional events, the erection of a building, the architect, the builders, or contractors may be
erected for a period of sixty (60) days plus the construction period.
E. On-premises wall signs pertaining to a nonconforming use shall be permitted on the same premises
of such use, provided the area of such sign does not exceed twelve (12) square feet.
F. Political signs, provided such signs shall not be posted in any place or in any manner that is
destructive to public property upon posting or removal. No political sign shall be posted more than
sixty (60) days before an election. All candidates for public office, their campaign committees, or
other persons responsible for the posting on public property of campaigning material shall remove
such material within two (2) weeks following election day.
G. Any other sign when permission is obtained according to the procedure outline at the beginning of
this Section. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-13-6: SPECIAL PERMITTED SIGNS:
The Mayor and City Council may allow the following signs upon the issuance of a special use permit:
A. Signs or bulletin boards customarily incidental to places of worship, libraries, museums, social
clubs, or societies, which signs or bulletin boards shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area
and which shall be located on the premises of such institution.
B. Any sign advertising a commercial enterprise, including real estate developers or subdividers, in a
district zoned residential shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and shall advertise only
the names of the owners, trade names, products sold and/or the business or activity conducted on
the premises where such sign is located.
C. In a commercial or manufacturing district, each business shall be permitted one flat or wall onpremises
sign. Projection of wall signs shall not exceed two feet (2') measured from the face of the
main building. The area of all permanent on-premises signs for any single business enterprise may
have an area equivalent to one and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of
building width, or part of a building, occupied by such enterprise but shall not exceed a maximum
area of one hundred (100) square feet.
D. In a commercial or manufacturing district, two (2) off-premises signs with a total area not exceeding
six hundred (600) square feet may be permitted at a single location. No single off-premises sign
shall exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, nor shall off-premises signs visible to
approaching traffic have a minimum spacing of less than two hundred feet (200'). Off-premises
signs shall conform to all applicable yard and height regulations for the appropriate zoning district,
except that such signs intended to be viewed from an elevated highway shall be not more than
twenty feet (20') above the level of the roadway at its nearest point. Off-premises wall signs shall
have all structural and supporting members concealed from view.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 279/336
E. Free-standing on-premises signs not over thirty feet (30') in height have a maximum total sign area
of one hundred (100) square feet per display area and located not closer than ten feet (10') to any
street right-of-way line and not closer than thirty feet (30') to any adjoining lot line may be erected
to serve a group of business establishments. There shall be only one free-standing sign for each
building, regardless of the number of businesses conducted in said building.
F. Any other sign may be permitted upon the issuance of a building permit approved by the Mayor and
Council. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-13-7: SIGN SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Off-premises signs shall not be erected in front of the required setback line for the appropriate zoning
district, except for the following:
A. For every square foot by which any on-premises sign exceeds fifty (50) square feet, the setback
shall be increased by one-half foot (1/2) but need not exceed one hundred feet (100').
B. Real estate signs and bulletin boards for a church, school, or any other public religious or
educational institution within residential zoning districts may be erected not less than ten feet (10')
from the established right-of-way line of any street or highway provided such sign or bulletin board
does not obstruct traffic visibility at street or highway intersections.
C. On-premises signs where permitted shall be erected or placed in conformity with the side and rear
yard requirements of the district in which located, except that in any residential district, onpremises
signs shall not be erected or placed within ten feet (10') of a side or rear lot line. (Ord.
626, 10-7-2002)
11-13-8: VIOLATIONS:
In case any sign shall be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in violation of this Chapter, the
Administrator shall notify in writing the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign to comply with this
Chapter. Political signs posted in violation of this Chapter are subject to removal by the Administrator
five (5) days after written notice of violation. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 14
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK STANDARDS
11-14-1: ZONING:
Manufactured home parks and developments are permitted only in those zones and areas allowing
the same or conditionally allowing the same as set forth in this Zoning Ordinance of the City following
the notice, hearing and review procedures set forth therein. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 280/336
11-14-2: SIZE OF DEVELOPMENT:
Each planned manufactured home development shall contain a minimum of ten (10) development
units. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-3: LOT COVERAGE:
No more than forty percent (40%) of any lot or place shall be covered by a manufactured home, nor
shall more than forty five percent (45%) of any lot or space be covered by any structure or structures,
including the manufactured home. Buffer area shall not be included in this calculation. (Ord. 626, 10-7-
2002)
11-14-4: SPACING:
All manufactured homes, including their structural additions, shall be located on the manufactured
home space as provided in Section 11-14-8 of this Chapter. No home shall be placed closer than
twenty feet (20') to any of the development property lines abutting a public street. (Ord. 626, 10-7-
2002)
11-14-5: SKIRTING:
The manufactured home park owner shall ensure that all manufactured homes placed within the City
shall, within thirty (30) days of their installation, be completely skirted with a material harmonious in
color and texture with the exterior of the manufactured home. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-6: ACCESS:
All home parks shall have interior streets. All places within a manufactured home park shall have
access to and abut upon an interior street. No home space shall have vehicular access to a public
street, except via the interior street within the home development. The interior street shall be designed
for vehicular traffic, shall be constructed and maintained according to this Title, not dedicated to the
public, and shall provide access to and abut upon all spaces within the home park, and shall allow
access to a public street. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-7: GENERAL LAYOUT:
The general layout of a manufactured home park shall provide adequate circulation space within its
confines and integrate with any existing or planned street pattern in the general area of the
development. Public street dedication may be required if needed to provide proper integration with
existing or planned streets. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-8: MINIMUM LOT DIMENSIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 281/336
Minimum requirements for each manufactured home lot shall be as follows:
A. Minimum width, forty feet (40');
B. Minimum area, three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet;
C. Minimum parking area, a paved or concrete space of no less than four hundred (400) square feet;
D. Minimum front setback from interior park streets, ten feet (10');
E. Minimum side yard setback from interior park street, ten feet (10');
F. Minimum space between manufactured homes, fifteen feet (15');
G. Minimum side yard setback from interior lot lines, seven feet six inches (7'6");
H. Minimum accessory patio area, one hundred twenty (120) square feet. The accessory patio is to be
constructed of concrete or masonry materials of a minimum thickness of four inches (4"). (Ord.
626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-9: UTILITIES:
The park shall be equipped with basic public utilities in a form that will make them readily usable by a
conventional manufactured home. All utilities shall be underground and shall meet a minimum state
standard. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-10: SEWER LINES:
All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or
other movements and shall be separated from the park water supply system at a safe distance.
Sewers shall be at a grade which will insure a velocity of two feet (2') per second when flowing full. All
sewer lines shall be constructed of materials approved by the City, shall be adequately vented, and
shall have watertight joints. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-11: INDIVIDUAL SEWER CONNECTIONS:
A. Each home stand shall be provided with at least a four inch (4") diameter sewer riser pipe. The
sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the manufactured
home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 282/336
B. The sewer connection shall have a slope of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot; provided, that
the total distance shall not exceed twelve feet (12'). The sewer connection shall consist of one
pipeline only without any branch fittings. All sewer connections shall have watertight joints.
C. All materials used for sewer connections shall be rigid, corrosive-resistant, absorbent and durable.
The inner surface shall be smooth.
D. The riser shall be protected within a concrete curb or by a concrete collar at least three inches (3")
thick and extending twelve inches (12") from the riser in all directions. The finished grade shall be
sloped in divert surface drainage away from the connection. The riser shall be protected from
heaving and thawing by back filling the trench with sand from the trench bottom to an elevation
suitable to support the protective collar. The sewer connection shall be equipped with couplings
that will assure tight joints at the manufactured home and at the drain. The sewer risers shall be
plugged when the home does not occupy the space. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-12: GENERAL PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS:
All plumbing within each manufactured home and all plumbing within the mobile home park shall
comply with the standards of the State and the City. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-13: WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS:
A. The system shall be so designed and maintained to provide a pressure of not less than twenty (20)
pounds per square inch under normal operating conditions at service buildings and other locations
requiring potable water supply and be of the size required by the City.
B. Fire hydrants shall be required to maintain standards of fire protection, i.e. not more than five
hundred feet (500') from any home.
C. Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the home stand at a point
where the water connection will approximate a vertical position.
D. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes and
to protect risers from heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface
drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
E. A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water riser pipe on each home lot.
F. Underground stop and waste valves shall be installed on each water service. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-14: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 283/336
The occupant of any space in a manufactured home park may erect or install accessory structures
such as patio covers, storage buildings or cabanas; provided, such structures shall be incombustible
and harmonious in design with the manufactured home to which they belong. They shall in no
instance violate the minimum space and setback requirements contained in this Chapter. (Ord. 626,
10-7-2002)
11-14-15: STREETS:
All interior park streets shall be at least fifty feet (50') in width, in accordance with standard
specifications and drawings of the City, and which shall be part of a street system, which feeds directly
into a public street or highway. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be four hundred feet (400')
and the minimum radius of the turning circle at the end of a cul-de-sac shall be forty five feet (45'). A
hammerhead design may be accepted upon approval of design. Streets shall have at least six inches
(6") of sub-base, two inches (2") prepared base, and two and one-half inches (21/2") of plant-mix hot
asphalt material. The Fire Chief shall approve plans for emergency access. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-16: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
A. General Requirements: Every park shall contain an electric wiring system consisting of wiring,
fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
the electrical code of the State and such other regulations governing electrical distribution systems.
B. Individual electrical connections shall conform to the requirements of the electrical code of the City
and State. Each trailer shall have its own electric service and no park permit shall distribute
electricity.
C. The design and layout of the park will provide free access to meters, electrical devises, wiring for
inspection, meter reading and other purposes associated with the distribution of electrical energy.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-17: RECREATIONAL AREA:
A common recreation area, properly landscaped, leveled and developed, shall be provided for each
park. In no case shall such area be less than four percent (4%) of the total area of the manufactured
home park. If the area requirement is to be met by small parks dispersed through the manufactured
home park, no single park area shall contain less than six thousand eight hundred (6,800) square feet.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-18: STREET GRADES AND DRAINAGE:
The grades of streets and roadways shall at no place in the park exceed six percent (6%). The entire
area shall be adequately drained and stable. Storm drainage facilities shall be provided as required by
the Building Official. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 284/336
11-14-19: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
Pedestrian walkways, four feet (4') in width, and constructed according to standard drawings and
general specifications of the City, shall be provided along the street frontage of all home spaces and
on the street frontage of all recreation and accessory areas. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-20: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING:
Each park shall contain an area set aside for parking recreational vehicles. Said area shall be fenced
and contain two hundred (200) square feet for each home space to be provided in the park. (Ord. 626,
10-7-2002)
11-14-21: SCREENING:
The periphery of every manufactured home park shall have sight proof screening from adjacent
private property, and at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, screening may be
required adjacent to the public right of way. All screening shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-22: MANAGEMENT OFFICE:
An office shall be maintained on the park premises which allows residents to contact the park
management at all times of the day. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-23: IMPROVEMENTS TO PERIPHERAL RIGHT OF WAY:
The developer of a manufactured home park shall be required to improve the public right of way upon
which his development touches to standards equivalent with those imposed upon applicants for
building permits within the City. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-24: STREET LIGHTING:
Interior street lighting shall be provided which illuminate to an intensity of one and five-tenths (1.5)
foot-candles at all places on the roadway. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-25: SPACE NUMBERING:
Each space in any manufactured home park shall be marked with its proper space number in a
manner that will provide conspicuous identification for public safely personnel. Each numbering shall
be subject to approval by the Building Official. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 285/336
11-14-26: ANIMAL RESTRICTIONS:
No domestic animals or house pets shall be allowed to run at large or commit any nuisances within
the limits of a manufactured home park, and the City shall have the right to impound, destroy, and
issue citations, and the owners of said animals shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 11-
20-2 of this Title for violation of the same. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-14-27: SIGNS:
The Building Official may order the erection of any necessary vehicular and pedestrian control and
regulatory signs within the park, and the owner shall immediately comply at his own expense. (Ord.
626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 15
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK STANDARDS
11-15-1: ZONING:
A recreational vehicle park is permitted use only in those zones and areas allowing the same or
conditionally allowing the same as set forth in this Zoning Ordinance of the City following the notice,
hearing and review procedures set forth therein. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-2: STREET FRONTAGE AND ACCESS:
Recreational vehicle parks shall be located with at least sixty feet (60') of primary frontage on a public
roadway of at least fifty feet (50') in width. Access to and from the park shall be directly onto the
primary frontage street. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-3: DRAINAGE:
All recreational vehicle parks shall be located in areas that are adequately drained and have
substantially stable soils. Adequate storm drainage facilities shall be provided. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-4: PARK SIZE:
No recreational vehicle park shall be less than one acre in size. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-5: SPACE SIZE:
Spaces for parking recreational vehicles shall be designated on a park map. Each space shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 286/336
located in such a manner as to facilitate maneuvers by vehicles larger than typical passenger cars.
Spaces shall contain no less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet with a minimum
twenty five feet (25') width and sixty feet (60') length. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-6: PARKING:
A. Each designated space shall contain enough room to park one vehicle in addition to the
recreational vehicle. In addition to this, the park shall contain additional surfaced parking area in
the ratio of one space for each five (5) recreational vehicle spaces in the park.
B. Recreational vehicles placed in parks shall maintain the following distances from the following
reference points:
1. From rear space boundary, ten feet (10');
2. From any other recreational vehicle, fifteen feet (15');
3. From any side line of space, seven and one-half feet (71/2'). (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-7: CULINARY WATER:
All recreational vehicle spaces with electrical connections shall also have potable water connection to
each space. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-8: INDIVIDUAL SEWER HOOKUPS:
Individual sewer hookups are not required. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-9: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL:
Provisions shall be made within the park for proper covered receptacles for the disposal of solid
waste. The details and plans for this system shall require the approval of the Building Official. (Ord.
626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-10: ELECTRICAL HOOKUPS:
All spaces having electrical hookups shall have such in accordance with the terms of the Electrical
Code most recently adopted by the City Council of the City and regulations of the State. The Building
Official or his Electrical Inspector shall determine compliance. A single electrical meter shall be
installed for each recreational vehicle park for the measurement of electrical power usage, and the
owner of the recreational vehicle park shall be liable. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-11: PLUMBING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 287/336
All plumbing of facilities within a recreational vehicle park shall be completed in accordance with the
Plumbing Code most recently adopted by the City Council and regulations of the State. (Ord. 626, 10-
7-2002)
11-15-12: PLACEMENT OF UTILITIES:
All utilities shall be placed underground and located at depths sufficient to assure proper safety and
sustained service. Where physical restrictions do not make it impossible, electric service lines shall be
placed at the rear of the spaces for recreational vehicles. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-13: INTERIOR STREETS:
Interior streets shall remain privately owned and maintained. To maintain the safety and convenience
of the public, all streets shall meet the following standards:
A. Minimum width, thirty feet (30');
B. Minimum surface, six inches (6") of gravel sub-base and two inches (2") of crushed surfacing
gravel;
C. Maximum grade, six percent (6%);
D. Adequate drainage. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-14: PERSONAL SERVICE BUILDING:
If a recreational vehicle park permits camping units within the park which are not self-contained, or if
the recreational vehicle park does not have individual water and sewer connections, then each park
shall provide at least one personal service building constructed of permanent materials which can be
easily cleaned and shall contain the following facilities: showers, toilets, lavatories, and other
necessary health facilities. The following guidelines are to be followed in constructing such a facility:
A. The structure shall be well ventilated and have a floor of concrete or similar material slightly sloped
toward a central floor drain.
B. The structure or structures shall have facilities in the following number:
1. Toilets, one unit per sex, per six (6) spaces;
2. Showers, one unit per sex, per fifteen (15) spaces;
3. Lavatories, at least two (2) per sex, per fifteen (15) spaces. Each shall be provided with paper
towels and dispensable soap;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 288/336
4. A dressing room of at least twenty five (25) square feet shall be provided for each combination
shower facility and lavatory.
C. Each facility shall have adequate hot water to serve the reasonable needs of a fully occupied park.
D. Be constructed in accordance with the Americans With Disabilities Act. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-15: FIRE PROTECTION:
Where not in conflict with other portions of this Title, all recreational vehicle parks shall conform to the
requirements of the fire regulations of the City.(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-16: FUELS:
Any fuels used in recreational vehicle parks for cooking, heating, or other purpose shall be used in
accordance with City or State codes adopted to regulate the use of such fuels. Where the codes are in
conflict, the rule that provides the greatest protection of the public shall apply. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-17: FENCING; PERIMETER PARKING RESTRICTION:
Each recreational vehicle park, where it abuts a residential area and/or manufactured home park, shall
be separated from such residential area by a sight-proof fence at least seven feet (7') in height. The
park shall be designed so that no recreational vehicle shall be parked within fifteen feet (15') of the
perimeter of the park or within twenty feet (20') of the edge of the right of way of the primary frontage
street or streets. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-18: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping shall be of trees, shrubs, and grasses of a kind and quantity determined sufficient by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-19: INTERIOR ROADWAY LIGHTING:
Interior roadways shall be lighted with adequate fixtures to provide a minimum of five-tenths (0.5) footcandles
of illumination at all points on their surface. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-20: REGISTER OF OCCUPANTS:
Every owner or operator of a recreational vehicle park shall maintain a register containing a record of
all occupants of the spaces and times occupied. The register will be retained for a minimum of three
(3) years and shall be open to the Building Official or his designee. The register shall contain the
following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 289/336
A. Names and addresses of occupants of the park;
B. The make and license number of motor vehicles and/or mobile homes;
C. The date of arrival and departure of each vehicle. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-21: PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION AND ALTERATION PROHIBITED;
NUISANCE STORAGE PROHIBITED:
There shall be no permanent construction onto or alteration of units place in recreational vehicle
parks. Skirting is not to be permitted, and wheels may be removed for temporary repairs only. No
flammable materials, rubbish, or other materials, which might create a nuisance, may be stored
underneath the floor of a unit parked in a recreational vehicle park. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-22: SIGNS:
The Building Official may order the erection of any necessary vehicular and pedestrian control and
regulatory signs within the park, and the owner shall immediately comply at his own expense. (Ord.
626, 10-7-2002)
11-15-23: ANIMAL RESTRICTIONS:
No domestic animals or house pets shall be allowed to run at large or commit any nuisance within the
limits of a recreational vehicle park, and the City shall have the right to impound, destroy and issue
citations, and the owners of said animals shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this Title for
violation of the same. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 16
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
11-16-1: PURPOSE:
It is the policy of the City to guide major land development projects, embracing a combination of land
uses, by encouraging planned unit developments to achieve the following:
A. Maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of housing and structure types and
permitting an increased density per acre and a reduction in lot dimensions, yards, setbacks, and
area requirements;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 290/336
B. A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and, if permitted as part of the project,
more convenience in the location of accessory commercial uses, industrial uses and services;
C. A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography and geological features,
scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation and prevents the disruption of natural drainage patterns;
D. A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through conventional development resulting
in substantial savings through shorter utilities and streets;
E. A development pattern in harmony with land use density, transportation, and community facilities
objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-2: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DEFINED:
A "planned unit development" is a use of land and structures, not necessarily adhering to the zoning
requirements, which has been approved by the City Council as provided by this Chapter. (Ord. 626,
10-7-2002)
11-16-3: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAND USE CONTROLS:
Whenever there is a difference between the provisions of this Chapter and those of the other
chapters, the provisions of this Chapter shall control. The respective provisions found elsewhere in
this Title shall govern subjects not governed by this Chapter. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-4: MINIMUM AREA:
A PUD for the following principal uses shall contain an area of not less than:
A. Three (3) acres for residential use;
B. Five (5) acres for manufactured home developments;
C. Ten (10) acres for residential use with subordinate commercial use;
D. Ten (10) acres for commercial use;
E. Ten (10) acres for industrial use. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-5: USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 291/336
All uses that may be allowed within the land use district are permitted within a PUD. In addition, up to
ten percent (10%) of the gross land area may be directed to other uses that are not allowed within the
land use district, provided:
A. That the uses are appropriate with the primary use;
B. That the uses are intended to serve principally the properties within the PUD;
C. That the uses are planned as an integral part of the PUD;
D. That the uses are located and so designated as to provide direct access to a collector or an arterial
street without creating congestion or traffic hazards;
E. That a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the primary use development occurs prior to the
development of the related uses. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-6: REQUIREMENTS:
Planned unit developments shall comply in all respects with the specific regulations and requirements
approved and authorized for such specific planned unit development. Specific requirements are as
follows:
A. Maximum building coverage in conformance with the underlying zoning district regulations, in
addition to the provisions of subsection 11-16-8A;
B. Minimum perimeter setbacks in conformance with the underlying zoning district regulations;
C. Maximum height of buildings shall not exceed that specified for the underlying zoning district;
D. Overall allowable density shall be no greater than that allowed in the underlying zoning district in
which the property is located, except, that the City Council may grant additional density for any
project which it feels would benefit the public interest and further the objectives of the City
Comprehensive Plan to encourage an adequate housing stock. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-7: OWNERSHIP:
A property owner or a person having a contractual interest in the property to be included in the PUD
shall file an application for approval of a PUD. The application shall be filed in the name or names of
the recorded owner or owners of property included in the PUD. However, the holder(s) of an equitable
interest in such property may file the preliminary application. Before approval is granted to the final
development plan, the entire project shall be under single ownership and evidence of legal title must
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 292/336
be presented with the final development plan. Single ownership shall include ownership by a
corporation or partnership. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-8: COMMON OPEN SPACE IN RESIDENTIAL PUD'S:
A. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross land area developed in any residential PUD project
shall be reserved for common open space and recreational facilities for the residents or users of
the area being developed.
B. The required amount of common open space land reserved under a PUD shall be held in corporate
ownership by owners of the project area for the use of each owner and similar easements or right
of way is usable as a trial or other similar purpose.
C. Every property developed under the PUD approach should be designed to abut upon common
open space or similar areas. A clustering of dwellings is encouraged. In areas where townhouses
are used, there shall be no more than eight (8) townhouse units in any contiguous group. (Ord.
626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-9: MAINTENANCE OF COMMON AREAS:
A homeowners' association shall be created to insure adequate maintenance of use-in-common
areas, facilities and structures. Maintenance responsibility shall remain with the owner of the PUD until
seventy five percent (75%) of the lots or units are sold. Thereafter, the maintenance responsibility
shall be as specified in the declarations, covenants and restrictions, or articles of incorporation and
bylaws previously filed by the owner-subdivider with the Gooding County Recorder prior to the final
plat approval of the PUD. A trust fund, established for the maintenance of the common areas, must be
included in the articles of incorporation. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-10: STREETS AND UTILITIES:
All streets must be built to the same standards required of all new public streets built in Gooding.
Underground utilities, including telephone, cable and electric systems are required within the limits of
all PUDs. The developer at his own expense shall install all lines, except telephone, gas, and cable
TV. All utilities shall be given proper easements by deed upon the final plat. All main water, sewer and
electrical lines shall become the property of the City, upon acceptance by the City, and all
maintenance shall be performed by the City upon the main lines only. All connecting laterals to main
water and sewer lines shall be the responsibility of the individual homeowner or the PUD's
homeowner's association.
If at any time the homeowners association of a PUD petitions the City to take a private street for
maintenance, the City may refuse to accept the street, or it may refuse to accept the street until it is
brought to City maintenance standards. Under no circumstances shall the City accept for maintenance
the common area of a PUD. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-11: CONTAINED DEVELOPMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 293/336
A planned unit development shall be essentially independent and contained. It shall be physically
disassociated from surrounding properties, particularly those with different uses. For example, terrain,
orientation, streets and highways, woods or rivers, sight-proof fencing or natural barriers shall create
this physical disassociation. If containment is impossible, either the development should be
disapproved or approval should be conditioned on the density, design and degree of development
insuring achievement of the objectives of this Chapter in the manner in which the site is used. (Ord.
626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-12: RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS:
Each PUD developer shall deliver a set of finalized "restrictive covenants" to the City Council prior to
final plat approval. These covenants shall contain, at a minimum:
A. No lot, home, share or interest in the PUD may be purchased without signing the "restrictive
covenants" accepting its conditions.
B. All owners shall belong to the homeowners' association.
C. All owners agree to a monthly direct deposit to the homeowners' association trust fund. The fund is
to be used for the maintenance of the PUD's common areas. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-13: COMMUNITY FACILITIES:
PUDs of forty (40) acres or more shall include site availability for needed community facilities not
otherwise provided for. For example, provision may be required for sites for schools, public safety
buildings, utilities, parks and recreation areas. This Section may not be avoided by dividing parcels
from an original tract into units of less than forty (40) acres so as to phase a development whether it
consists of strictly PUD's or not. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-14: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The requirements on a preliminary plat for a PUD shall be the same as specified in the Subdivision
Ordinance1 except that the following additional information shall be submitted:
A. Approximate percentage of area intended for use-in-common;
B. Description of intended type of use and of operation, including justification for the project;
C. Approximate maximum height of buildings;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 294/336
D. For residential use, number of single-family dwelling units and of multiple-family dwelling units
intended;
E. Topography to show direction of drainage with maximum contour intervals of twenty feet (20')
extending no less than one hundred fifty feet (150') beyond the boundaries of the development
area;
F. All structures and improvements within the development area, which are to remain;
G. Tentative street pattern and pedestrian walkway pattern separate from streets, within the
development area, showing intended street width;
H. Tentative location of building lots and/or building areas, and major areas intended for use-incommon;
I. The initial draft of articles of incorporation, association bylaws, restrictive covenants, and other legal
documents as required. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-15: ENGINEERING APPROVAL:
The developer shall submit to the City Engineer for approval the drawings for utilities, street
improvements and building construction in PUDs. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-16: INITIAL FILING FEE:
The fee for filing a preliminary plat for a PUD shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 626,
10-7-2002)
11-16-17: APPLICATION; COMMISSION ACTION:
The preliminary plat along with association bylaws, restrictive covenants, and other required
documents shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review. Upon being
reviewed and approved or disapproved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the preliminary plat
and other documents shall be submitted to the City Council. If the preliminary plat, the bylaws,
restrictive covenants and other required documents are accepted for further processing, the plat shall
be returned to the Planning and Zoning Commission for public hearing. Revisions requested by the
applicant while preparing for the public hearing shall be accepted or rejected by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-18: HEARING BEFORE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
A public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission on the preliminary plat shall be held as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 295/336
provided for in Section 11-16-17 when the same is returned to the Commission by the City Council. A
date for hearing shall be set at such a time as sufficient information has been submitted for a
meaningful public hearing. Additional prints shall be supplied as required.
A. Notice of hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed by the zoning law of the City for special
use permits.
B. Following conclusion of the hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit the results
of the hearing together with its recommendations to the City Council. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-19: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
The City Council shall consider the results of the public hearing and recommendations of the Planning
and Zoning Commission and either approve the preliminary plat or disapprove it with reasons for such
disapproval, in which event a revised plat may be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for rehearing. Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant may proceed toward final plat
approval. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-20: FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Upon approval of the preliminary plat for a PUD the procedures to be followed for final platting shall be
the same as required in the Subdivision Ordinance except that the following will be required:
A. Design and layout of use-in-common areas with any specific recreation areas indicated;
B. Perimeter fencing, where required, in height, material and area to be fenced;
C. Design, layout of entrance treatment and entrance signs;
D. Landscaping plans showing grassed areas and general location and kinds of planting;
E. Typical plot plan for each type of building including entranceway, walkways, parking areas, fencing
and sight screening;
F. Final draft of restrictive covenants, association bylaws and articles of incorporation, and other legal
documents as required. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-21: BONDING:
All improvements, amenities, recreational areas, use-in-common, parking, fencing, walkways, curb
and gutter, streets and other improvements shown on the final plat and associated documents shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 296/336
constructed prior to recording the final plat or bonding shall be required in the amounts and as
otherwise specified in the Subdivision Ordinance. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-22: BUILDING PERMITS AND PLOT PLANS:
Upon approval and recording of any final plat drawing involved, building permits may be issued. The
plot plan for each building or for each contiguous group of buildings shall not preclude minor
adjustments being permitted by the Building Official which do not violate the building spacing and/or
setback requirements which have been approved. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-23: REVOCATION OF APPROVAL:
In the event a material condition of approval of a PUD is violated or is unfulfilled within any time limit
set, or applicable provisions of this Title are materially violated, the City Council may, either on
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or on its own initiative, give required notice
and hold a public hearing on the question of revocation of the approval given and of any permits
issued pursuant thereto. After concluding the hearing, the Council shall make appropriate written
findings of fact and if it elects to revoke the approval and/or permits, it shall do so by resolution. In
such event any improvements already made shall be used in accord with existing use zone
regulations. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-16-24: PHASED DEVELOPMENT OF PUD:
Any developer wishing to develop a PUD over a series of years shall comply with the additional
requirements and regulations set forth in this Section. Each phase of such development shall contain
all the necessary elements and improvements to exist independently from proposed future stages in a
stable manner and shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations.
A. Development Plan: In addition to the PUD application date, the developer shall submit to the City a
development plan. The Plan, if approved, shall be the master plan for the entire project subject to
modification by the developer through same procedures as required for approval of original plan;
and, subject to additional regulations of subsequently adopted or amended ordinances and
statues; and subject to additional requirements imposed by the Commission or Council due to
changes in the development plan or as a result of subsequent subdivision or development of
neighboring properties. After approval of the development plan, the developer shall submit to the
City a preliminary plat and final plat of each phase of the project built or to be built. A public
hearing will be required on all development plans as specified in this Chapter. However, the public
hearing requirement may be waived on preliminary plans originating from an approved
development plan, where the preliminary plan is in substantial conformity to the approved
development plan.
B. Preliminary Plats: Upon approval of a development plan, the developer shall file a preliminary plat
for each stage of his development in conformance with the approved development plan. (Ord. 626,
10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 297/336
Chapter 17
VARIANCES
11-17-1: GRANTED WHEN:
The Planning Commission shall consider variances to the terms of thistle which will not be contrary to
the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
Title will result in unnecessary hardship and under such conditions that the spirit of thistle shall be
observed and substantial justice done. A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege,
but may be granted to an applicant only upon showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of
the site and that the variance is not in conflict with the public interest. In acting upon such variance the
Planning Commission shall make a full investigation and shall only recommend granting a variance
upon finding that the following are true:
A. That the granting of the variance will not be a conflict with the spirit and intent of the comprehensive
general plan for the City, and will not effect a change in zoning;
B. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions, applicable to the property
involved, or the intended use thereof, which do not apply generally to the property or class of use
in the district, so that a denial of the relief sought will result in:
1. Undue loss in value of the property,
2. Inability to preserve the property rights of the owner,
3. The prevention of reasonable enjoyment of any property right of the owner;
C. The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare,
or injurious to the property or improvements of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment of
such property or improvements. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-17-2: APPLICATION; FILING; REQUIREMENTS:
One or more property owners may initiate an application for a variance. Such application shall be filed
with the Planning Commission on forms prescribed by the Planning Commission accompanied by
such data and information necessary to assure the fullest presentation of facts and should include:
A. Name, address, and phone number of applicant(s);
B. Legal description of property (and street address, where possible);
C. Description of nature of variance requested;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 298/336
D. A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance conforms to the standards set
forth in Section 1-17-1 above;
E. Name and address of all property owners and residents within three hundred feet (300') of the
exterior boundaries of the land being considered. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-17-3: FILING FEE:
The owner or owner's representative as set forth in Section 11-19-1 of this Title shall pay a filing fee at
the time of the filing. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-17-4: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED; NOTIFICATION:
The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each variance request following
the same hearing and notice procedures as set forth in Chapter 11 of this Title, except notification to
property owners shall be by ordinary mail and need not extend beyond three hundred feet (300') of the
external boundaries of the land being considered. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-17-5: COMMISSION ACTION:
Within forty five (45) days after the public hearing for a variance request, the Commission shall
transmit its recommendations for approval or disapproval to the Council. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-17-6: COUNCIL ACTION; APPLICANT NOTIFICATION:
Within forty five (45) days after receiving the recommendations of the Commission, the Council shall
approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions, the application for variance and shall give written
notice to the applicant within ten (10) days after the decision has been rendered. (Ord. 626, 10-7-
2002)
Chapter 18
NONCONFORMING USES
11-18-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this Chapter to permit nonconforming uses to continue until they are removed, but not
to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this Chapter that nonconforming uses shall not be
enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-18-2: INCOMPATIBILITY OF NONCONFORMING USE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 299/336
Nonconforming uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which such
use is located. A nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged nor shall any other prohibited
uses be added, including additional signs. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-18-3: AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP:
To avoid undue hardship, no changes shall be required in the plans, construction or designated use of
any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption of
this Chapter and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. (Ord. 626, 10-
7-2002)
11-18-4: SINGLE NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
Development of or building on any single lot of record shall require a special use permit. (Ord. 626,
10-7-2002)
11-18-5: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD IN COMBINATION:
If two (2) or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Chapter and if all or part of the
lot with no buildings do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Chapter and no portion
of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area
requirements established by this Chapter nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a
lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this Chapter. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-18-6: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND
LAND IN COMBINATION:
If a lawful use exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter that would not be
allowed in the district under the terms of this Chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. It shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except
in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located;
B. No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any additional land area;
C. If no structural alterations are made any nonconforming use, upon the issuance of a special use
permit by the Commission, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the
Commission shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the
district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Commission may
require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with other provisions of this Chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 300/336
D. Any time a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use it shall thereafter conform to the
regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
E. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or
abandoned for more than one year (except when government action impedes access to the
premises), the nonconforming use shall no longer be allowed;
F. Intentional removal or destruction of the nonconforming structure shall eliminate the nonconforming
status of the land. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-18-7: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
On any nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may
be done on ordinary repairs provided that the nonconforming shall not be increased. Nothing in this
Section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building
or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety upon
order of such official. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-18-8: USES UNDER SPECIAL USE PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USE:
Any use, which is permitted as a special use in a district under the terms of this Chapter, shall not be
deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall, without further action, be considered a
conforming use. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 19
FILING FEES
11-19-1: DESIGNATED:
A filing fee as set by resolution shall accompany all applications for amendment, reclassification,
special use, or variances by resolution by the City Council, the applicant shall reimburse the City for all
costs incurred in publication and/or mailing. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 20
ENFORCEMENT
11-20-1: ENFORCEMENT:
The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council and such officer shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 301/336
11-20-2: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Title is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this Title is committed, continued or permitted.
B. Upon conviction of any violation of any of the provisions of this Title, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for not more than
six (6) months or both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Removal and/or demolition of noncompliance unit will be at violators/ owners expense at two
hundred percent (200%) of cost the City incurs. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 21
AMENDMENTS
11-21-1: PURPOSE; PROCEDURE GENERALLY:
This Title maybe amended whenever the Council deems that amendment is required for public
convenience or necessity, or for general welfare. Any amendment shall be enacted pursuant to this
Section, and for purposes of this Section, includes any measure to change districts, to change district
regulations, to add, repeal or amend any other provisions of this Section or the whole of this Title.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-2: INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS:
An amendment to the text of this Title or to the official Zoning Map may be initiated by a resolution of
intention by the Planning Commission or the City Council or by an application of one or more of the
owners of property affected by the proposed amendment. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-3: PROPERTY OWNER APPLICATION FILING; REQUIREMENTS;
RESUBMITTAL LIMITATIONS:
Applications from a property owner shall be filed with the Planning Commission on forms prescribed
by the Planning Commission, accompanied by such data and information necessary to assure the
fullest presentation of facts. Applications shall contain the following information:
A. Name, address and phone number of applicant;
B. Proposed amendment;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 302/336
C. Present land use;
D. Present zoning district;
E. Proposed use;
F. Proposed zoning district;
G. A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Commission showing property lines; thoroughfares,
existing and proposed zoning and such other items as the Commission may require;
H. A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are within one thousand feet (1,000')
of the external boundaries of the land being considered;
I. A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the Comprehensive Plan, availability of
public facilities and compatibility with the surrounding areas. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-4: INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS; CONDITIONS:
No application from an owner of property for the same general purpose concerning the same property
which has been denied by the City shall be received or processed by the Secretary of the Commission
within twelve (12) months of such denial except by unanimous action of the Planning Commission,
unless there is an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan which applies to the property in question.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-5: FILING FEE REQUIRED WHEN:
A filing fee shall be paid at the time of the filing by the owner or owner's representative but no fee will
be required in the case of proceedings instituted by either the Council or the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-6: ZONING DISTRICT AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
Zoning districts shall be amended in the following manner:
A. Request for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall be submitted to the Commission, which
shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature of the amendment requested.
B. If the request is in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, the Commission may
recommend and the Council may adopt or reject the ordinance amendment under the notice and
hearing procedures as herein provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 303/336
C. If the request is not in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, the request shall be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission or, in its absence, the Council, which shall
recommend and the Council may adopt or reject an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan under
the notice and hearing procedure provided in Section 67-6509, Idaho Code. After the
Comprehensive Plan has been amended, the Zoning Ordinance may then be amended as
hereinafter provided for. The hearing on the Comprehensive Plan and the proposed change to the
Zoning Ordinance may be held concurrently. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-7: PUBLIC HEARING; GENERALLY:
The Commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on proposed zoning
amendments. Zoning amendments may consist of text or map revisions. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-8: PUBLIC HEARING; PROCEDURE FOR TEXT AMENDMENT:
The Commission, prior to recommending a Zoning Ordinance text amendment to the Council shall
conduct at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard.
At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of time and place and a summary of the
amendment shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the
jurisdiction. Following the Commission's hearing, if the Commission makes a material change from
what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
Commission forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the Council, pursuant to State
Code. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-9: PUBLIC HEARING; PROCEDURE FOR MAP AMENDMENT:
The Commission, prior to recommending a Zoning Ordinance map amendment that is in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan to the Council shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing,
notice of time and place and a summary of the amendment shall be published in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction. The applicant shall provide additional
notice of the hearing by regular mail to property owners and residents within the land being
considered, one thousand feet (1,000') of the external boundaries of the land being considered, and
any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed change as determined by the Commission.
The proposed map amendment may impact property owners or residents who reside outside the
postal service zip code mailing limits of the City. The Commission will determine if these property
owners should be notified by certified mail. When notice is required by two hundred (200) or more
property owners or residents, in lieu of the mail notification three (3) notices in the official newspaper
or paper of general circulation is sufficient; provided, that the third notice appears at least ten (10)
days prior to the public hearing. Following the Commission's hearing, if the Commission makes a
material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the Commission forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the Council.
(Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-10: RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 304/336
Within forty five (45) days from the receipt of the proposed amendment, the Commission shall transmit
its recommendation to the Council. The Commission may recommend that the amendment be granted
as requested, or it may recommend that the amendment be denied. The Commission shall insure that
any favorable recommendations for amendments are in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and
established goals and objectives. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
11-21-11: GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ZONING AMENDMENTS:
The Commission and Council shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed
zoning amendment in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence answering
the following questions about the proposed zoning amendment:
A. Will the new zoning be harmonious with and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and, if
not, has there been an application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment;
B. Is the area included in the zoning amendment intended to be rezoned in the future;
C. Is the area included in the zoning amendment intended to be developed in the fashion that would
be allowed under the new zoning - for example, a residential area turning into commercial area by
means of special use permits;
D. Has there been a change in the area or adjacent areas, which may dictate that the area should be
rezoned. For example, have the streets been widened, new railroad access been developed or
planned or adjacent area being developed in a fashion similar to the proposed rezone area;
E. Will the proposed uses be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that
such use will not change the essential character of the same area;
F. Will the proposed uses not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses;
G. Will the area be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways,
streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water, sewer or that the
person responsible for the establishment of proposed zoning amendment shall be able to provide
adequately any of such services;
H. Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and
will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community;
I. Will the proposed uses not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions
of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare by reason of
excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors. (Ord. 626, 10-7-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 305/336
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall be known and cited as the CITY OF GOODING SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS, hereinafter referred to as the "Subdivision Ordinance". (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY:
These regulations are authorized by title 50, chapter 13, of the Idaho Code, as amended or
subsequently codified. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-1-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations are to promote the public health, safety, general welfare, and to
provide for:
A. The harmonious development of the area;
B. The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with other existing or planned streets
and roads;
C. Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation;
D. The conservation of or provision of adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities;
E. The avoidance of population congestion and of scattered subdivision of land as would involve
danger of injury to health, safety, or general welfare by reason of:
1. The lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, or other public services; or
2. The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such
services;
F. The requirements as to extent and manner in which:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 306/336
1. Roads shall be created and improved; and
2. Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections, or other facilities shall be installed
as condition precedent to the approval of a plat;
G. The manner and form of making and filing of any plat; and
H. The administration of these regulations by defining the procedures for the equitable review and
approval of all plats and subdivisions covered by these regulations. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-1-4: JURISDICTION:
These regulations shall apply to the subdividing and developing of all land within the incorporated
territory of the City of Gooding, including the property within the areas of impact and defined in Section
2-4-7 of this Code of said incorporated City under the requirements of section 50-1306, Idaho Code,
as amended, or subsequently codified, or; corporate limits of any city including the property within one
mile of the corporate limits of such city, under the requirements of section 50-1306, Idaho Code, as
amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
All subdivisions as herein defined shall be submitted for approval of the Council and shall comply with
the provisions of these regulations. These regulations shall supplement all other regulations, and
where at variance with other laws, regulations, ordinances, or resolutions, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply. This Title shall not apply to any subdivision created and forming a part of any
lot or lots forming a part of any subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date hereof,
except for the further dividing of lots; nor is it intended by this Title to repeal (except as herein
provided), abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws,
ordinances or regulations, or with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other
private agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the City is a party.
(Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-1-6: ADMINISTRATION:
A. The Council shall appoint a Planning and Zoning Commission1 to carry out the provisions as herein
specified. The Commission shall receive and make recommendations on all subdivision
applications.
B. In the event the Commission fails to act or carry out its responsibilities according to the regulations
contained herein, the Council shall assume all the duties of the Commission as herein specified in
relation to the application concerned. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-1-7: COMBINING PERMITS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 307/336
The Commission is hereby required to combine all permits which may be required in this Title and
previously or subsequently adopted City ordinances which are relative to land development into one
permit application and processing procedure. In conjunction with a combined permit, the Commission
shall coordinate methods of approval with the respective departments for the purpose of reducing
errors, misunderstanding, confusion and unnecessary delay for everyone involved. (Ord. 496, 7-5-
1977)
12-1-8: SEVERABILITY:
Where any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section, or other part of these regulations is
held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall affect only that part so held
invalid. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
12-2-1: INTERPRETATION OF TERMS OR WORDS:
For the purpose these regulations, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
A. The present tense includes the past or future tense, the singular includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular;
B. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive; and the word "should" is preferred; and
C. The masculine shall include the feminine. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well defined boundaries, usually streets.
BOARD: The Board of City Councilmen.
BUILDING: A structure designed or used as the living quarters for one or more families, or the
structure designed or used for occupancy by people for commercial or industrial uses.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: An imaginary line established by subdivision regulations and zoning
ordinances requiring all buildings to be set back a certain distance from lot lines and street rights of
way.
BUILDING SITE: An area proposed or provided and improved by grading, filling, excavation or other
means for erecting pads for buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 308/336
CEMETERY: A lot that has been planned for the selling of sites for the burial of animal or human
remains.
CITY: The City having jurisdiction of the parcel of land under consideration.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission1 as appointed by the Council to administer this
Title, having jurisdiction over the parcel of land under consideration.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A plan, comprehensive plan, comprehensive development plan adopted
by the local authority and showing the general location and extent of present and proposed
development, including, but not limited to, housing, industrial and commercial uses, streets, parks,
school and other community facilities.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of: 1) an undivided interest in common in real property, in an
interest or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof, together with; 2) a separate interest
in real property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Gooding, Idaho.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the County Recorder, Gooding County, Idaho.
COVENANT: A written promise or pledge.
CULVERT: A drain that channels water under a bridge, street, road or driveway.
DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the public. Land becomes
dedicated when accepted by the City as a public dedication, either by ordinance, resolution, or entry in
the official minutes, or by the recording of a plat showing such dedication.
DEVELOPER: Authorized agent(s) of a subdivider or the subdivider himself.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or other structure, proposed or built for occupancy by people.
Dwelling Unit (Pre-Fab): A building or other structure, proposed or built for occupancy by people that
is designed for initial transportation on streets and highways which arrives at a site where it is installed
on a permanent foundation.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public to use land for specific
purposes.
ENGINEER: Any person who is licensed in the State to practice professional engineering.
FLOOD PLAIN: The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel of a river, stream or
watercourse or lake or other body of standing water, which has been or may be covered by water of a
flood of one hundred (100) year frequency. The flood plain includes the channel, floodway and
floodway fringe.
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to
confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
Designated Floodway: A floodway whose limits have been designated and established.
Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by overflow from a river, stream,
lake or other body of standing water.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 309/336
Flood Of One Hundred Year Frequency: A flood magnitude which has one percent (1%) chance of
being equalled or exceeded in any given year.
Floodway: The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the flood plain adjoining the channel
which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the flood water of any watercourse.
Floodway Encroachment Lines: The lines limiting a designated floodway.
Floodway Fringe: That part of the flood plain which is beyond the floodway encroachment lines
limiting a designated floodway. Such areas will include those portions of the flood plain which will be
inundated by a flood of one hundred (100) year frequency but which may be developed for use under
land use regulations without material effect upon the flood water carrying capacity of the floodway and
flood water levels. Such areas are characterized by shallow flood depths and low velocities of water
flow.
GOVERNING BODY: The Mayor and City Council of the City of Gooding, Idaho.
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by an appropriate State or Federal agency.
HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision, or portion thereof having an average slope of ten percent
(10%) or more.
IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical constructions associated with subdivision
and building site developments.
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision the size of which consists of fifty (50) or more lots or
dwelling units.
LOT: A parcel, plot, tract, or other land area of suitable size as required in these regulations and
existing zoning ordinances; and created by subdivision for sale, transfer, or lease.
LOT AREA: The area of any lot shall be determine exclusive of street, highway, alley, road, or other
rights of way.
LOT TYPES: As used in these regulations, lot types are as follows:
Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets;
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot, with frontage on only one street;
Reversed Lot: A lot with frontage on a side street or other right of way other than interior or corner
lot; and
Through Lot: A lot with frontage on more than one street, not a corner lot. Also known as double
frontage lots. Through lots are prohibited under these regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure built since June 15, 1976, that bears the seal of H.U.D.
indicating it has met the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (H.U.D. Standards) and is used as a permanent
dwelling. Manufactured homes shall comply with the following development standards:
A. Shall be at least twenty four feet (24') wide, with a minimum floor area of nine hundred sixty
(960) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 310/336
B. Shall have a nonmetallic, wood shake or asphalt shingle roof with a minimum slope of three feet
every twelve feet (3'/12') and a minimum six inch (6") eave.
C. Shall have a horizontal aluminum, simulated wood or wood siding.
D. Shall have a foundation facia that is similar in appearance and durability to the masonry
foundation of site-built dwellings and which surrounds the entire perimeter of the structure and
completely encloses the space between the siding and the finished grade.
E. Shall be permanently affixed and set upon a foundation base having an anchoring system that
is totally concealed under the structure. The running gear and towing hitch shall be removed.
F. Shall obtain a building permit from the City Building Inspector to insure that the manufactured
home is placed on site to H.U.D. standards set forth in Circular Letter No. 2-83, dated April 8,
1983, or as later amended, published by the Boise Service Office of H.U.D. regulating the
perimeter foundation, the anchoring of the structure to its foundation and other building
requirements.
G. Shall meet all other State requirements.
MOBILE HOME: A structure that is transportable in one section, built on a permanent chassis, and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, not to include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A park designed and intended for purposes of rental spaces where residence
is in mobile homes exclusively.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for residential use where
residence is in mobile homes exclusively and land owned by occupant.
MONUMENT: Any permanent marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe, or iron or steel rods,
used to permanently establish any tract, parcel, lot or street lines, as specified in section 50-1303,
Idaho Code.
OPEN SPACE: An area open to the sky for outdoor recreation activity. Streets, buildings, or other
covered structures are not included in computing these areas.
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: A lot or tract as recorded on any plat or record on file in the office of
the County Recorder, each one sixteenth ('/76) of a section (40 acres) or any unplatted contiguous
parcel of land held in one ownership and of record at the effective date of this Title.
OWNER: The individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation having proprietary
interest in the land to be subdivided.
PERFORMANCE BOND: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the subdivider of
his surety to the City Clerk and Recorder which guarantees that the subdivider will perform all actions
required by an approved plat, and provides that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the
provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay damages up to the limit of the
bond, or the surety will itself complete the requirements of the approved plat.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A use or a combination of residential, commercial and industrial
uses planned for a tract of land to be developed as a unit under single ownership or control, which is
developed for the purpose of selling or renting individual lots or estates, whether fronting on private or
dedicated streets, which may include two (2) or more principal buildings as governed by the Zoning
Ordinance. The requirements of this Title may be modified by the Council upon recommendation by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 311/336
the Commission to achieve the best possible planned development for the specific site under
consideration.
PLAT: The drawing, mapping, or planning of a subdivision, cemetery, townsite, or other tract of land or
a replatting of such including certifications, descriptions and approvals.
Final Plat: The final and formal presentation by maps or drawings of an approved subdivision
development, the original and one copy of which is filed with the County Clerk and Recorder.
Preliminary Plat: The first formal presentation by maps or drawings of a proposed subdivision, as
required in these regulations.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a dedicated street or partial street and adjacent property, in
either case, reserved or held in public ownership for future street extension or widening.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or served for use as a public way of which normally
includes sidewalks and other public utilities or service areas.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street right of way outside the street pavement which is improved for
pedestrial use, (also known as walkway).
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: Shall be the specifications as may be specified in this Title or as
officially adopted by the City.
STATE: The State of Idaho.
STREET: A right of way which provides access to adjacent property, the dedication of which has been
officially accepted. The term "street" also includes the terms "highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place", and other such terms.
Alley: A minor street providing secondary access at the back or side of a property otherwise abutting
a street.
Arterial: A street designated for the purpose of carrying fast and/or heavy traffic.
Collector: A street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic from minor streets to other collector
streets and/or arterial streets.
Commercial: A street designated for the purpose of providing traffic movement in a commercial
area.
Cul-De-Sac: A street connected to another street at one end only and provided with a turn-around
space.
Dead-End: A street connecting to another street at one end only and not having provision for
vehicular turn-around at its terminus.
Frontage: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street, which has the primary
purpose of providing access to abutting properties.
Industrial: A street designated for the purpose of providing traffic movement in an industrial area.
Loop: A minor street with both terminal points on the same street of origin.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 312/336
Minor: A street which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting properties.
Partial: A dedicated right of way providing only a portion of the required street width, usually along
the edge of a subdivision or tract of land.
Private: A street which provides vehicular and pedestrial access to one or more properties however,
not accepted for public dedication or maintenance.
Side Street: A secondary street that provides access to a corner lot of which the principle building is
not oriented toward.
SUBDIVIDER: A subdivider shall be deemed to be the individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, syndicate, trust, or other legal entity that executes the application and initiates
proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of this Title; the subdivider
need not be the owner of the property, however, he shall be an agent of the owner or have sufficient
proprietary rights in the property to represent the owner.
SUBDIVISION: The division of an original lot, tract, or parcel of land into more than two (2) parts for
the purpose of transfer of ownership or development; the dedication of a public street and the addition
to, or creation of, a cemetery. However, this Title shall not apply to any of the following:
A. An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded document varying the width, depth, or
building setbacks of each building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does not
change the original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat;
B. An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent or a court decree for the
distribution of property;
C. The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as defined and allowed in the Idaho
Code;
D. Widening of existing streets to conform to the Comprehensive Plan;
E. The acquisition of collector and arterial street rights of way by a public agency in conformance
with the Comprehensive Plan; and
F. The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property boundaries which does not result
in the change of the present land usage of the properties involved.
SURVEYOR: Any person who is licensed in the State of Idaho as a public land surveyor to do
professional surveying.
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Rental space for travel trailers on a limited basis.
UTILITIES: Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity, television, storm drains, and
similar facilities providing service to and used by the public.
VARIANCE: A variance is a modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations where such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions peculiar to the
property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
VICINITY MAP: A small scale map showing the location of a tract of land in relation to a larger area.
(Ord. 496, 7-5-1977; amd. Ord. 599, 7-15-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 313/336
Chapter 3
PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
12-3-1: SUBDIVISION REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to create a subdivision as defined in Section 12-2-2 of this Title shall submit all
necessary applications to the Commission. No final plat shall be filed with the County Recorder until
the plat has been acted upon by the Commission and approved by the Council. No lots shall be sold
from any plat until it has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-3-2: PRE-APPLICATION:
A. Application: Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat the subdivider shall
submit eight (8) copies of a sketch plan to the Commission. The sketch plan shall include the entire
developmental scheme of the proposed subdivision, in schematic form and include the area
proposed for immediate development in such a form and content as required by the Commission
and shall include the following:
1. The general layout of streets, blocks and lots in sketch form;
2. The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision site;
3. Areas set aside for schools, parks and other public facilities.
B. Fee: None required.
C. Commission Action: The subdivider shall submit the pre-application to the members of the Planning
and Zoning Commission ten (10) days prior to the regular meeting. A mailing list can be obtained
from the City Clerk. At the regular meeting the subdivider shall present his pre-application and
intent to the Commission for review and comment. The Commission may, if it deems necessary,
request review of the pre-application by other agencies. The Commission will review the preapplication
to determine its compliance with this Title as well as the following concerns:
1. The compliance of the proposed development with existing local or State policies, goals and
objectives or development plans;
2. Determination of additional special permits or ordinance conflicts such as rezoning, special
development permit or variance that may be needed and the determination of the manner that
such requirements can be combined into one permit;
3. Advise the applicant of any unique environmental or hazardous concerns that may be directly or
indirectly associated with the subject property, such as areas that have been designated by the
State as areas of critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, flood plain, airport
flight pattern and the like; and
4. Provide the subdivider with all necessary forms. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 314/336
12-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Application: Upon completion of the pre-application procedures, the subdivider may file with the
Commission a completed subdivision application form and preliminary plat data as required in this
Title in such form and content as required by the Commission.
B. Combining Both Preliminary And Final Plats: The applicant may also request that the subdivision
application be processed as both a preliminary and final plat if the following exists:
1. The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten (10) lots;
2. No new street or major widening are involved;
3. No major special development considerations are involved, such as development in a flood
plain, hillside development or the like; and
4. All required information for both preliminary and final plat is complete and in an acceptable form.
A request to combine both preliminary plat and final plat into one application shall be acted upon
by the Commission.
C. Content Of Preliminary Plat: The contents of the preliminary plat shall be in such a form and
information provided as stipulated by the Commission; however, any additional maps or data
deemed necessary by the Commission may also be required. The subdivider shall submit to the
Commission at least the following:
1. Eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, drawn in accordance with
the requirements hereinafter stated;
2. Eight (8) sets of preliminary engineering plans for streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and other
required public improvements, including a master utility map; said engineering plans shall
contain sufficient information and detail to enable the Commission to make a preliminary
determination as to conformance of the proposed improvements to applicable regulations,
ordinances, and standards as outlined in Chapter 6, Special Developments, of this Title;
3. A written application requesting approval of the preliminary plat on a form prescribed by the
Commission;
4. Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed development within any special
development area, such as hillside, planned unit development, flood plain, cemetery, mobile
home, large scale development, hazardous and unique areas of development.
D. Requirements Of Preliminary Plats: The following shall be shown on any preliminary plat submitted
or shall be submitted with the same.
1. The name of the proposed subdivision;
2. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdividers or subdivider and the
surveyor who prepared the plat;
3. The name and address of all adjoining property owners whether or not bisected by a public right
of way as shown on records in the County Assessor's office;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 315/336
4. The legal description of the subdivision;
5. A statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision, such as: residential single-family;
two-family and multiple housing; commercial; industrial; recreational; or agricultural and a
showing of any sites proposed for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses;
6. A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed subdivision is a portion of a
larger holding intended for subsequent development;
7. A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the surrounding area (, mile
minimum radius, scale optional);
8. The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and the adjacent land;
9. Streets, street names, right of way and roadway widths, including adjoining streets or roadways;
10. Lot lines, dimensions and numbers, and the total number of lots by block;
11. Contours, shown at five foot (5') intervals where land slope is greater than ten percent (10%)
and at two foot (2') intervals where land slope is ten percent (10%) or less, with an established
bench mark, including location and elevation;
12. A site report as required by the appropriate health district where individual wells or septic tanks
are proposed;
13. Any proposed or existing utilities, including, but not limited to, storm and sanitary sewers,
irrigation laterals, ditches, drainages, bridges, culverts, water mains, fire hydrants, electric power
lines, gas lines, cable lines, and their respective profiles or indicated alternative methods;
14. A copy of any proposed restrictive covenants and/or deed restrictions or, if none, a statement
that none are proposed;
15. Any dedications to the public and/or easements together with a statement of location,
dimensions, and purpose of such;
16. Any additional required information for special developments as specified in Chapter 6 of this
Title;
17. A statement as to whether or not a variance will be requested with respect to any provision of
this Title describing the particular provision, the variance requested, and the reasons therefor.
E. Fee: At the time of submission of an application for a preliminary plat a non-refundable fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) per lot shall be paid by the subdivider. There
shall be no additional fee for the combining of the preliminary and final plats.
F. Submission Requirements: The subdivider shall submit eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat and
required supplemental material, and required fee to the Commission at least ten (10) days prior to
the regular Commission meeting.
G. Public Notification:
1. Posting A Commission Meeting: The subdivider shall post a reasonable number of posters on or
near the subject property under consideration to be subdivided. Such poster and stated
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 316/336
information shall be of such size and content as may be approved by the Commission. The
location of the posters shall be on the closest public roads in visible locations surrounding the
subject property and erected at least ten (10) days prior to the Commission's meeting.
2. Failure To Notify: The failure of the subdivider to comply with the exact provisions of these
procedures shall invalidate the Commission's action.
H. Commission Action: At the next regular Commission meeting, the subdivider shall present the
preliminary plat for action. The Commission may approve, approve conditionally, disapprove, or
table the preliminary plat for additional information. Such action shall occur within thirty (30) days
of the date of the regular meeting at which the plat is first considered. The action, and the reasons
for such action shall be stated in writing by the Commission and forwarded to the applicant. The
Commission shall also forward a statement of the action taken and the reasons for such action
together with a copy of the preliminary plat to the Council for their action.
I. Council Action:
1. Action On Preliminary Plat: At the next regular Council meeting, the subdivider shall present the
preliminary plat for action. The Council may approve, approve conditionally, disapprove, or table
the preliminary plat for additional information. Such action shall occur within thirty (30) days of
the date of the regular meeting at which the plat is first considered. The action, and the reasons
for such action shall be stated in writing by the Council and forwarded to the applicant.
2. Action On Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: If the Commission's conclusion is favorable to
the subdivider's request and recommendation from the Commission that the subdivision be
considered as both a preliminary plat and final subdivision, then a recommendation shall be
forwarded to the Council in the same manner as herein specified for a final plat. The
Commission may recommend that the combined application be approved, approved
conditionally or disapproved.
J. Appeals: Any person who appeals in person or writing before the Commission or the subdivider
may appeal in writing the decision of the Commission relative to any action taken by the
Commission. Such appeal must be submitted to the Council within ten (10) days from such
Commission action.
K. Approval Period:
1. Failure to file and obtain the certification of the acceptance of the final plat application by the
developer within one year after action by the Commission, shall cause all approvals of said
preliminary plat to be null and void, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
Commission prior to the expiration date.
2. In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is made in successive contiguous
segments in an orderly and reasonable manner, and conforms substantially to the approved
preliminary plat, such segments, if submitted within successive intervals of one year may be
considered for final approval without resubmission for preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 496, 7-5-
1977)
12-3-4: FINAL PLAT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 317/336
A. Application: After the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may
cause the subdivision, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a final plat prepared in accordance
with the approved preliminary plat. The subdivider shall submit to the Commission the following:
1. Three (3) copies and the original of the final plat.
2. Three (3) copies and the original of the final engineering construction drawings for streets,
water, sewers, sidewalks and other public improvements.
B. Content Of Final Plat: The final plat shall include and be in compliance with all items required under
title 50, chapter 13 of the Idaho Code and shall be drawn at such a scale and contain lettering of
such size as to enable the same to be placed on one sheet of eighteen by twenty four inch (18 x
24") drawing paper with no part of the drawing nearer to the edge than one inch (1"). The reverse
of said sheet shall not be used for any portion of the drawing, but may contain written matter as to
dedications, certifications and other information. The final plat shall include at least the following:
1. A written application for approval of such final plat as stipulated by the Commission;
2. Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the proposed final plat;
3. Such other and further information as the Commission may deem necessary to establish
whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or approved said final plat;
4. Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and meeting all requirements or conditions
thereof;
5. Conform to all requirements and provisions of this Title; and
6. Acceptable engineering practices and local standards.
C. Commission Review:
1. Submittal Of Final Plat: The Commission shall review the final plat for compliance with the
approved or conditionally approved preliminary plat. If the Commission determines that there is
substantial difference in the final plat than that which was considered as a preliminary plat or
conditions which have not been met, the Commission may require that the final plat be
resubmitted to the Technical Review Committee and Commission in the same manner as
required in the preliminary plat process.
2. Submission To The Council: Upon the determination that the final plat is in compliance with the
preliminary plat and all conditional requirements have been met, the Commission shall place the
final plat on the Council agenda within forty five (45) days from the date that an acceptable final
plat application was received and acknowledged by the Commission.
D. Agency Review: The Commission may transmit one copy of the final plat or other document
submitted, for review and recommendation to the same departments and agencies, or others as
they may deem necessary to insure compliance with the preliminary approval and/or conditions of
preliminary approval. Such agency review shall also include the construction standards of
improvements, compliance with health standards, the cost estimate for all improvements and the
legal review of the performance bond.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 318/336
E. Council Action: The Council at its next meeting following receipt of the Commission's report shall
consider the Commission's findings, comments from concerned persons and agencies to arrive at
a decision on the final plat. If said final plat conforms to the requirements of this Title applicable at
the time of approval of the preliminary plat, all rulings made by the Commission on the preliminary
plat, and the requirements of the Idaho State law, the Council shall approve, approve conditionally,
disapprove or table the final plat for additional information within thirty (30) days of the date of the
regular meeting at which the plat is first considered.
F. Approval Period: Final plat and covenants, if any, shall be filed with the County Recorder within one
year after written approval by the Council. Otherwise, such approval shall become null and void
unless prior to said expiration date an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
Commission.
G. Method Of Recording: Upon approval of the final plat by the Council, the subdivider's prepayment
of recording fees, and the inclusion of the following signatures on the final plat to the County
Recorder for recording:
1. Certification and signature of the Council verifying that the subdivision has been approved.
2. Certification and signature of the City Engineer verifying that the subdivision meets the City
requirements and has been approved by the Council; and
3. Certification and signature of local or State health agency that all health requirements have been
complied with. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
Chapter 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
12-4-1: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED:
All plans submitted pursuant to the provisions of this Title, and all subdivisions, improvements and
facilities done, constructed or made in accordance with said provisions shall fully comply with the
minimum design standards set forth hereinafter in this Chapter; provided, however, that any higher
standards adopted by any highway district, State highway department or health agency shall prevail
over those set forth herein. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-2: DEDICATION:
Arterial and collector streets shall be dedicated to the public in all cases in general, all other streets
shall also be dedicated to public use. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-3: LOCATION:
Street and road location shall conform to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 319/336
A. Street Location And Arrangements: When a major street plan or comprehensive development plan
has been adopted, subdivision streets shall conform to such plans;
B. Local Or Minor Streets: Local or minor streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by
through traffic;
C. Street Continuation And Extension: The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of
existing streets from adjoining areas into new subdivisions unless otherwise approved by the
Council and the highway district or department having jurisdiction over such streets;
D. Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall be such that said streets extend to the boundary line of the tract to make
provisions for the future extension of said streets into adjacent areas. A reserve strip may be
required and held in public ownership;
E. Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to topography so as to result in
usable lots, safe streets and acceptable gradients;
F. Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or commercial subdivisions unless other
provisions are made for service access and off street loading and parking. Dead-end alleys shall
be prohibited in all cases;
G. Frontage Roads: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street, it shall be required that
there be frontage roads approximately parallel to and on each side of such arterial street, and that
there be such other treatment as is necessary for the adequate protection of residential properties
and to separate through traffic from local traffic;
H. Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than five hundred feet (500') in length
and shall terminate with an adequate turn-around having a minimum radius of fifty feet (50') for
right of way;
I. Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where unusual circumstances make such
necessary to the reasonable development of a tract in conformance with this Title and where
satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street is provided.
Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the
street shall be dedicated with such tract; and
J. Private Streets: Private streets and roads shall be prohibited except within planned unit
developments. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-4: SPECIFICATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 320/336
A. Street Right-Of-Way Widths: Street and road right-of-way widths shall conform to the adopted
major street plan or comprehensive development plan and the rules of the State Department of
Highways and the highway district or department having jurisdiction; minimum right-of-way
standards are as follows:
STREET TYPES WIDTHS WIDTHS OF PAVEMENT
Major Arterial 100 feet 48 feet divided
Collector Arterial 80 feet 42 feet
Local Street 50 feet 36 feet
B. Street Grades: Street grades shall not exceed nine percent (9%) on either local or collector streets,
and no street grade shall be less than three-tenths feet (3/,a) per one hundred feet (100').
C. Street Alignment: Street alignment shall be as follows:
1. Horizontal Alignment: When street lines deflect from each other by more than ten degrees (10?)
in alignment, the center lines shall be connected by a curve having a minimum radius of five
hundred feet (500') for arterial street, three hundred feet (300') for collector streets and one
hundred fifty feet (150') for minor streets. Between reverse curves on minor streets there shall
be a minimum tangent distance of one hundred feet (100'), and on collector and arterial streets,
two hundred feet (200');
2. Vertical Alignment: Minimum sight distance shall be two hundred feet (200') for minor streets
and three hundred feet (300') for collector and other streets. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-5: STREET NAMES:
The naming of streets shall conform to the following:
Street names shall not duplicate any existing street name except where a new street is a
continuation of an existing street; street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same
as existing streets shall not be used. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-6: INTERSECTIONS:
Intersections shall conform to the following:
A. Angle Of Intersection: Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (900) or as closely thereto as
possible, and in no case, shall streets intersect at less than eighty degrees (80?);
B. Sight Triangles: Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street intersections shall permit vehicles
to be visible to the driver of another vehicle when each is one hundred twenty five feet (125') from
the center of the intersection;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 321/336
C. Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at any one intersection;
D. "T" Intersections: "T" intersections may be used wherever such design will not unduly restrict the
free movement of traffic;
E. Vertical Alignment Of Intersection: A nearly flat grade with appropriate drainage slopes is desirable
within intersections. This flat section shall extend fifty feet (50') to one hundred feet (100') each
way from the intersection. An allowance of two percent (2%) maximum intersection grade in rolling
terrain, and four percent (4%) in hilly terrain, will be permitted. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-7: PEDESTRIAL WALKWAYS:
Right of way for pedestrial walkways in the middle of long blocks shall be required where necessary to
obtain convenient pedestrial circulation to schools, parks or shopping areas; the right of way shall be
at least ten feet (10') wide and shall extend entirely through the block. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-8: EASEMENTS:
Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines, rear lot lines, and side lot lines
when necessary; total easement width shall be not less than twelve feet (12') where lots adjoin.
Unobstructed drainage way easements shall be provided as required by the Council. (Ord. 496, 7-5-
1977)
12-4-9: BLOCKS:
Every block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of lots, except where lots back onto an
arterial street, natural feature, or subdivision boundary; blocks shall not be less than three hundred
feet (300') long in all cases.
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to adequate sites
suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; the zoning requirements as to lot
size and dimensions; the need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
traffic; and the limitations and opportunities of topography.
B. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand feet (1,000'). (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-10: LOTS:
Lots shall conform to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 322/336
A. Lot Sizes: No subdivision plat in the area included in an R-1 District shall hereafter be approved by
the City unless all interior lots shown thereon shall have a frontage of seventy five feet (75') or
more and a minimum area of six thousand one hundred (6,100) square feet. Corner lots shall have
a frontage of seventy five feet (75') or more and a minimum area of seven thousand three hundred
twenty (7,320) square feet or more, except that lots fronting on cul-de-sac circles may have
reduced frontage as approved by the Council, but shall not be less than forty feet (40');
B. Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to straight streets and shall conform to
the radius of curved streets;
C. Width Related To Length: Narrow, deep lots shall be avoided;
D. Corner Lots: Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to permit appropriate building setback
from both streets or orientation to both streets;
E. Uninhabitable Areas: Land subject to flooding or which shall otherwise be deemed to be
uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential purposes or for any other uses that may increase
or create a danger to health, life, or property or which may increase or create a flood hazard. Such
land within a subdivision shall be set aside for other uses such as parks or other open space;
F. Backup Lots: Lots shall back into such features as freeways, arterial streets, shopping centers, or
industrial properties, except where there is a marginal access street, unless a secondary access is
provided. Such lots shall contain a landscaped easement along the rear at least twenty feet (20')
wide in addition to the utility easement; the restricted access to the arterial street will minimize
noise and protect outdoor living areas. Lots extending through a block and having frontage on two
(2) local streets shall be prohibited;
G. Lot Frontage: All rectangular lots shall have at least seventy five feet (75') of frontage upon a
publicly dedicated street. Variances may be permitted for an approved planned unit development;
and
H. Future Arrangements: Where parcels of land are subdivided into unusually large lots (such as when
large lots are approved for septic tank operations) the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so
as to allow for future resubdividing into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the
ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks. Whenever such future
subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated the plan thereof shall be approved by the Commission
prior to the taking of such action. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-11: PLANTING STRIPS AND RESERVE STRIPS:
Planting strips and reserve strips shall conform to the following:
A. Planting Strips: Planting strips shall be required to be placed next to incompatible features such as
highways, railroads, commercial or industrial uses to screen the view from residential properties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 323/336
Such screens shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide, and shall not be a part of the normal
roadway right of way or utility easement; and
B. Reserve Strips:
1. Reserve Strips - Private: Privately held reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited.
2. Reserve Strips - Public: A one foot (1') reserve may be required to be placed at the end or along
"stub", "dead-end", or "half streets" which terminate at subdivision boundaries. These reserves
shall be deeded in fee simple to the City for future street purposes. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-12: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following:
A. Public Uses: Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown on the
Comprehensive Development Plan is located in whole or part within a subdivision, a suitable area
for this purpose shall be dedicated to the public or reserved for public purchase. If within two (2)
years of plat recording, the purchase is not agreed on, the reservation shall be cancelled or shall
automatically cease to exist; and
B. Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to residential development and
enhance the attractiveness of the community (such as trees, watercourse, historic spots, and
similar irreplaceable assets) shall be preserved, insofar as possible, in the design of the
subdivision. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-4-13: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS:
Large scale developments shall be governed by the following provisions:
A. Modification: This Title may be modified in accordance with the variance provisions of this Title in
the case of a subdivision large enough to constitute a complete community or neighborhood,
consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan which provides and dedicates adequate
public open space and improvements for circulation, recreation, education, light, air, and service
needs of the tract when fully developed and populated; and
B. Neighborhood Characteristics: A community or neighborhood under this provision shall be
consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan, bounded by major streets or natural
physical barriers, and shall contain public areas of sufficient size for schools, playgrounds, parks
and other public facilities to serve its population. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
Chapter 5
IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 324/336
12-5-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter is to establish and define the public improvements which will be
required to be constructed by the subdivider as conditions for final plat approval and also to outline the
procedures and responsibilities of the subdivider and the various public officials and agencies
concerned with the administration, planning design, construction, and financing of public facilities, and
to further establish procedures for assuring compliance with these requirements. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-5-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed subdivision to have prepared by a
registered engineer a complete set of construction plans, including profiles, cross-section,
specifications, and other supporting data, for all required public streets, utilities and other facilities.
Such construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been approved with the
preliminary plat, and shall be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are subject
to approval by the City Engineer and other responsible public agencies. All construction plans shall be
prepared in accordance with the public agencies' standards or specifications. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-5-3: REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other improvements in
accordance with the conditions and specifications as follows:
A. Monuments: Monuments shall be set in accordance with section 50-1313, Idaho Code.
B. Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the Council. Vertical curbs and gutters shall be constructed on collector
and arterial streets.
C. Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be required on minor streets and shall be constructed
in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the Council.
D. Installation Of Public Utilities: Underground utilities are recommended and may be required by the
Council in areas where overhead facilities would not be compatible with the surrounding
properties.
E. Driveways: All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the Public Works Department,
highway district or State highway department.
F. Water Supply System: When a proposed subdivision is to be serviced by a public water supply
system, fire hydrants and other required water system appurtenances shall be provided by the
subdivider. If there is no existing or accessible public water supply system, the subdivider shall be
required to install a water supply system for the common use of the lots within the subdivision as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 325/336
approved by the State Department of Environmental Services. Individual wells may be permitted in
accordance with the appropriate health district.
G. Sanitary Sewer System:
1. When a proposed subdivision is to be served by a public sanitary sewage system, sanitary
sewers and other required appurtenances thereto shall be provided by the subdivider as
approved by the State Department of Environmental and Community Services.
2. Where it is determined in the judgment of the Commission, based upon the advice of the
appropriate health district, that a subdivision cannot be feasibly connected with an existing public
or private sewer system or that a public or private sewer system cannot be provided for the
subdivision, then an approved disposal system may be authorized which shall comply with the
appropriate health district.
H. Sidewalks And Pedestrial Walkways: Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street.
Where the average width of lots, as measured at the frontage line or at the building setback line, is
over one hundred feet (100'), sidewalks on one side may be required by the Council. Pedestrial
walkways, when required, shall have easements at least ten feet (10') in width and include a
concrete work at least five feet (5) in width, located generally along the center line of the
easement, dedicated as a public pedestrial walkway. Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be
constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications as adopted by the Council.
I. Greenbelt: Greenbelts or landscaping screening may be required for the protection of residential
properties from adjacent major arterial streets, waterways, railroad right of way or other features.
Subdivision plats shall show the location of any greenbelt areas.
J. Street Lighting: Street lights shall be required to be installed at intersections throughout the
subdivision. In these cases a subdivider shall conform to the requirements of the City and the
public utility providing such lighting.
K. Bicycle Paths: Bicycle paths should be considered in all developments and may be required by the
Commission.
L. Responsibility For Private Improvements And Public Utilities: It shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider to arrange and provide for the development, installation, construction, or other
improvement of private facilities and public utilities within and for the subdivision in accordance
with applicable standards and requirements.
M. Responsibilities For The Construction Of Public Works:
1. The scope of this Chapter is to define the respective areas of responsibility of the subdivider and
the City relative to the installation, construction, or other improvements of public works in route
to and within the boundaries of a subdivision.
2. In certain instances, the City may require formal written agreements with the subdivider that
more fully and specifically describe their respective obligations and responsibilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 326/336
N. General: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to complete at his sole expense all the
development and construction of public works for and within his subdivision except as specifically
provided otherwise to be the obligation and responsibility of the City, or as may be accepted by the
City as being within the spirit and intent of its responsibilities.
O. Completion Of Public Works: The subdivider shall complete the installation or construction of all the
different phases of public works for which he is responsible before the City will accept any of them.
This requirement may be satisfied by completion of a stage if a staged development is called for in
the approved development plan.
P. Guarantee Of Completion: Until the public works for which the subdivider is responsible are
completed, or an acceptable stage of the development is completed, the City will issue no building
permits for private construction therein; unless a satisfactory performance bond or other suitable
guarantee of performance acceptable to the City is provided by the subdivider.
Q. Evidence Of Completion:
1. The subdivider shall notify the City in writing when the public works for which he is responsible
have been completed.
2. The City Engineer or the City Superintendent shall also certify in writing, a copy of which shall
be sent to the subdivider, that the said public works have been inspected by him or his
authorized representative, and that the said public works have been completed in accordance
with applicable standards and specifications. As built, construction plans shall be submitted to
the City on completion.
R. Acceptance Of Public Works: Compliance with the foregoing provisions shall constitute the City's
acceptance of the public works. The City shall thereby accept said public works and be responsible
for their operation and maintenance in accordance with City policies.
S. Streets:
1. The subdivider shall perform, install, construct, or otherwise complete at his sole expense the
following items relative to street improvements within the boundaries of the subdivision:
a. Route (or boundary) surveys of the dedicated rights of way.
b. Construction surveyors of line and grade.
c. Installation of sidewalks, if applicable.
d. Installation of curbs and gutters, if applicable.
e. Preparation of the subgrade.
f. Inspection of the roadway base course.
g. Inspection of all phases of construction to assure compliance with applicable standards and
specifications.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 327/336
h. Installation of crushed gravel leveling course to be used as a temporary wearing surface until
a permanent asphalt pavement is installed.
i. Asphalt pavement is to be installed following the installation of curbs and gutters.
2. The City shall perform, install, construct, or otherwise complete at its sole expense the following
items relative to street improvements within the boundaries of the subdivision.
a. Installation of traffic control signs and signals and street name signs.
3. The City shall also improve to the extent it deems suitable, subject to budgetary limitations, such
existing right of way it considers necessary to provide adequate access to the subdivision.
T. Sanitary Sewage Collection System: The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of a
sanitary sewage collection system within the boundaries of the subdivision. The subdivider shall
perform, install, construct or otherwise complete at his sole expense the following items relative to
sanitary sewers:
1. Preparation of plans and specifications for the construction of the sanitary sewer system,
including extensions from the existing collection system, and the approval of said plans and
specifications by the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare.
2. Construction surveys of line and grade within the subdivision.
3. Installation of the sewer system within the subdivision, including sewers, manholes and other
appurtenances, and, if applicable, sewage pumping stations.
4. If sewer mains are located in a dedicated street, installation of a sewer service line to the
property line of each lot.
5. Inspection of construction to assure compliance with the plans, specifications, and applicable
standards.
6. Installation of a sewer extension from the existing collection system to a designated point of
connection near the subdivision.
7. Connections to the sewers will be in accordance with existing procedures and policies of the
City; and the subdivider will be liable for the payment of sewer assessment and hookup charges
as provided by City ordinances.
U. Water Distribution System: The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of a culinary
water distribution system within the boundaries of the subdivision. The subdivider shall perform,
install, construct, or otherwise complete at his sole expense the following items relative to a
culinary water distribution system:
1. Preparation of plans and specifications for the construction of the water distribution system,
including any required extensions from the existing system, and the approval of said plans and
specifications by the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare.
2. Construction surveys of line and grade within the subdivision.
3. Installation of the water distribution system within the subdivision, including water lines, control
valves, fire hydrants, and appurtenant facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 328/336
4. If water mains are located in a dedicated street, installation of a water service line to the
property line of each lot.
5. Inspection of construction to assure compliance with the plans, specifications, and applicable
standards.
6. Installation of a water line extension or extensions as indicated above.
7. Connections to the water mains shall be in accordance with existing procedures and policies of
the City; and the subdivider shall be liable for the payment of water assessment and hookup
charges as provided by City ordinances.
V. Reimbursement For Oversizing: In the event the City requires the subdivider to install oversized
pipe lines or other excess facilities to make provisions for present or future service needs in excess
of the requirements for the subdivision, the City shall reimburse the subdivider for the additional
costs of material and installation resulting therefrom.
W. Building Line Setback: In all new subdivisions the building line setback shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20') from the property line. In the event that a new subdivision is located along a street
with existing residences, the setback line shall be not less than other structures along the street
and preferably should be set back as an average of the existing structures.
X. Side And Rear Lot Line Clearance: In all new subdivisions no building of any nature shall be placed
or constructed nearer than five feet (5') from the property line. Where utility rights of way or other
rights of way or easements are provided along property lines and lot lines, no structure of any
nature shall be permitted in such rights of way or easements, except for the purpose for which they
are provided. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
Chapter 6
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENTS
12-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to identify the various types of special developments that normally pose
special concerns to the Commission and elected officials when reviewing and acting upon subdivision
requests. Therefore, this Chapter outlines the general plan submittal requirements and design
standards that shall be taken into consideration when acting on special developments. The provisions
of this Chapter are in addition to the plan requirements and design standards that are required by
Chapters 11-3 and 11-4 of this Code. The required information shall be submitted to the Commission
with the preliminary plat. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-6-2: HILLSIDES:
Since all areas within the City limits are relatively flat this Chapter is not immediately applicable.
In the event that a "Hillside Subdivision" considered as a special development is proposed within one
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 329/336
mile of the City limits, Subdivision Ordinance No. 9, Gooding County, Idaho shall control the
development. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-6-3: PLANNED UNIT AND CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Site Development Plan: The developer shall provide the Commission with a colored rendering of
adequate scale to show the completed development that will include at least the following:
1. Architect style and building design;
2. Building materials and color;
3. Landscaping;
4. Screening;
5. Garbage areas;
6. Parking; and
7. Open space.
B. Private Streets: Private street construction standards shall be based upon recommendations from
the City Engineer and Commission. Adequate construction standards may vary depending on the
size of the development and the demands placed on such improvements.
C. Home Owners' Association: Home Owners' Association by-laws and other similar deed restrictions,
which provide for the control and maintenance of all common areas, recreation facilities or open
space shall meet with the approval of the Council. Any and all powers as specified in such
agreements may be required to also be assigned to the jurisdictional agency to insure continued
and adequate maintenance of all such common areas, recreational facilities and open spaces,
ability to assess property for delinquencies, and enforcement of motor vehicle speed to the best
interests of the owners involved and of the general public.
D. Storage Areas: Storage areas shall be provided for the anticipated needs of boats, campers and
trailers. For typical residential development, one adequate space shall be provided every three (3)
living units. This may be reduced by the Council if there is a showing that the needs of a particular
development are less.
E. Parking Space: One additional parking space beyond that which is required by the Zoning
Ordinance may be required for every three (3) dwelling units to accommodate visitor parking.
F. Maintenance Building: A maintenance building shall be provided, size and location to be determined
by the type and service needed for the necessary repair and maintenance of all common areas.
G. Open Space: The location of open space shall be appropriate to the development and shall be of
such shape and area to be usable and convenient to the residents of the development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 330/336
H. Control During Development: Single ownership or control during development shall be required and
a time limit may be imposed to guarantee the development is built and constructed as planned.
(Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-6-4: FLOOD PLAINS:
A. Flood Areas: For any proposed subdivision that is located within a flood plain, the developer shall
provide the Commission with a development plan of adequate scale and supporting documentation
that will show and explain at least the following:
1. Location of all planned improvements;
2. The location of the floodway and floodway fringe per engineering practices as specified by the
Army Corps of Engineers;
3. The location of the present water channel;
4. All major drainage ways;
5. Areas of frequent flooding;
6. Means of floodproofing buildings; and
7. Means of insuring loans for improvements within the flood plain.
B. Justification For Development: Upon the determination that buildings are planned within the flood
plain or that alterations of any kind are anticipated within the flood plain area that will alter the flow
of water, the developer shall through design demonstrate conclusively to the Commission that such
development will not present a hazard to life or limb, hazard to property, adverse effects on the
safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel and not have an adverse impact on the
natural environment.
C. Commission's Findings: In determining the appropriateness of subdivision for land located within a
flood plain, the Commission shall consider the objectives of this Title, and at least the following:
1. The danger to life and property due to the increased flood heights or velocities caused by
subdivision fill, roads, and intended uses;
2. The danger that intended uses may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of
others;
3. The adequacy of proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems
to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions under flood conditions;
4. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
5. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
6. The requirements of the subdivision for a waterfront location;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 331/336
7. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed subdivision and
land use;
8. The compatibility of the proposed uses with existing development and development anticipated
in the foreseeable future;
9. The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the comprehensive plan and flood plain
management program for the area;
10. The safety of access to the property for emergency vehicles in times of flood;
11. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters
expected at the site; and
12. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees, fills, structures or other features within
the proposed subdivision will individually or collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights,
or damages. If only part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, the Council shall limit
development to that part and shall require the development to proceed consistent with that
limitation.
D. Floodproofing Plans: Floodproofing plans must be individually approved by the Council upon
recommendation from the Commission before such uses are constructed. Floodproofing may
include but is not limited to the following:
1. Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement;
2. Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters, or similar methods of closure;
3. Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures;
4. Use of paints, membranes, or mortors or reduce seepage of water through walls;
5. Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation;
6. Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures;
7. Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of
flood waters;
8. Installation of pumps or comparable facilities for subsurface drainage systems to relieve external
foundation wall and basement flood pressures;
9. Building design and construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or
flotation debris;
10. Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which permit the drains to be
closed to prevent backup of sewage and storm waters into buildings or structures;
11. Location and installation of all electrical equipment, circuits and electrical appliances so that
they are protected from inundation by the regulatory flood;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 332/336
12. Location of storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids or
other toxic materials which could be hazardous to public health, safety and welfare at elevations
above the height associated with the regulatory protection elevation; or design of such facilities
to prevent flotation of storage containers, or damage to storage containers which could result in
the escape of toxic materials into flood waters. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-6-5: CEMETERIES:
A. Function: The developer shall provide the Commission with written documentation that will
sufficiently explain if the proposed cemetery will be used for either human or animal remains and
the functions that are anticipated on the property.
B. Compliance With Idaho Code: The developer shall submit a written statement that has been
prepared by an attorney that adequately assures the compliance of the proposed cemetery with
the procedural platting requirements that are outlined in Title 27, Idaho Code. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-6-6: MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS:
A. General: Mobile home subdivisions shall in general be treated the same as any residential
subdivision, subject to any special requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and also subject
to the following special requirements.
B. Special Requirements: Mobile home subdivisions shall be subject to the following special
requirements:
1. Development as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for the planned
development of two (2) acres;
2. Essential community facilities and services for the type of development under consideration is
available, or provisions shall be made to assure that these facilities will be provided;
3. The site shall be suitable for residential development and not be subject to hazards such as
insect or rodent infection, objectionable smoke, noxious odors, unusual noise, or the probability
of flooding or erosion;
4. Adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste disposal;
5. Protection of existing ground cover;
6. Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same type, by aesthetically
acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas, and existing natural or man-made barriers;
7. The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for the vehicular traffic
requirements of the property served. No lot within the development shall have direct vehicular
access to a street bordering the development; and
8. Creation of a home owners' association to assure that all common open areas are adequately
maintained. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 333/336
12-6-7: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
A. General: Mobile home parks shall in general be treated the same as any residential subdivision,
subject to any special requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and also subject to the
following special requirements.
B. Special Requirements:
1. Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for planned development of
two (2) acres;
2. Essential community facilities and services for the type of development under consideration is
available, or provisions shall be made to assure that these facilities will be provided;
3. The site shall be suitable for residential development and not be subject to hazards such as
insect or rodent infection, objectionable smoke, noxious odors, unusual noise, or the probability
of flooding or erosion;
4. Adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste disposal;
5. Protection of existing ground cover;
6. Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same type, by aesthetically
acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas, and existing natural or man-made barriers;
7. The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for the vehicular traffic
requirements of the property served. No lot within the development shall have direct vehicular
access to a street bordering the development. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-6-8: TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS:
A. General: Travel trailer parks shall in general be treated the same as any residential subdivision,
subject to any special requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and also subject to the
following special requirements.
B. Special Requirements: Travel trailer parks shall be subject to the following special requirements:
1. Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for the planned development
of two (2) acres;
2. Essential community facilities and services for the type of development under consideration is
available, or provisions shall be made to assure that these facilities will be provided;
3. Adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste disposal;
4. Protection of existing ground cover;
5. Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same type, by aesthetically
acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas, and existing natural or man-made barriers; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 334/336
6. The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for the vehicular traffic
requirements of the property served. No lot within the development shall have direct vehicular
access to a street bordering the development. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-6-9: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION:
A. Required Information: Due to the impact that large scale development would have on public utilities
and services, the developer shall submit the following information along with the preliminary plat:
1. Identification of all public services that would be provided to the development that will occur as a
result of the subdivision (re: fire protection, police protection, central water, central sewer, road
construction, recreation, maintenance, schools and other);
2. Estimate the public service costs to provide adequate service to the development;
3. Estimate the tax revenue that will be generated from the development; and
4. Public means of financing the services for the development if any public services would not be
offset by tax revenue from the development. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
Chapter 7
VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS
12-7-1: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
A. Application: Any property owner desiring to vacate an existing subdivision, public right of way or
easement, or desiring to dedicate a street right of way, or easement shall complete and file an
application with the Commission and also file such other applications as are otherwise required by
law. These provisions shall not apply to the widening of any street which is shown in the
Comprehensive Development Plan, or the dedication of streets, rights of way, or easements to be
shown on a recorded plat of a subdivision.
B. Council Action:
1. When considering an application for vacation procedures, the Council shall establish a date for a
public hearing and give such public notice as required by law. The Council may approve, deny,
or modify the application. Whenever public rights of way or lands are vacated, the Council shall
provide adjacent property owners with a quit claim deed for said vacated rights of way in such
proportions as are prescribed by law.
2. When considering an application for dedication procedures, the Council may approve, deny, or
modify the application. When a dedication is approved, the required street improvements shall
be constructed or a bond furnished assuring the construction, prior to acceptance of the
dedication. To complete the acceptance of any dedication of land, the owner shall furnish to the
Council a deed describing and conveying such lands to be recorded with the County Recorder.
(Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 335/336
Chapter 8
VARIANCES
12-8-1: PURPOSE:
The Commission may recommend to the Council a variance from the provisions of this Title on a
finding that undue hardship may result from strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements
of this Title or that application of such provisions or requirements is impracticable. The Commission
shall only recommend variances that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In
making its findings, the Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and
the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed
subdivision, and the probable effect of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the
probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be
recommended unless the Commission finds after a public hearing:
A. There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting said property that the strict application
of the provisions of this Title would clearly be impracticable, or unreasonable; in such cases, the
subdivider shall first state his reasons in writing to the specific provisions or requirements involved;
B. The granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
other property in the area in which said property is situated;
C. Such variance will not violate the provisions of the Idaho Code; and
D. Such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of this Title and the
Comprehensive Development Plan. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-8-2: TOPOGRAPHICAL-PHYSICAL LIMITATION VARIANCE:
Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the
requirements of this Title would result in extra-ordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual
topography, other physical conditions, or other such conditions, which are not self-inflicted, or that
these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this Title the
Commission may recommend to the Council that variance modification or a waiver of these
requirements be granted. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-8-3: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT VARIANCE:
The developer may request a variance from specified portions of this Title in the case of a planned
unit development. Upon considering the request variance, the Commission shall take into account the
nature of the proposed use of the land and existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons
to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon
traffic conditions in the vicinity, adequate open space, light, air and other needs. The Commission's
findings and report to the Council shall include whether:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=893 336/336
A. The proposed project will constitute a desirable and stable community development and be in
compliance with the Comprehensive Development Plan;
B. The proposed project will be in harmony with adjacent areas; and
C. The proposed project will be served with adequate public facilities. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
Chapter 9
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
12-9-1: ENFORCEMENT:
No subdivision plat required by this Title or the Idaho Code shall be admitted to the public land records
of the County or recorded by the County Recorder, until such subdivision plat has received final
approval by the Council. No public board, agency, commission, official or other authority shall proceed
with the construction of any of the public improvements required by this Title until the final plat has
received the approval by the Council. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)
12-9-2: PENALTIES:
Penalties for failure to comply with the provisions of this Title shall be as follows:
"Violation of any of the provisions of this Title or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall be considered as a separate
offense. The land owner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any other person who
commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a
separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the Council or any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is
necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this Title or of the Idaho Code." (Ord. 496, 7-5-
1977)
12-9-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Title shall be in full force and effect upon publication following passage and approval.
Regularly passed and adopted by the City of Gooding on this July 5, 1977. (Ord. 496, 7-5-1977)