§ 1-1 TITLE 1 - GENERAL § 1-3
Chapter 1
MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES
Sec. 1-1: Repeal of Existing
Ordinances
Sec. 1-2: Effect of Repealing
Ordinances
Sec. 1-3: Rules for Construction of
Ordinances and
Amendments
Sec. 1-1. Repeal of Existing
Ordinances.
The ordinances contained in this
Chapter and the chapters following shall be
known as the "Revised Ordinances of the
City of Moscow, Idaho," and so far as their
provisions are the same in effect as those of
previously existing ordinances, they shall
be construed as continuations thereof; but
subject to the limitations and provisions of
the next sections, all ordinances and
resolutions of the City of Moscow, Idaho,
heretofore in force (except such as are of a
private, local or temporary nature,
including franchises, grants, dedications
and special levies for local assessments),
are hereby repealed.
Sec. 1-2. Effect of Repealing
Ordinances.
The repeal of ordinances as provided
herein shall not affect any right which has
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty
incurred, nor any action or proceeding as
commenced under or by virtue of the
ordinances repealed, nor the tenure of
office of any person holding office at the
time when they take effect; nor shall the
repeal of any ordinance thereby have the
effect of reviving any ordinance theretofore
repealed or superseded.
Sec. 1-3. Rules for Construction of
Ordinances and
Amendments.
In the construction of the Moscow
City Code and all ordinances amendatory
thereof or supplementary thereto the
following rules shall be observed unless
such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the legislative
body or repugnant to the context of the
ordinance.
A. Intent to Defraud: Whenever, by any
of the provisions of this Code, an
intent to defraud is required in order to
constitute an offense, it is sufficient if
an intent appears to defraud any
person, association or body politic or
any combination of persons.
B. Liability of Employers and Agents:
When the provisions of an ordinance
prohibit the commission or omission
of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited thing or omitting
the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned or
aiding or abetting the person shall be
guilty of the offense described and
liable to the penalty as set forth in this
Code.
C. Title of Sections and Subsections:
1. The title of any section or
subsection of these ordinances shall be
deemed to in nowise restrict or qualify
or to limit the effect of the provisions
set forth and contained in such section
or subsection.
2. State Law references and City
Resolution and Ordinance numbers
and dates are included for reference
only and shall be deemed to in nowise
restrict or qualify or to limit the effect
of the provisions set forth and
contained in such section or
subsection.
3. Where the title of an
administrative officer or department
head is used in this Code (e.g., Public
Works Director, Director of
Community Development, Fire Chief,
Chief of Police, etc.), such shall
include all authorized employees,
agents, designees, and representatives
of such officer or department head.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
D. Constitutionality; Effect of: Should
any section, subsection or portion of
§ 1-3 TITLE 1 - GENERAL § 1-3
this Code, or of any ordinances which
may be hereafter passed, approved and
published as required by law, be
declared by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or
void, such adjudication shall in no
way affect the remaining portion of
such section, subsection, part or
portion of the Code.
E. Definitions.
The definitions contained herein shall
have the following meanings,
throughout this Code, unless otherwise
more specifically defined in a
particular chapter, section, or
subsection:
The singular number includes the
plural.
Words used in the present include the
future.
Words used in the masculine gender
comprehend, as well, the feminine and
neuter.
The word "shall" is mandatory and
"may" is permissive.
Words prohibiting anything being
done except in accordance with a
license or permit or authority from a
board or officer shall be construed as
giving such board or officer power to
license or permit or authorize such
thing to be done.
1. City. The City shall mean the
City of Moscow, Idaho, as set forth at
Title 1, Chapter 2 of this Code, and/or
its officers, employees, and duly
authorized representatives.
2. Clerk. The Clerk shall mean the
Clerk of the City of Moscow, Idaho, as
set forth at Title 2, Chapter 5 of this
Code.
3. Code. The Code or this Code
shall mean the Revised Ordinances of
the City of Moscow, Idaho, sometimes
commonly referred to as the Moscow
City Code.
4. Council. The Council shall mean
the Council of the City of Moscow,
Idaho, as set forth at Title 2, Chapter 2
of this Code.
5. Day, Month, Quarter, Year. The
word "day" shall be any twenty-four
(24) hour period from midnight to
midnight; and the word "month" shall
mean a calendar month unless
otherwise expressed; and the word
"quarter" means any three (3) month
period, ending with the last day of
March, June, September and
December; the word "year" shall mean
any one calendar year. When any time
is specified in this Code, it shall mean
standard time as distinguished from
solar time, and the words "midnight"
or "noon" shall be taken to be
midnight or noon standard time.
6. Idaho Code. The Idaho Code or
State law shall mean the Idaho Code
containing the General Laws of Idaho.
7. Knowingly imports only a
knowledge that the facts existed or
exist which bring the act or omission
within the provisions of these
ordinances. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such
act or omission.
8. Land, Real Estate, Real Property
include lands, tenements,
hereditaments, water rights,
possessory rights and claims.
9. Neglect, Negligence, Negligent
and Negligently import a want of such
attention to the nature or probable
consequences of the act or omission as
a prudent person ordinarily bestows in
acting in his or her own concern.
10. Oath includes "affirmation" and
the word "swear" includes the word
"affirm." Every mode or oral
statement under oath or affirmation is
embraced in the term "testify" and
every written one in the term
"depose."
11. Officer shall include officers and
boards in charge of departments and
the members of such boards, and such
references as to the Clerk or City
Treasurer, as the case may be
applicable.
§ 1-3 TITLE 1 - GENERAL § 1-3
12. Official Time. Whenever certain
hours are named herein, they shall
mean Pacific Standard Time or
Daylight Saving Time as may be in
current use in the City.
13. Owner applied to a building or
land shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint
tenant or lessee of the whole or a part
of such building or land.
14. Person includes an individual,
group of individuals, organization,
proprietorship, joint venture,
partnership, trust, business trust,
syndicate, association, joint stock
company, corporation, cooperative,
and bodies politic and corporate.
15. Personal Property includes
money, goods, chattels, things in
action, evidences of debt and general
intangibles as defined in the Uniform
Commercial Code, Idaho Code Title
28, as amended.
16. Property includes both real and
personal property.
17. Public Thoroughfare includes
streets, alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
18. Signature includes any name,
mark or sign written with the intent to
authenticate any instrument of writing.
19. Tenant or Occupant, applied to a
building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any
part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
20. Willfully, when applied to the
intent with which an act is done or
omitted, implies simply a purpose or
willingness to commit the act or make
the omission referred to. It does not
require any intent to violate law or to
injure another or to acquire an
advantage.
21. Writing includes printing,
typewriting or any other intentional
reduction to tangible form.
§ 2-1 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 2-4
Chapter 2
CORPORATE LIMITS
Sec. 2-1: Establishment
Sec. 2-2: Corporate Limits
Sec. 2-3: Official Moscow City
Limits Map
Sec. 2-4: Official Name of City
Sec. 2-1. Establishment.
The City of Moscow, Latah County,
Idaho shall embrace, include and contain
within its corporate limits all the territory
embraced, included and encompassed
within the lines and boundaries as by
ordinance bounded and described.
Sec. 2-2. Corporate Limits.
The boundaries and corporate limits of
the City of Moscow, Latah County, State of
Idaho are hereby established and ordained
to be as described by ordinance.
Sec. 2-3. Official Moscow City
Limits Map.
The official Map of the City shall be
updated annually and three (3) copies of
the map and legal description shall remain
on file in the office of the Clerk.
All that territory bounded and
included within the lines set forth in the
ordinance is hereby declared and ordained
to be within the corporate limits of the
City, and to be and constitute the territory
subject to the jurisdiction of the
Municipality of the City of Moscow,
County of Latah, State of Idaho.
Sec. 2-4. Official Name of City.
The official name of the City shall be
“City of Moscow, Idaho."
§ 3-1 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 3-1
Chapter 3
ORDER INCORPORATING
MUNICIPALITY
Sec. 3-1: Order Incorporating
Municipality
Sec. 3-1. Order Incorporating
Municipality.
The Board of County Commissioners
of Nez Perce County, Idaho Territory, met
July 12, 1887, pursuant to adjournment.
The following were present: C. A. Leeper,
Commission Chairman; H. J. Bundy,
Commissioner; J. L. Naylor,
Commissioner; J. C. Hattabough, Clerk;
and A. Quackenbush, District Attorney.
In the matter of the petition of the
people of Moscow, for the incorporation of
their Town.
The Board having examined said
petition and being satisfied that the same
was duly filed and that the majority of the
taxable inhabitants of said Town had
signed said petition, and that the metes and
bounds of said Town together with the
adjacent boundaries thereof are fully set
forth and the request of said petitioners
being deemed reasonable by this Board, the
following order is ordered to be entered
upon the records of this Board.
It appearing to the satisfaction of the
Board of County Commissioners of Nez
Perce County, Idaho Territory at a regular
meeting of said Board held at Lewiston on
the 11th day of July A. D. 1887.
FIRST: That a petition signed by a
majority of the taxable male inhabitants of
the Town of Moscow in said County and
Territory has been duly filed with the Clerk
of this Board praying for an order
Incorporating the said Town of Moscow,
the metes and bounds thereof being set
forth in said petition, together with the
adjacent boundaries thereof.
SECOND: That a Board of Trustees
be appointed as by law provided, that
police be established for the local self
government of said Town of Moscow, and
that said Town at once enter upon all the
rights, privileges and franchises granted by
law.
Now, Therefore, by reason of the law
and the premises and by virtue of the
authority in this Board vested, it is hereby
ordered and declared:
That the Town of Moscow, Nez Perce
County, Idaho Territory, be and the same is
hereby declared to be incorporated under
the name and style of the Town of
Moscow, and the metes and bounds of said
Town shall be and the same are declared to
be as follows:
Commencing at a point 10 chains east
and 30 feet north of the southwest corner of
the northeast quarter of Section 8 in Twp.
39 N R 5 WBM, and running thence
westerly parallel to subdivision lines and in
accordance with the United States
Government survey a distance of 69 chains
and 80 links to a point, which point shall
constitute the northwest corner of the
corporation limits of the Town of Moscow
and running thence south to the south
boundary line of Section 7 in the aforesaid
Twp. N R 5 WBM and running thence in a
southeasterly direction along the southern
boundary line of the Columbia and Palouse
Railway Company's right-of-way to a point
where said southern boundary line of said
Railway Company's right-of-way intersects
the west boundary line of Section 17 Twp.
39 N R 5 WBM and running thence east 49
chains and 30 links to a point due south of
the place of beginning and running thence
north a distance of 69 chains to the place of
beginning.
That W. J. McConnell, W. W. Langdon, M.
J. Shields, W. W. Baker and R. H. Barton
are hereby appointed and declared to be the
Trustees of said Town of Moscow and said
Trustees shall continue in office until their
successors are duly elected and qualified as
by law required. That police shall be
established for the local government of said
Town of Moscow, and that said Town shall
at once enter into the enjoyments,
privileges and franchises of every kind
whatsoever granted by Law.
§ 3-1 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 3-1
Done at Lewiston, Idaho this 12th day
of July, 1887.
By order of the Board.
C. A. Leeper, Chairman of Board of
County Commissioners
Attest
J. C. Hattabaugh, Clerk,
By F. Kroutinger, Deputy.
§ 4-1 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 4-2
Chapter 4
CORPORATE SEAL
Sec. 4-1: Design
Sec. 4-2: Adopted
Sec. 4-1. Design.
The Corporate Seal of the City of
Moscow, Idaho, shall be circular in form
with inner and outer circles. The outer
circle shall be of rope design, one and
seven-eighths (1 7/8) inches in diameter.
The inner circle shall be of dot design, one
and one-fourth (1 1/4) inches in diameter. It
shall bear upon the upper portion of the
space between the inner and outer circles
the words "City of Moscow" and upon the
lower portion of said space the words
"State of Idaho". Upon the space within the
inner circle shall be the inscription
"Incorporated July 12, 1887". All lettering
shall be in Gothic style type.
A facsimile of the Seal is as follows:
Sec. 4-2. Adopted.
The Seal hereinabove is hereby
adopted as the Seal of the City of Moscow,
Idaho.
§ 5-1 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 5-5
Chapter 5
ELECTIONS
Sec. 5-1: Creation of Right
Sec. 5-2: Number of Petitioners
Required
Sec. 5-3: Form of Petition
Sec. 5-4: Time for Filing Petitions
Sec. 5-5: Printing of Petition and
Sheets for Signatures
Sec. 5-6: Verification on Sheets for
Signatures
Sec. 5-7: Examination and
Certification of Signatures
Sec. 5-8: Sufficiency of Petition,
Notification, Effect of
Council Action, Election
Sec. 5-9: Form of Ballot
Sec. 5-10: Conduct Of Election
Sec. 5-11: Prohibited Acts, Penalties
Sec. 5-12: Election Precincts,
Designated
Sec. 5-1. Creation of Right.
The people of the City shall have the
right to enact ordinances through the
initiative process, and to repeal ordinances
through the referendum process, according
to the procedures set forth herein.
Sec. 5-2. Number of Petitioners
Required.
To enact an ordinance by initiative or
to repeal an ordinance by referendum, there
shall be attached or appended to the
petition the signatures of the legal voters of
the City equal to at least twenty percent
(20%) of the total number of voters who
cast votes at the last general election in the
City.
(Ord. 2008-20, 09/02/2008)
Sec. 5-3. Form of Petition.
The initiative petition shall be in
substantially the following form:
Initiative Petition to the Mayor and
Council of the City of Moscow,
Idaho. "We, the undersigned
citizens and qualified electors of
the City of Moscow, respectfully
demand that the following
proposed ordinance, to wit:
(setting out full text of measure
proposed) shall be submitted to the
qualified electors of the City of
Moscow, for their approval or
rejection at an election to be called
in accordance with Idaho Code
Section, and each for himself says:
I have personally signed this
petition; I am a qualified elector of
the City of Moscow; my residence
and post office are correctly
written after my name."
Signature, Printed Name, Residence Street
and Number, City of Post Office
(Here follow twenty [20] numbered lines
for signatures)
The petition for referendum on any
ordinance passed by the Council shall be in
substantially the same form as an initiative
petition with appropriate title and changes,
setting out in full the text of the ordinance
to be referred to the people for their
approval or rejection.
(Ord. 2011-04, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 5-4. Time for Filing Petitions.
Initiative and referendum petitions
with the requisite number of signatures
attached shall be filed with the Clerk not
less than sixty (60) days following the final
adoption of the act of Council which is to
be subject to referendum. The Clerk shall
deliver such petitions to the Latah County
Clerk within five (5) business days of the
Clerk’s receipt of such petition(s) for
verification by the Latah County clerk
pursuant to Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2011-04, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 5-5. Printing of Petition and
Sheets for Signatures.
Time limits for perfection petition:
A. Before or at the time of initiating the
circulation of any petition for initiative
§ 5-5 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 5-6
or referendum, the person or persons,
organization(s) under whose authority
the petition is to be circulated, shall
send or deliver to the Clerk a copy of
such petition duly signed by at least
twenty (20) electors who were
registered to vote at the last general
City election held in the City and
eligible to sign such petition. The
Clerk shall deliver such petition(s) to
the Latah County Clerk within five (5)
business days of the Clerk’s receipt of
such petition for verification by the
Latah County Clerk pursuant to Idaho
Code. Following return to the Clerk
of the Petition(s) and verification of
signatures by the Latah County Clerk,
the Clerk shall immediately examine
the petition and specify the form and
kind and size of paper on which the
petition shall be printed and circulated
for further signatures. All petitions
and sheets for signatures shall be
printed on a good quality bond or
ledger paper.
B. The Clerk shall indicate in writing on
the petition that it has been approved it
as to form. The Clerk shall also
inform the person or persons,
organization or organizations under
whose authority the petition is to be
circulated, in writing, that the petition
must be perfected with the required
number of certified signatures within
seventy-five (75) days following the
date of approval as to form. Any
petition that has not been perfected
with the required number of certified
signatures within the seventy-five (75)
days allowed shall be declared null
and void ab initio in its entirety.
C. A full and correct copy of the
initiative petition or referendum
petition shall be attached to each sheet
for signatures.
(Ord. 2008-20, 09/02/2008; 2011-04,
06/06/2011)
Sec. 5-6. Verification on Sheets for
Signatures.
Each and every signature sheet of each
petition containing signatures shall be
verified on the face thereof in substantially
the following form by the person who
circulated said sheet of the petition, by his
or her affidavit thereon, as a part thereof:
State of Idaho )
) ss.
County of Latah )
I, __________________ swear or
affirm, under penalty of perjury, that I
am a resident of the State of Idaho and
at least eighteen (18) years of age, and
that every person who signed this
sheet of the foregoing petition signed
his or her name thereto in my
presence. I believe that each has
stated his or her name and the
accompanying required information
on the signature sheet correctly, and
that the person was eligible to sign
this petition.
Signature: _____________________
Post Office Address: _____________
Subscribed and sworn to before
me this _____ day of ____________ ,
________.
(Notary Seal)
Notary Public ___________________
Residing at: ____________________
(Ord. 2008-20, 09/02/2008; 2011-04 06/06/2011)
§ 5-7 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 5-8
Sec. 5-7. Examination and
Certification of Signatures.
A. All petitions with their attached
signature sheets shall be presented on
the same day to the Clerk, who shall
make a cursory examination of them to
determine whether the petitions
apparently contain the necessary
number of signatures.
1. If the Clerk determines, by a
cursory review, that the total number
of signatures on the petitions is not
sufficient to satisfy the number
required by Idaho Code , all petitions
with attached signature sheets shall be
retained by the Clerk who shall notify
in writing the person filing the petition
of the number of signatures needed,
and further signatures may be
gathered, if within the time limit set by
Idaho Code.
2. If the cursory examination of the
signature sheets by the Clerk reveals:
a. Erasures on any signature;
b. Illegible or indecipherable
signatures;
c. Signatures not properly
identified by all of the information
required on the sheet;
d. Duplicate signatures; or
e. Signatures of persons who
have requested in writing to have their
names removed from the petition; the
Clerk shall summarily reject such
signatures and they shall not be
counted. Each rejected signature shall
be drawn through with ink and
initialed by the Clerk. If the total
number of signatures not rejected does
not appear to be sufficient to satisfy
the number required by Idaho Code ,
all petitions with attached signature
sheets shall be retained by the Clerk
who shall notify in writing the person
filing the petition of the number of
signatures needed, and further
signatures may be gathered, if within
the time limit of Idaho Code.
B. All originals of petitions presented to
the Clerk found to apparently contain
the necessary number of signatures,
after the cursory examination provided
for above, shall be filed with the Clerk
and become public records of the City.
The Clerk shall deliver such petitions
to the Latah County Clerk within five
(5) days of the Clerk’s receipt of such
petitions; thereafter, the Latah County
Clerk shall verify the signatures for
compliance pursuant to the Idaho
Code.
(Ord. 2011-04, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 5-8. Sufficiency of Petition,
Notification, Effect of
Council Action, Election.
A. In the event that a petition filed with
the Clerk does not contain the required
number of certified signatures (as
determined by the Latah County
Clerk), the Clerk shall inform the
person or organization under whose
authority the petition was circulated
that the petition is defective for lack of
certified signatures, and specify the
number of additional signatures
required to make the petition valid.
The petition must be perfected within
thirty (30) days of the date that the
Clerk finds the petition defective for
lack of certified signatures. If the
petition is not perfected within the
thirty (30) day period, the Clerk shall
declare the petition null and void ab
initio in its entirety.
B. In the event that a petition filed with
the Clerk is found to contain the
required number of certified
signatures, the Clerk shall promptly,
by certified mail, inform the
petitioner(s), and shall also notify the
Council at its next meeting, that the
initiative or referendum petition is in
proper form.
1. If the petition is for a referendum,
the Council shall have thirty (30) days
from the date of certification of the
petition to repeal the ordinance being
referred to the voters. In the event the
Council repeals the ordinance, the
§ 5-8 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 5-11
referendum petition shall be declared
null and void.
2. If the petition is an initiative
petition, the Council shall have thirty
(30) days to pass an ordinance
substantially as proposed by the
initiative petition. In the event the
Council passes such an ordinance, the
initiative petition shall be null and
void.
3. In the event the Council neither
repeals the ordinance which is the
subject of referendum petition, nor
enacts an ordinance which is the
subject of an initiative petition, an
election shall be ordered pursuant to
Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2011-04, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 5-9. Form of Ballot.
The Council shall prepare a ballot for
an initiative or referendum election in one
of the following ways:
A. If the full text of the ordinance or
proposed ordinance to be voted upon
does not exceed one hundred (100)
words in length, it may be set out in
full on the election ballot; or
B. If the full text of the ordinance or
proposed ordinance to be voted upon
exceeds one hundred (100) words in
length, and the Council votes not to
have it printed at length on the
election ballot, it shall, with the
assistance of the City Attorney,
prepare a short title and description of
the ordinance or proposed ordinance
which shall clearly and impartially
state its purpose and effect, which
short title and description shall be
printed on the election ballot.
Sec. 5-10. Conduct of Election.
Initiative or referendum elections,
whether special or general, shall be
conducted and the results thereof canvassed
and certified in all respects as near as
practicable, in like manner as general
elections, except as otherwise provided.
The timing of special elections for
initiative or referendum shall be as
indicated in Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2008-20, 09/02/2008)
Sec. 5-11. Prohibited Acts, Penalties.
A person is guilty of a misdemeanor,
relative to an initiative or referendum
governed by this Chapter, who:
A. Signs any name other than his own to
any initiative or referendum petition;
B. Knowingly signs his name more than
once on the same initiative or
referendum petition;
C. Knowingly signs his name to any
initiative or referendum petition if he
is not a registered City elector;
D. Willfully or knowingly circulates,
publishes or exhibits any false
statement or representation concerning
the content, purport or effect of any
initiative or referendum petition for
the purpose of obtaining any signature
to any such petition, or for the purpose
of persuading any person to sign any
such petition;
E. Presents to any officer for filing any
initiative or referendum petition to
which is attached, appended or
subscribed any signature which the
person so filing such petition knows to
be false or fraudulent, or not the
genuine signature of the person
purporting to sign such petition, or
whose name is attached, appended or
subscribed thereto.
F. Circulates or causes to circulate any
initiative or referendum petition,
knowing the same to contain false,
forged or fictitious names;
G. Makes any false affidavit concerning
any initiative or referendum petition or
the signatures appended thereto;
H. Offers, proposes, attempts or threatens
in any manner or form for any
pecuniary reward or consideration:
1. To sell, hinder or delay any
initiative or referendum petition or any
part thereof or any signatures thereon;
§ 5-11 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 5-12
2. To desist from beginning,
promoting or circulating any initiative
or referendum petition;
3. To use any recall petition or any
power or promotion or opposition in
any manner or form for extortion,
blackmail or secret or private
intimidation of any person or business
interest.
(Ord. 2011-04, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 5-12. Election Precincts,
Designated.
The City of Moscow is hereby divided
into precincts as set forth on the "Official
Precinct Map of the City of Moscow" on
file in the office of the Latah County Clerk.
Said precincts shall, as nearly as possible
and practicable, conform to the like
designated County election precincts within
the City (including absentee voting
precincts) and shall be amended when
Latah County election precincts within the
City are amended.
(Ord. 2011-04, 06/06/2011)
§ 6-1 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 6-1
Chapter 6
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
Sec. 6-1: Official Newspaper
Sec. 6-1. Official Newspaper.
The Moscow-Pullman Daily News, a
newspaper printed and published in the
City, shall be and is hereby appointed,
designated and constituted the official
newspaper of the City and such writings as
are required under and by virtue of the City
government of the said City to be given
publication in a newspaper shall be
published in said Moscow-Pullman Daily
News.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-213
§ 7-1 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 7-1
Chapter 7
DEPOSITORIES
Sec. 7-1: Designation of Depositories
Sec. 7-1. Designation of
Depositories.
The City Treasurer and Finance
Director shall deposit and keep all moneys
of the City in such depositories as may be
authorized by law as provided for by Idaho
Code, Section 50-1013 and Chapter 1 of
Title 57, Idaho Code.
§ 8-1 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 8-3
Chapter 8
SALARIES
Sec. 8-1: Compensation Shall be
Fixed
Sec. 8-2: Salaries of Elective Officers
Sec. 8-3: Salaries Fixed by Council
Sec. 8-1. Compensation Shall Be
Fixed.
The salary for elective officers shall
be fixed by ordinance. Salary adjustments
for such elective officers shall be made
every two (2) years from the date of the
previous adjustment in accordance and in
proportion with adjustments in the
Consumer Price Index as published by the
United States Department of Labor. Such
adjustments must be specifically approved
by ordinance at least six (6) months prior to
the effective date of such adjustments.
Ref. Idaho Code, § 50-203
Sec. 8-2. Salaries of Elective
Officers.
The salary for elective officers shall
be as follows:
Effective January 1, 2020:
Mayor $2,028.50 per month
Council $ 703.28 per month
(Ord. 97-19, 5/19/97; 99-20, 6/21/99; 2001-12,
08/06/01; 2005-16, 05/16/2005; 2007-06,
07/02/2007; 2009-09, 05/04/2009; 2011-07,
06/20/2011; 2013-09, 05/06/2013; 2015-08,
05/04/2015; 2017-09, 08/07/2017; 2019-03,
05/20/2019)
Sec. 8-3. Salaries Fixed by Council.
Salaries of appointive officers shall be
as fixed by the Council.
(Ord. 97-19, 5/19/97)
§ 9-1 TITLE 1 — GENERAL § 9-3
Chapter 9
PENALTIES
Sec. 9-1: Violation and Penalties
Sec. 9-2: License
Sec. 9-3: Application
Sec. 9-1. Violation and Penalties.
A violation of any section of this Code
or of any section of any uniform code
adopted by the City by a person shall be a
misdemeanor as defined by the Idaho Code
and any amendments thereto and shall
subject such person up to the maximum
misdemeanor penalties in the Idaho Code,
unless otherwise provided by this Code or
by the Idaho Code.
Sec. 9-2. License.
When a person is convicted of a
violation of any section of this Code, any
license previously issued to such person by
the City may be revoked by a court of
competent jurisdiction or by the Council.
Sec. 9-3. Application.
The penalty provided in this Chapter
shall be applicable to every section of this
Code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section. Any
person convicted of a violation of any
section of this Code, where any act or duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or
where any act which is of a continuing
nature is forbidden or declared to be
unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day such act,
duty or obligation remains unperformed or
such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Code.
§ 10-1 TITLE 1 - GENERAL § 10-3
Chapter 10
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 10-1: Definition of City Records
Sec. 10-2: City Records Declared
Public Property
Sec. 10-3: Policy
Sec. 10-4: Records Management
Responsibilities
Sec. 10-5: Responsibilities of City
Department Heads
Sec. 10-6: Responsibilities of Records
Administrators
Sec. 10-7: City Offices to Use Records
Schedules
Sec. 10-8: Development of Records
Retention and Disposition
Schedules
Sec. 10-9: One-Time Destruction of
Obsolete Records
Sec. 10-10: Electronic Mail
Sec. 10-11: Archives
Sec. 10-12: Preservation of Permanent
Records
Sec. 10-13: Non-Current Records Not to
be Maintained in Office
Files
Sec. 10-14: Records Using Photographic
and Digital Media
Sec. 10-15: Accessibility of Records on
Microfilm or Digital Media
Sec. 10-16: Public Disclosure of
Licensing Records
Sec. 10-1. Definition of City Records.
All papers, correspondence,
memoranda, accounts, reports, maps, plans,
photographs, sound and video recordings,
files, microform, magnetic or paper tape,
punched card, or other documents,
regardless of physical form or
characteristic, which have been or shall be
created, received, filed, or recorded by any
City office or department or its lawful
successor, or officials thereof in pursuance
of law or ordinance or in the conduct,
transaction, or performance of any
business, duty, or function of public
business, whether or not confidential or
restricted in use, are hereby declared to be
records of the City of Moscow, and shall be
created, maintained, and disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of this
Ordnance or procedures authorized by it
and in no other manner. Materials acquired
solely for reference, exhibit, or display, and
stocks of publications shall not constitute
records for purposes of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-2. City Records Declared
Public Property.
All City records as defined in 10-1 of
this Chapter, are hereby declared to be
property of the City of Moscow. No City
official or employee has, by virtue of his or
her position, any personal or property right
to such records even though he or she may
have developed or compiled them. The
unauthorized destruction, removal from
files, or private use of such records is
prohibited.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-3. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy
of the City to provide for efficient,
economical, and effective controls over the
creation, distribution, organization,
maintenance, use, and disposition of all
City records through a comprehensive
system of integrated procedures for the
management of records from their creation
to their ultimate disposition.
Periodically the City Clerk or designee
shall review or examine filing systems in
each department / division, make transfers
of records, arrange for disposition of
outdated records and otherwise assist City
officers in complying with the City records
policy.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
§ 10-4 TITLE 1 - GENERAL § 10-6
Sec. 10-4. Records Management
Responsibilities.
The City Clerk or designee is
responsible for directing and coordinating
records management operations among the
City departments and shall have the
following duties:
A. Plan, formulate, and prescribe basic
files management and records
disposition policies, systems,
standards and procedures.
B. Prepare records retention and
disposition schedules in cooperation
with department heads for all City
departments; define and identify vital,
historical and/or permanent records;
and establish retention periods for all
records. Retention periods shall be as
long as deemed necessary by the City
Clerk but may be kept longer based on
the business needs of the originating
office, as noted in the retention
schedule.
C. Review schedules annually and update
or amend as needed.
D. Coordinate the City-wide files
management and records disposition
programs and report annually on
program effectiveness in each City
department.
E. Provide records management advice
and assistance to all City departments.
F. Develop, disseminate, coordinate files
maintenance, records disposition
procedures, and computer assisted
retrieval programs including, but not
limited to, those prescribed by this
Ordinance, in order to meet the current
and long-term information needs of
the City.
G. Provide training to Department
Records Administrators and other
personnel in the fundamentals of
records management and their duties
in the records management program.
H. Implement at the proper time such
actions as destruction, and transfers
that are required by records schedules.
I. Establish and monitor compliance
with standards for filing and storage
equipment in all City departments.
J. Work with all City departments to
facilitate departmental changes to
enable management to realize the
greatest efficiency and effectiveness in
their Records Management programs
as needed.
K. Work, in cooperation with other
responsible City officials, and Director
of Information Systems to establish a
disaster plan for each City department
and the archives to ensure maximum
availability of records for reestablishing
operations quickly and
with minimum disruption and expense.
L. Develop procedures to ensure the
preservation of the historically
valuable records of the City.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-5. Responsibilities of City
Department Heads.
All City department heads are
responsible for the implementation and
operation of effective file operations,
records transfers and dispositions, and
other activities in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance within their
areas of responsibility. They shall
designate Records Administrators within
their departments and provide the City
Clerk the names of such designees.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-6. Responsibilities of Records
Administrators.
The Records Administrator in each
office and/or department is responsible for
providing coordination between the City
Clerk and personnel in his or her office to
ensure compliance with the provisions of
this Records Management Ordinance. This
responsibility shall include supervising the
application of records schedules within the
office or department.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
§ 10-7 TITLE 1 - GENERAL § 10-11
Sec. 10-7. City Offices to Use
Records Schedules.
All City departments shall adopt
records retention and disposition schedules
and destroy, transfer, or otherwise dispose
of records in accordance with policies set
forth by the records schedules.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-8. Development of Records
Retention and Disposition
Schedules.
Retention periods to be included in
records schedules shall be submitted by the
City Clerk to the City Attorney. The City
Attorney shall notify the City Clerk within
ten (10) working days of the approval or of
any objection to a retention period. At the
expiration of the ten (10) day period, if no
objection has been submitted, the records
schedule shall be adopted by resolution of
the City Council and shall have full force
as sufficient authorization for records
destruction or other action. If objection is
made, the City Clerk, in consultation with
and upon the advice of the City Attorney,
shall determine a retention period
satisfactory to the office or department
concerned.
When a records retention and
disposition schedule is adopted by
resolution of the City Council, it shall
thenceforth constitute full authority to
transfer, microfilm, image, prepare for
destruction or take other actions, with
respect to City records. The City Council
hereby directs that such action be taken by
the City Clerk or under his or her
supervision. The City Clerk shall provide
written notification to the pertinent
department, State Historical Society, and
the City Council of intended destruction, as
required by law.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-9. One-Time Destruction of
Obsolete Records.
Prior to the implementation of the
records management program for a
department, a one (1) time destruction of
obsolete records of that department may be
made by the department, under the
supervision of the City Clerk. Prior to such
destruction, the City Clerk shall submit, to
the City Attorney, lists of records to be
destroyed, who shall give notice of any
records they believe should not be
destroyed, and such records shall be
retained for a period suggested by them.
The City Clerk shall also submit notice as
required by law to the State Historical
Society and the City Council. Obsolete
records shall include those no longer
created by the office or department and no
longer are needed for administrative, legal,
fiscal, or other research purposes.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-10. Electronic Mail.
Electronic mail, also known as e-mail,
whether created or received, shall be
retained for a period of two (2) years and
then automatically removed from the City’s
exchange server. Electronic mail that is
related to pending or threatened litigation
will be retained until the litigation is
concluded or the applicable statute of
limitations has expired. Electronic mail
that is the subject of a “litigation hold”
shall be retained for such time as indicated
in such “hold”. Department directors, and
heads of divisions, may designate certain
electronic mail as semi-permanent or
permanent records and must retain those
records in a format and location separate
from the exchange server.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-11. Archives.
The Archival operation shall utilize
one (1) or more buildings to store inactive
records; to ensure the security of such
records from deterioration, theft, or damage
during the period of storage; and to permit
fast, efficient retrieval of information from
stored records.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
§ 10-12 TITLE 1 - GENERAL § 10-16
Sec. 10-12. Preservation of Permanent
Records.
The City Clerk shall develop
procedures to ensure the permanent
preservation of the historically valuable
records of the City. The City Clerk shall
provide housing for such records in a
municipal facility and in such manner that
the records, unless their use is restricted by
law or regulation, are open to the public for
research purposes. In no circumstances
shall the permanent records of the City be
transferred to private individuals, to private
historical societies or museums, or to
private or public colleges or universities.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-13. Non-Current Records Not
to be Maintained in Office
Files.
Records no longer required to support
current operation of the City shall be
transferred to less costly off-site storage, or
be destroyed, when such action is indicated
by any approved records schedule. Such
records shall not be maintained in active
office files or equipment.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-14. Records Using
Photographic and Digital
Media.
A. City may reproduce and retain
documents in a photographic, digital
or other non-paper medium, as
provided by Idaho Code § 50-909.
The medium in which a document is
retained shall accurately reproduce the
document in paper form during the
period for which the document must
be retained and shall preclude
unauthorized alteration of the
document.
B. If the medium chosen for retention is
photographic, all film used must meet
the quality standards of the National
Archives and Records Administration
Technical Guidelines for Digitizing
Archival Materials for Electronic
Access: Creation of Production
Master Files, June 2004 and records
management software that meets
Department of Defense’s Design
Criteria Standard for Electronic
Records Management Software to
meet the standards set for the State of
Idaho.
C. A document retained by the City in
any form or medium permitted under
this Section shall be deemed an
original public record for all purposes.
A reproduction or copy of such a
document, certified by the City Clerk,
shall be deemed to be a transcript or
certified copy of the original and shall
be admissible before any court or
administrative hearing.
D. Once a paper document is retained in a
non-paper medium as authorized by
this Section, the original paper
document may be disposed of or
returned to the sender, except in the
case of permanent records, as defined
in Idaho Code § 50-907. Paper
originals of permanent records shall be
retained by the City in perpetuity, or
may be transferred to the Idaho State
Historical Society’s permanent records
repository upon resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-15. Accessibility of Records on
Microfilm or Digital
Media.
The public is hereby given identical
access to records on microfilm, or digital
media to which they would be entitled
under law if the records were in any other
medium. A reasonable fee is to be charged
for reproduction of official or unofficial
copies from records on microfilm or digital
media.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
Sec. 10-16. Public Disclosure of
Licensing Records.
A. Except as provided in paragraph B
(hereinbelow), the City Clerk or
§ 10-16 TITLE 1 - GENERAL § 10-16
designee is authorized to release or
disclose to parties other than those to
whom the record pertains, all
information received by or retained by
the City Clerk’s office, including
names, addresses, and criminal records
(other than N.C.I.C. reports and Latah
County Arrest/Non-Arrest records) of
applicants, licensees, child care
operators, child care workers, child
care volunteers, and juvenile child
care workers, a child care facility’s
owners, officers and chief agents, if
any, and persons residing in a child
care facility.
B. The City Clerk or designee shall not
disclose or release the following:
1. Any personal information,
including, but not limited to,
parentage, race, religion, sex, height,
weight, tax identification number,
social security number, financial
worth or medical condition;
2. Reports and correspondence
received from the Idaho Department of
Health and Welfare or a similar
agency of another state relating to
child protection matters;
3. Complaints, reports and records
concerning incidents which the City
Clerk’s office verifies are unfounded
or unsubstantiated or do not fall within
the purview of duties assigned the City
Clerk’s office by ordinance; and
4. Investigatory records of a law
enforcement agency, as required by
Idaho Code § 9-335.
C. The City Clerk or designee may
require that requests for information
contained in the records of the City
Clerk’s office be made in writing, may
require the name and address of the
requesting party and may rely on
requests submitted by facsimile
transmission. All such written
requests shall be retained and are
subject to disclosure under the Idaho
Public Records Act upon proper
request.
(Ord. 2015-09, 06/15/2015)
§ 1-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 1-5
Chapter 1
MAYOR
Sec. 1-1: Mayor; Duties
Sec. 1-2: Mayor May Convene Special
Meeting of Council
Sec. 1-3: Mayor to Sign Contracts
Sec. 1-4: Mayor May Offer Reward
Sec. 1-5: Veto Power of Mayor
Sec. 1-6: Accounts and Reports of
Officers
Sec. 1-7: Police Power of Mayor
Sec. 1-8: Mayor May Require Aid
Sec. 1-9: Mayor May Issue Subpoenas
Sec. 1-10: Other Powers
Sec. 1-11: Election; Term of Office
Sec. 1-12: Vacancy in Office of Mayor
Sec. 1-1. Mayor; Duties.
The Mayor, the superintending and
administrative officer of the City, shall
devote so much of the Mayor's time to the
duties of the Mayor's office as an efficient
and faithful discharge thereof may require.
The Mayor shall from time to time give the
Council such information and recommend
such measures as the Mayor may deem
beneficial to the City. The Mayor shall
examine the grounds of all complaints
against any of the City administrators to
determine existence of a violation or
neglect of duty and report the evidence
thereof, if deemed sufficient for the
removal of said City administrator, to the
Council. The Mayor shall require that
every City administrator, on the expiration
of such City administrator’s term of office
or resignation or removal from the same,
deliver to such City administrator’s
successor all moneys, books, papers, maps,
plats, furniture, fixtures, apparatus,
machinery, tools and instruments and
appurtenances belonging to such office.
The Mayor shall perform all other duties
imposed by law.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97)
Sec. 1-2. Mayor May Convene
Special Meeting of
Council.
The Mayor shall have the power to
call special meetings of the Council, the
object of which shall be submitted to the
Council in writing; the call and object, as
well as the disposition thereof, shall be
entered upon the records by the Clerk.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-604
Sec. 1-3. Mayor to Sign Contracts.
The Mayor is authorized and
empowered to sign his or her name
officially for and on behalf of the City on
all contracts, including deeds, bonds, bills,
notes, obligations and other agreements,
documents and papers, to which the City is
a party and to require that the conditions in
the said instruments are faithfully
performed and to borrow money on the
credit of the City when authorized by the
Council.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-607
Sec. 1-4. Mayor May Offer Reward.
The Mayor, whenever the Mayor
deems it expedient, is hereby empowered to
offer a reward not exceeding One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) for the arrest and
conviction of any person charged with
violating this Code.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-607
Sec. 1-5. Veto Power of Mayor.
The Mayor shall have power to veto or
sign any ordinance or resolution passed by
the Council provided any ordinance or
resolution vetoed by the Mayor may be
passed over the Mayor's veto by a vote of
one-half (1/2) plus one (1) of the members
of the full Council elected notwithstanding
the veto, and should the Mayor neglect or
refuse to sign any ordinance or resolution
and return with his or her objection, in
writing, at the next regular meeting of the
Council, the same shall become a law
without the Mayor's signature.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-611
§ 1-6 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 1-12
Sec. 1-6. Accounts and Reports of
Officers.
The Mayor shall have the power, when
he or she deems it necessary, to require any
City administrator of the City to exhibit
such City administrator’s accounts or other
papers, and to make reports to the Council
in writing touching upon any subject or
matter the Mayor may require pertaining to
such City administrator’s office.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-605
Sec. 1-7. Police Power of Mayor.
The Mayor shall have jurisdiction over
all places within five (5) miles of the City
for the enforcement of any health or
quarantine ordinance and regulations
thereof, and shall have jurisdiction in all
matters, except taxation, within one mile of
the City, and over such properties as may
be owned by the City without the corporate
limits.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-606
Sec. 1-8. Mayor May Require Aid.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to call
on every inhabitant in the City over the age
of twenty-one (21) and under the age of
fifty (50) years to aid in enforcing the laws.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-609
Sec. 1-9. Mayor May Issue
Subpoenas
A. The Mayor is hereby authorized to
subpoena any person in the City to
testify as a witness in any proceeding
arising out of such Mayor’s duties as
set forth by this Code and the Idaho
Code and in furtherance of a corporate
City purpose.
B. One-half (1/2) plus one (1) of the
members of the full Council may veto
any subpoena after issuance of such
subpoena by the Mayor.
C. Any person or persons who willfully
fails to appear after being served with
a subpoena under this Chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
fined up to One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) per day for a maximum of
three (3) days for such person’s failure
to appear and testify as required by the
subpoena.
D. Such fine may be waived subsequent
to appearance by the person pursuant
to subpoena or for good cause.
E. The Mayor may designate another
person to exercise such subpoena
power so long as such subpoena
power is limited as follows:
1. The Mayor shall specify the
specific purpose for which a witness is
subpoenaed to testify.
2. The Mayor shall specify a
specific time period during which a
witness is subpoenaed to testify.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97)
Sec. 1-10. Other Powers.
The Mayor shall have all other powers
granted by the laws of this State, not
specifically enumerated herein.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-607
Sec. 1-11. Election; Term of Office.
The Mayor shall be nominated and
elected in accordance with the laws of the
State of Idaho and the Mayor's term of
office shall be four (4) years.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-601
Sec. 1-12. Vacancy in Office of
Mayor
In case of a temporary vacancy in the
office of Mayor due to absence or
disability, the president of the Council shall
exercise the office of Mayor during such
disability or temporary absence, and until
the Mayor shall return. When a vacancy
occurs in the office of Mayor by reason of
death, resignation or permanent disability,
the Council shall fill the vacancy from
within or without the Council as may be
deemed in the best interests of the City,
which appointee shall serve until the next
general City election, at which election a
Mayor shall be elected for a full four (4)
year term.
(Ord. 97-24, 7/7/97); Ref. Idaho Code § 50-608
§ 2-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 2-6
Chapter 2
COUNCIL
Sec. 2-1: Regular Meetings
Sec. 2-2: Special Meetings of Council
Sec. 2-3: Cancellation of Meetings
Sec. 2-4: Quorum
Sec. 2-5: Ordinance Presentment
Sec. 2-6: Manner of Passing
Sec. 2-7: Exception
Sec. 2-8: Endorsement
Sec. 2-9: Passage Over Mayor's Veto
Sec. 2-10: Becomes Law Without
Signature
Sec. 2-11: Preservation
Sec. 2-12: Election, Term of Office
Sec. 2-13: First Meeting Conduct
Sec. 2-14: Consent Agenda
Sec. 2-15: City Council President
Sec. 2-16: City Council Vice President
Sec. 2-17: Administrative Committee
Sec. 2-18: Public Works/Finance
Committee
Sec. 2-1. Regular Meetings.
The regular meetings of the Council
shall be held in the City Hall on the first
and third Monday in each and every month
at seven (7:00) o'clock P.M.
If the first or third Monday in any
month shall fall upon a legal holiday, then
the regular meeting of the Council shall, for
such month, be on the next succeeding day
at seven (7:00) o'clock P.M.
(Ord. 2003-04; 02/18/03; 2010-02, 01/19/2010)
Sec. 2-2. Special Meetings of
Council.
One half (1/2) plus one (1) of the
members of the full Council shall have the
power to call special meetings of the
Council, the object of which shall be
submitted to the Council in writing; the call
and object, as well as the disposition
thereof, shall be entered upon the journal of
the Clerk.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-706, (Ord. 2003-04; 02/18/03;
2010-02, 01/19/2010)
Sec. 2-3. Cancellation of Meetings.
One half (1/2) plus one (1) of the
members of the full Council shall have the
power to cancel a regular or special
meeting of the Council as long as such
cancellation occurs not less than twenty
four (24) hours prior to the scheduled
regular or special meeting that is the
subject of such cancellation.
(Ord. 2010-04, 02/16/2010)
Sec. 2-4. Quorum
At all meetings of the Council a
majority of the full Council shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business;
unless otherwise provided by law, a
question before the Council shall be
decided by a majority of the members
present.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-705
Sec. 2-5. Ordinance Presentment.
All ordinances of the City shall be
typewritten or printed and shall be
presented to the Council by a member at
any regular or special meeting.
Sec. 2-6. Manner of Passing.
Every such ordinance shall be read in
meetings of the Council on three (3)
different days, two (2) readings of which
may be by title only and one (1) reading of
which shall be in full. At each such
reading of an ordinance it shall be open to
discussion and amendment and may be
referred to a committee and shall be passed
to the next reading unless by vote of the
meeting some other disposition is made.
For final passage of ordinances which have
been amended, the yeas and nays shall be
called and recorded and a concurrence of a
majority of the whole number of members
of the Council shall be required for
passage. Provided however, that one-half
(1/2) plus one (1) of the members of the
full Council may dispense with the portions
of this Chapter requiring all ordinances to
be read on three (3) different days, and on
the vote upon the motion to dispense with
the above provisions, the yeas and nays
shall be called and recorded.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-902.
§ 2-7 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 2-13
Sec. 2-7. Exception
The Council may however, revise,
codify, and compile from time to time and
to publish in book or pamphlet form all
ordinances of the city of a general and
permanent nature and to make such
changes, alterations, modifications,
additions, and substitutions therein as it
may deem best to the end that a complete,
simplified code of such ordinances then in
force shall be presented, but with errors,
inconsistencies, repetitions, and
ambiguities therein eliminated.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-903
Sec. 2-8. Endorsement.
When any such ordinance is passed it
shall be signed by the Clerk, and the date of
its passage by the Council shall be added
thereto, and it shall within three (3) days
thereafter be presented to the Mayor, or, in
case of the Mayor's absence from the City,
to the President of the Council, for his or
her approval. If the President of the
Council approves the same, the President of
the Council shall sign such ordinance.
Sec. 2-9. Passage Over Mayor's
Veto.
Should the Mayor not approve the
ordinance he or she shall, before the next
regular meeting after such ordinance is
presented to the Mayor for approval, return
the same to the Council with the Mayor’s
objections to the same in writing. When
any ordinance is so returned by the Mayor,
it shall be reconsidered by the Council at
the first regular meeting thereafter. If, on
such reconsideration, one-half (1/2) plus
one (1) of the members elected to the
Council shall vote in the affirmative, the
ordinance shall become a law
notwithstanding the Mayor's veto. The
Clerk, in such case, shall annex a certificate
to the ordinance stating that the same was
vetoed by the Mayor and that, on its
reconsideration, it received the required
majority of votes.
Sec. 2-10. Becomes Law Without
Signature.
Should the Mayor refuse or neglect to
sign such ordinance and return the same
with his or her objections in writing at the
next regular meeting after the same has
been presented to the Mayor, it shall
become law without the Mayor’s signature.
The Clerk shall annex to such ordinance a
certificate to the effect that the Mayor has
failed to sign or veto the same, and it has
therefore become a law without the
Mayor’s signature.
Sec. 2-11. Preservation.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk to
safely keep the original ordinances as
engrossed and after final passage the Clerk
shall copy the same at length in a book to
be known as Ordinance Book No. ______,
which book is to be provided by the
Council for that purpose and shall be kept
as a permanent record of the City.
Sec. 2-12. Election, Term of Office.
A. Number Designated. The number of
Council members for the City shall be
six (6) in number; they shall be
nominated and elected in accordance
with the laws of the State of Idaho;
their election shall be at large and their
term of office shall be four (4) years.
B. Declaration of Election. The three (3)
persons receiving the largest number
of votes shall be declared to be elected
for the four-year (4) seats available. If
other Council seats are available, the
candidates receiving the highest
number of votes shall be declared to
be elected to such seats.
(Ord. 89-14, 6/5/89)
Sec. 2-13. First Meeting Conduct.
Council persons elected at each
general City election shall be installed at
the first meeting in January following such
election. The manner of conducting that
meeting shall be as herein set forth and not
otherwise; the incumbents shall meet and
§ 2-13 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 2-17
conduct such business as may be necessary
to conclude the fiscal matters of the
preceding year; the newly elected members
shall then subscribe to the oath of office, be
presented certificates of election, assume
the duties of their position, and conduct
such business as may be necessary, one (1)
item of which shall be the election of a
member as president of the Council.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-702
Sec. 2-14. Consent Agenda.
A. When it is determined that an item is
of a routine and non-controversial
nature by the Mayor and Council or
the members of a Council committee,
such item may be presented at a
regular meeting of the Council as part
of the consent agenda.
B. Items of business which may be
considered on the consent agenda may
include, but need not be limited to the
following: approval of minutes;
approval of citizen appointments;
referrals to committees; approval of
reports; approval of authorization of
communications; approval of
resolutions or other items which had
been considered by the Council at
earlier meetings; setting of public
hearings.
C. The consent agenda may be
considered by the Council as a single
item and may be introduced by a
motion to approve the consent agenda.
D. On objection to the inclusion of any
item on the consent agenda by any
member of the Council, that item shall
be removed from the consent agenda
forthwith and may be considered at
any later time in the meeting which the
Mayor deems appropriate. Neither a
formal motion nor a second is
necessary to remove an item from the
consent agenda. Such objections shall
be recorded prior to taking the vote to
approve the consent agenda. Approval
of the consent agenda will not affect
the consideration of any item removed
from the consent agenda.
E. There shall be no debate or discussion
of any item on a consent agenda
beyond asking questions for a simple
verification.
F. Approval of the motion to approve the
consent agenda shall be fully
equivalent to approval, adoption, or
enactment of each motion, resolution,
or other item of business thereon
exactly as if each had been acted upon
individually. Approval of the motion
must be by a roll call vote. The Clerk
shall record in the Council minutes
each item passed under the consent
agenda, individually and in full.
(Ord. 82-1489, 3/1/82)
Sec. 2-15. City Council President.
The Council shall elect a President
from among its members during its first
meeting in January every year. The
Council President shall serve as Mayor and
shall have all of the duties and powers of
the Mayor during periods when the Mayor
is absent from the City or incapacitated.
The Council President shall have such
other duties and responsibilities as the
Council may from time to time direct by
vote or by resolution.
(Ord. 91-11, 3/25/91)
Sec. 2-16. City Council Vice
President.
The Council shall elect a Vice
President from among its members during
its first meeting in January every year. The
Council Vice President shall serve as
Mayor and shall have all of the duties and
powers of the Mayor during periods when
the Mayor and the Council President are
both either absent from the City or are
incapacitated. The Council Vice President
shall serve as Council President during
periods when the President is absent from
the City or incapacitated. The Council
Vice President shall have such other duties
and responsibilities as the Council may
from time to time direct by vote or by
resolution.
(Ord. 91-11, 3/25/91)
Sec. 2-17. Administrative Committee.
The Administrative Committee shall
be made up of three (3) Council members
appointed by the Council. The Committee
§ 2-17 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 2-18
shall meet on a regular basis to consider
matters concerning Police, Fire, Parks and
Recreation, Community Development,
Legal, personnel, and other administrative
affairs of the City Notice of Administrative
Committee meetings shall comport with the
Idaho Code.. The Administrative
Committee shall report and make
recommendations to the Council on a
regular basis. It shall select a chairperson
who shall direct the meeting and oversee
preparation of agendas. The
Administrative Committee Chair, or the
Vice Chair of the Administrative
Committee, in the absence or incapacity of
the Administrative Committee Chair, shall
serve as Mayor and shall have all of the
duties and powers of the Mayor during
periods when the Mayor, Council
President, and Council Vice President are
absent from the City or are incapacitated.
The Administrative Committee Chair or
Vice Chair shall have such other duties and
responsibilities as the Council may from
time to time direct by vote or by resolution.
(Ord. 91-11, 3/25/91; 2004-38, 12/20/2004; 2013-11,
06/03/2013)
Sec. 2-18. Public Works/Finance
Committee.
The Public Works/Finance Committee
shall be made up of three (3) Council
members appointed by the Council. The
Committee shall meet on a regular basis to
consider matters concerning the public
works activities, solid waste issues of the
City, and financial matters, including
insurance. Notice of Public Works/Finance
Committee meetings shall comport with the
Idaho Code. The Public Works/Finance
Committee shall report to and make
recommendations to the Council on a
regular basis. It shall select a chairperson
who shall direct the meeting and oversee
preparation of agendas. The Public
Works/Finance Committee Chair, or the
Vice Chair of the Public Works/Finance
Committee, in the absence or incapacity of
the Public Works/Finance Committee
Chair, shall serve as Mayor and shall have
all of the duties and powers of the Mayor
during periods when the Mayor, Council
President, Council Vice President,
Administrative Committee Chair and Vice
Chair are absent from the City or are
incapacitated. The Public Works/Finance
Committee Chair or Vice Chair shall have
such other duties and responsibilities as the
Council may from time to time direct by
vote or by resolution.
(Ord. 91-11, 3/25/91; 2004-38, 12/20/2004; 2013-11,
06/03/2013)
§ 3-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 3-3
Chapter 3
APPOINTMENTS, TERMS OF
OFFICE, BONDS
Sec. 3-1: Appointment by Mayor
Sec. 3-2: Term of Office
Sec. 3-3: Bonds of Employees or
Officers
Sec. 3-1. Appointment by Mayor.
The Mayor, with the approval of the
Council, shall appoint a Clerk, Attorney,
Public Works Director, Chief of Police,
Chief of the Fire Department, Treasurer,
City Supervisor and such other officers as
may be deemed advisable for the efficient
operation of the City.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-204
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 3-2. Term of Office.
All appointive officers shall hold
office for the term for which they were
appointed and qualified: provided, that any
appointive officer may be removed by the
Mayor for any cause by him or her deemed
sufficient; but such removal shall be by and
with the affirmative vote of one-half (l/2)
plus one (1) of the members of the full
Council; provided, that the Council, by the
unanimous vote of all its members, may
upon their own initiative remove any
appointive officer.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-206
Sec. 3-3. Bonds of Employees or
Officers.
The several officers herein named
shall execute a bond to the City in such
penal sum as the Council may by ordinance
determine, conditioned on the faithful
performance of their duties.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-204
§ 4-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 4-4
Chapter 4
CITY SUPERVISOR
Sec. 4-1: Office Established,
Appointment and
Removal, Scope of
Authority
Sec. 4-2: Duties, Powers and
Responsibilities
Sec. 4-3: Classified Position
Sec. 4-4: Combination of Position
Sec. 4-1. Office Established,
Appointment and
Removal, Scope of
Authority.
There is hereby established the office
of City Supervisor, which office shall be
filled by the appointment of the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by a majority of the
Council. The City Supervisor shall be
subject to removal by the Mayor with
consent of the Council or by unanimous
vote of the Council. The City Supervisor
shall be the administrative assistant,
executive and liaison officer for the City,
under the direction and authority of the
Mayor.
Sec. 4-2. Duties, Powers and
Responsibilities.
The City Supervisor shall have the
following specific duties, powers and
responsibilities, in addition to others
provided in this Chapter or otherwise:
A. Under the direction and authority of
the Mayor, the City Supervisor shall
supervise, administer and coordinate
the activities and functions of the
various City officers and departments
in carrying out the requirements of
City ordinances and the policies of the
Council.
B. The City Supervisor shall regularly
report to the Mayor concerning the
status of all assignments, duties,
projects and functions of the various
City offices, departments, boards and
commissions.
C. The City Supervisor shall cause to be
prepared and submitted to the City
Supervisor by each department,
division or service of the City
government, itemized annual estimates
of expenditures required by any of
them and submit a report thereof to the
Mayor, with the recommendation of
the City Supervisor, prior to the
passage of the annual appropriation
ordinance.
D. The City Supervisor shall supervise all
purchases and expenditures by the
various City offices, departments,
commissions and boards, for the
purpose of keeping the same within
the limitations of the annual budget of
the City.
E. The City Supervisor shall serve as the
chief public information officer of the
City.
F. The City Supervisor shall attend all
meetings of the Council with the duty
of reporting any matter concerning
City affairs under his or her
supervision.
G. The City Supervisor shall assist the
Mayor generally in conducting the
City's business in all matters, and
perform such other duties and assume
such other responsibilities as the
Council through the Mayor may direct
or as by ordinances and resolutions of
the Council may be required.
Sec. 4-3. Classified Position.
The position of City Supervisor shall
be a classified position at a grade level
determined by the Mayor and Council. All
rules and regulations and fringe benefits set
forth in the City of Moscow Personnel
Policies, as amended by the Council from
time to time, shall apply to this position.
(Ord. 84-17, 8/20/84)
Sec. 4-4. Combination of Position.
The office of City Supervisor may be
combined with any other appointive
position in the City; provided, that where
combined, the compensation shall be fixed
§ 4-4 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 4-4
by the Council for the combined office and
shall not necessarily be the total of the
compensation fixed for each office
individually.
§ 5-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 5-3
Chapter 5
CITY CLERK
Sec. 5-1: Office Established
Sec. 5-2: Duties
Sec. 5-3: Bonding Requirement
Sec. 5-1. Office Established.
There is hereby established the office
of City Clerk, which office shall be filled
by appointment of the Mayor, with consent
of the Council, who shall hold office for
the duration of the Clerk's appointment or
until such time as the Clerk may be
removed by the Mayor, or as provided by
law.
Sec. 5-2. Duties.
In addition to the duties imposed upon
the Clerk by Idaho Code, it shall be the
duty of the Clerk to attend Council
meetings and keep a fair and correct
journal of the proceedings of the Council;
to file and keep all books and papers of the
Council; to keep and reserve all records
and books entrusted to the Clerk; to affix
the Seal of the City to instruments required
to be executed by the Clerk under the City's
Seal; to sign warrants authorized by the
Council; to administer oaths; and to
perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by this Code and the ordinances
and resolutions of the City or as the Mayor
may direct.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-207
Sec. 5-3. Bonding Requirement
The Clerk, before entering upon the
duties of the office, shall execute a bond to
the City in such penal sum as the Council
may by ordinance determine, conditioned
on the faithful performance of the Clerk's
duties.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-204
§ 6-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 6-4
Chapter 6
CITY TREASURER AND
FINANCE DIRECTOR
Sec. 6-1: Office Established
Sec. 6-2: Duties
Sec. 6-3: Deposit of City Funds
Sec. 6-4: Bonding Requirement
Sec. 6-1. Office Established.
There is hereby established the office
of City Treasurer and Finance Director,
which office shall be filled by appointment
of the Mayor, with consent of the Council,
who shall hold office for the duration of the
City Treasurer and Finance Director's
appointment or until such time as he or she
may be removed by the Mayor, or as
provided by law.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-204
Sec. 6-2. Duties.
In addition to the duties imposed upon
the City Treasurer and Finance Director by
Idaho Code, the City Treasurer shall
receive and keep all money that shall come
into the City by taxation or otherwise, and
pay out of the same by check signed by the
Mayor and City Treasurer and Finance
Director as provided by Idaho Code. The
City Treasurer and Finance Director shall
keep the books of account of the City,
including an account of the general fund,
and a separate account of the separate
funds that may be created for any specific
object. Such records shall be maintained in
accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles for municipalities.
The City Treasurer and Finance Director
shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by the ordinances and
regulations of the City or as the Mayor may
direct.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-208
Sec. 6-3. Deposit of City Funds.
The City Treasurer and Finance
Director shall deposit and keep all moneys
of the City in such depositories as may be
authorized by law.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-208
Sec. 6-4 Bonding Requirement
The City Treasurer and Finance
Director shall, before entering upon the
duties of the office, execute a bond to the
City in such penal sum as the Council may
by ordinance determine, conditioned on the
faithful performance of the City Treasurer
and Finance Director's duties.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-204
§ 7-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 7-5
Chapter 7
CHIEF OF POLICE
Sec. 7-1: Office Established
Sec. 7-2: Duties
Sec. 7-3: Appointment of Police
Personnel
Sec. 7-4: Police Officer
Sec. 7-5: Officers May Call for
Assistance
Sec. 7-1. Office Established.
There is hereby established the office
of Chief of Police, which office shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor, with
consent of the Council, who shall hold
office for the duration of the Chief of
Police's appointment or until such time as he
or she may be removed by the Mayor, or as
provided by law.
Sec. 7-2. Duties.
In addition to the duties imposed upon
the Chief of Police by Idaho Code, it shall
be the duty of the Chief of Police, under the
direction of the Mayor, to preserve the
public peace and see that all laws are
enforced within the City and to perform
such other duties as may be prescribed by
this Code and the ordinances and
resolutions of the City or as the Mayor may
direct.
Sec. 7-3. Appointment of Police
Personnel.
The Chief of Police shall appoint such
other police personnel as are necessary to
assist the Chief of Police in discharging his
or her duties. All such appointments shall
be in accordance with adopted rules and
regulations therefor and shall be subject to
approval by the Mayor.
Sec. 7-4. Police Officer.
All police officers shall be under the
supervision of the Chief of Police and
subject to his or her orders, except in cases
otherwise provided for by law. It shall be
the police officers' duty to preserve the
public peace and to see that all laws are
enforced within the City and to perform
such other duties as may be prescribed by
this Code and the ordinance and resolutions
of the City or as the Chief of Police may
direct.
Sec. 7-5. Officers May Call for
Assistance.
It shall be unlawful for any person who
shall be requested by the Chief of Police or
any police officer to assist him or her in
discharging such officer's duty in an
emergency situation to refuse or fail to
render to the best of such person's ability
such aid as is required.
§ 8-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 8-7
Chapter 8
FIRE CHIEF
Sec. 8-1: Office Established
Sec. 8-2: Duties
Sec. 8-3: Authority at Fire Scene
Sec. 8-4: Demolition Power
Sec. 8-5: Use of Public Right-of-Way
Sec. 8-6: Firefighters May Call for
Assistance
Sec. 8-7: Moscow Volunteer Fire
Department
Sec. 8-1. Office Established.
There is hereby established the office
of Fire Chief, which office shall be filled
by appointment of the Mayor, with consent
of the Council and with the advice and
consent of the Moscow Volunteer Fire
Department membership, and shall hold
office for the duration of his or her
appointment or until such time as the Fire
Chief may be removed by the Mayor, or as
provided by law.
Sec. 8-2. Duties.
In addition to the duties imposed upon
the Fire Chief by Idaho Code and/or by
contract, the Fire Chief shall supervise and
administer the fire education, suppression
and prevention and affairs of the City, and
shall superintend and manage any contact
between the City and the Moscow
Volunteer Fire Department membership,
subject to the approval of the Mayor. The
Fire Chief shall perform such other duties
as may be prescribed by the ordinances,
resolutions and regulations of the City or as
directed by the Mayor.
Sec. 8-3. Authority at Fire Scene.
The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's
designee shall have absolute command and
control at the scene of any fire including
control over the street adjacent to the fire
scene. This authority shall continue until
the Fire Chief, or the next designee,
determines that the fire is fully suppressed.
While attending fires and answering fire
calls, the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's
designee shall have the authority of a
police officer.
(Ord. 89-11, 5/15/89)
Sec. 8-4. Demolition Power.
The Fire Chief, or any firefighter
under his or her command at a fire, may,
with the concurrence and consent of the
Mayor, destroy, or cause to be destroyed,
part or all of any building or structure
during the progress of a fire, for the
purpose of checking or extinguishing the
same.
Sec. 8-5. Use of Public Right-of-
Way.
The Fire Chief and any firefighter
under his or her command, shall, in going
to or from, or while attending emergencies,
fires or drills, have and be entitled to the
right-of-way upon all streets, alleys, and
sidewalks within the City.
Sec. 8-6. Firefighters May Call for
Assistance.
It shall be unlawful for any person
who shall be requested by the Fire Chief or
any firefighter to assist him or her in
discharging his or her duties in an
emergency situation, to refuse or fail to
render to the best of his or her ability such
aid as is required.
Sec. 8-7. Moscow Volunteer Fire
Department.
The City may, on an ongoing basis,
contract with the Moscow Volunteer Fire
Department for fire prevention, fire
suppression and other services. The words
"Fire Department," when used in City
codes and the Uniform Fire Code shall
mean the Moscow Volunteer Fire
Department.
(Ord. 89-11, 5/15/89)
§ 9-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 9-2
Chapter 9
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
Sec. 9-1: Office Established
Sec. 9-2: Duties
Sec. 9-1. Office Established.
There is hereby established the office
of Public Works Director, which office
shall be filled by appointment of the
Mayor, with consent of the Council, who
shall hold office for the duration of the
Public Works Director's appointment or
until such time as the Public Works
Director may be removed by the Mayor or
as provided by law.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 9-2. Duties.
In addition to any duties imposed upon
the Public Works Director by Idaho Code
and/or City Code, the Public Works
Director shall plan, organize, supervise,
and direct the activities and operations of
the Public Works Department including
engineering, streets, water, sewer, and
wastewater treatment and related activities,
and shall serve as liaison for the Public
Works Department to the Council. The
Public Works Director shall direct the
preparation and maintenance of a variety of
narrative, engineering, public works, and
statistical reports, records and files related
to all of the activities and operations of the
Public Works Department, including those
which are required to be created and
maintained by the City Engineer. The
Public Works Director shall supervise the
preparation of plans, specifications, and
estimates for and supervise and oversee the
review of all construction of any public
works projects when health and safety is
involved. The Public Works Director shall
direct the preparation and establishment of
technical standards, methods and
procedures for all construction that is or
which may become the responsibility of the
City, and shall see that such are executed.
Engineering records of the City shall be
maintained by the Public Works
Department. The Public Works Director
shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by the Idaho Code, ordinances,
resolutions and regulations of the Council
or as may be directed by the Mayor. The
Public Works Director shall employ and
shall supervise a City Engineer and/or other
licensed professional engineers, as
necessary.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
§ 10-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 10-2
Chapter 10
CITY ATTORNEY
Sec. 10-1: Appointment
Sec. 10-2: Duties
Sec. 10-1. Appointment.
The Mayor shall appoint, with
approval of the Council, an Attorney
licensed by the State of Idaho who shall
hold office for the duration of the City
Attorney's appointment or until such time
as the City Attorney may be removed by
the Mayor, or as provided by law.
Sec. 10-2. Duties.
A. The City Attorney shall be the legal
advisor of the City of Moscow, and
may represent the City in all suits or
proceedings in which the City is
interested.
B. The City Attorney shall perform such
other duties as may be prescribed by
ordinances and resolutions duly
passed.
C. The City Attorney shall prosecute
violations of City ordinances, state
traffic infractions and state
misdemeanors committed within the
City limits, and shall exercise the
same powers as the county prosecutor.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-208A
§ 11-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 11-2
Chapter 11
HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR
Sec. 11-1: Office Established;
Appointment and Removal
Sec. 11-2: Duties
Sec. 11-1. Office Established;
Appointment and Removal.
There is hereby established the office
of Human Resources Director, which office
shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor,
with consent of the Council, who shall hold
office for the duration of such appointment
or until such time as the Human Resources
Director may be removed by the Mayor, or
as provided by law.
Sec. 11-2. Duties.
The Human Resources Director shall
have the following specific duties, powers,
and responsibilities:
A. Under the direction of the City
Supervisor, the Human Resources
Director shall plan, develop, supervise,
administer, monitor, and evaluate Citywide
Human Resources and Risk
Management programs; and shall
assure compliance with applicable
local, state, and federal laws, rules, and
regulations; and shall serve as the
City’s Title VI Civil Rights
Coordinator charged with
responsibility for the City’s compliance
with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964; and shall supervise and evaluate
the performance of assigned personnel.
(Ord. 2008-05, 04/07/2008)
B. The Human Resources Director shall
regularly communicate with the Mayor,
City Supervisor, Council, City
departments, community leaders,
boards, commissions, and outside
agencies to resolve problems,
coordinate activities, exchange
information, and provide expertise.
C. The Human Resources Director shall
develop and prepare the annual
preliminary budget for the Human
Resources Department; and shall
analyze and review budgetary and
financial data; and shall control and
authorize expenditures in accordance
with established limitations.
D. The Human Resources Director shall
perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by this Code and the
ordinances and resolutions of the City
or as the Mayor or the City Supervisor
may direct.
§ 12-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 12-2
Chapter 12
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTOR
Sec. 12-1: Office Established;
Appointment and Removal
Sec. 12-2: Duties
Sec. 12-1. Office Established;
Appointment and Removal.
There is hereby established the office
of Community Development Director,
which office shall be filled by appointment
of the Mayor, with consent of the Council,
who shall hold office for the duration of
such appointment or until such time as the
Community Development Director may be
removed by the Mayor, or as provided by
law.
Sec. 12-2. Duties.
The Community Development Director
shall have the following specific duties,
powers, and responsibilities:
A. Under the direction of the City
Supervisor, the Community
Development Director shall organize
and direct the City's Community
Development Department including
planning, code enforcement, and
community development programs; and
shall supervise and evaluate the
performance of assigned personnel.
B. The Community Development Director
shall communicate with the Mayor,
City Supervisor, Council, City
departments, community leaders,
boards, commissions and outside
agencies to resolve problems,
coordinate activities, exchange
information, and provide expertise.
C. The Community Development Director
shall develop and prepare the annual
preliminary budget for the Community
Development Department, and shall
analyze and review budgetary and
financial data; and shall control and
authorize expenditures in accordance
with established limitations.
D. The Community Development Director
shall also be the Zoning Administrator
and shall have all responsibilities
required to assist the City to comply
with federal, state and local statutes
and ordinances related to zoning and
land use planning, including but not
limited to Idaho Code Title 67, Chapter
65, and the City Zoning Code.
E. The Community Development Director
shall perform such other duties as may
be prescribed by this Code, and the
ordinances and resolutions of the City
or as the Mayor or the City Supervisor
may direct.
§ 13-1 TITLE 2 — ADMINISTRATION § 13-2
Chapter 13
PARKS AND RECREATION
DIRECTOR
Sec. 13-1: Office Established;
Appointment and Removal
Sec. 13-2: Duties
Sec. 13-1. Office Established;
Appointment and Removal.
There is hereby established the office
of Parks and Recreation Director, which
office shall be filled by appointment of the
Mayor, with consent of the Council, who
shall hold office for the duration of such
appointment or until such time as the Parks
and Recreation Director may be removed by
the Mayor, or as provided by law.
Sec. 13-2. Duties.
The Parks and Recreation Director
shall have the following specific duties,
powers, and responsibilities:
A. Under the direction of the City
Supervisor, the Parks and Recreation
Director shall plan, organize, and direct
the operation, maintenance, and
development of the City's Parks and
Recreation programs, services, and
facilities, including general facilities
management and maintenance of
municipal buildings; and shall
supervise, direct, or evaluate the
performance of assigned staff.
B. The Parks and Recreation Director
shall communicate with the Parks and
Recreation Commission, Mayor, City
Supervisor, Council, City departments,
community leaders, boards,
commissions and outside agencies to
resolve problems, coordinate activities,
exchange information, and provide
expertise.
C. The Parks and Recreation Director
shall develop and prepare the annual
preliminary budget for the Parks and
Recreation Department; and shall
analyze and review budgetary and
financial data; and shall control and
authorize expenditures in accordance
with established limitations.
D. The Parks and Recreation Director
shall have authority to control the use
of City Parks and Recreation Facilities
in compliance with City policies and
practices.
E. The Parks and Recreation Director
shall perform such other duties as may
be prescribed by this Code, and the
ordinances and resolutions of the City
or as the Mayor or the City Supervisor
may direct.
§ 1-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 1-5
Chapter 1
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Sec. 1-1: Board Established
Sec. 1-2: Public Hearings
Sec. 1-3: Powers of Board
Sec. 1-4: Meetings
Sec. 1-5: Procedure
Sec. 1-6: Stay
Sec. 1-1. Board Established.
A Board of Adjustment is hereby
established. The word "Board" when used
herein, shall mean the Board of
Adjustment. The Board shall consist of
seven (7) members, and shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and subject
to the approval of the Council for a five (5)
year term. The terms of such membership
shall be staggered as follows: two (2) of
the memberships shall be appointed for an
initial term of one (1) year; and two (2) of
the memberships shall be appointed for an
initial term of three (3) years; and
remaining and subsequent appointees shall
serve the full five (5) year term. Board
members shall be selected without respect
to political affiliation. In case any vacancy
should occur in the membership of the
Board, for any cause, the Mayor shall fill
such vacancy by making an appointment
with the advice and subject to the approval
of the Council, for the unexpired term.
City staff shall provide such training for the
Board as is practical. The Board shall be
considered as a Board of Hearing
Examiners with decision making powers
subject to appeal of the Council. The
members of the Board shall hold office at
the pleasure of the Mayor; the Mayor may
revoke their appointment at any time and
for any reason deemed sufficient by the
Mayor, with the approval of the Council.
(Ord. 86-27, 9/2/86; Ord. 2005-30, 09/19/05)
Sec. 1-2. Public Hearings.
Any affected person may appear
before the Board or may file reasons in
writing for supporting or opposing the
applicant's request. The Board shall
conduct hearings and accept evidence in
accordance with the rules established by
the Board.
Sec. 1-3. Powers of Board.
To hear and decide appeals from any
determination made by the Building
Inspector, application for conditional use,
special use, and/or variances. The
concurring vote of the majority of the
members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any determination of the Building
Inspector, or to grant any conditional use,
special use permit, and/or issue a variance
when the requirements as set forth herein
regarding the same are found to exist.
(Ord. 2005-30, 09/19/05)
Sec. 1-4. Meetings.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at
least once a month provided there is
business to transact and at such other times
as the chairman of the Board may
determine. There shall be a fixed place of
meeting, and all regular Board meetings
shall be open to the public. At least one
notice of all public hearings of the Board
shall be published in the official newspaper
at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. Such notice shall contain a map of
the area and/or legal description of the area
which is the subject of application for a
conditional use permit or a variance. The
Board shall adopt its own rules of
procedure and keep a record of its
proceedings, findings and action in each
case, and the vote of each member on each
question considered in the proceedings.
The presence of three (3) members shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum and three
(3) affirmative votes shall be necessary for
granting a variance or conditional use
permit.
Sec. 1-5. Procedure.
Application for conditional use
permits or appeals and variances from a
ruling of the Building Inspector,
concerning the provisions herein contained,
§ 1-5 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 1-6
may be made to the Board within such
times as shall be prescribed by the Board.
Further procedures and fees shall he
established by resolution of the Council.
Sec. 1-6. Stay.
When any appeal is made to the Board
from a decision of the Building Inspector,
any further findings of the matter shall be
stayed until the final determination by the
Board of Adjustment.
When an appeal is taken to the
Council from any decision of the Board, all
proceedings therein shall be stayed until
final determination of the Council.
When an appeal is taken to the District
Court from any decision of the Board, or
the Council, all proceedings therein shall
be stayed until final determination by the
District Court.
(Ord. 86-27, 9/2/86)
§ 2-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 2-3
Chapter 2
PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION
Sec. 2-1: Commission Established,
Members
Sec. 2-2: Organization
Sec. 2-3: Duties
Sec. 2-4: Maps, Plats and Replats
Sec. 2-5: Hearings
Sec. 2-6: Reports
Sec. 2-7: Rezone and Annexation
Request
Sec. 2-1. Commission Established,
Members.
A. There is hereby established a Planning
and Zoning Commission. The word
“Commission” when used herein shall
mean the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Commission shall
consist of up to nine (9) voting
members, serving without pay.
Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the
advice of and subject to the approval
of the Council. Members shall be
selected without respect to political
affiliation. An appointed member of
the Commission must have resided in
the County for two (2) years prior to
such member's appointment, and must
remain a resident of the County during
such member's service on the
Commission. The term of office of
the Commission members chosen from
the residents at large shall be five (5)
years or until their successors are
appointed and qualified. Members
may be removed for cause by a
majority vote of the Council.
Vacancies in such Commission,
occurring otherwise than the
expiration of term, shall be filled by
the Mayor with the advice of and
subject to the approval of the Council,
for the unexpired term.
Ref. Idaho Code § 67-5504(a)
(Ord. 2009-08, 04/06/2009)
B. Pursuant to Idaho Code Section 67-
6526(g), persons living within the
delineated Area of City Impact shall
be entitled to representation on the
Commission. Such representation
shall as nearly as possible reflect the
proportion of population living within
the City compared to the population
living within the Area of City Impact.
(Ord. 96-07, 4/15/96, Modified Ord. 98-23,
7/6/98)
Sec. 2-2. Organization.
The members of the Commission shall
meet and organize by electing one of their
members chairperson and such other
officers as may be deemed necessary,
annually, on the first regularly scheduled
meeting after January 1. The Commission
may establish subcommittees, advisory
committees or neighborhood groups to
advise and assist in carrying out the
responsibilities of local planning. A record
of meetings, hearings, resolutions, studies,
findings, permits and actions taken shall be
maintained. All meetings and records shall
be open to the public. At least one regular
meeting shall be held each month for not
less than nine (9) months in a year. A
majority of voting members appointed to
the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 96-07, 4/15/96); Ref. Idaho Code § 65-
6504(b)(c)
Sec. 2-3. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Commission
to conduct a comprehensive planning
process designed to prepare, implement,
and review and update a comprehensive
plan (hereafter referred to as the “Plan”).
The Plan shall include all land within the
jurisdiction of the City. The Plan shall
consider previous and existing conditions,
trends, desirable goals and objectives, or
desirable future situations for each
planning component. The Plan with maps,
charts, and reports shall be based on the
components set forth at Idaho Code Section
67-6508 as they may apply to land use
regulations and actions unless the Plan
§ 2-3 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 2-7
specifies reasons why a particular
component is unneeded. Nothing herein
shall preclude the consideration of
additional planning components or subject
matter.
(Ord. 96-07, 4/15/96, Modified Ord. 98-23, 7/6/98);
Ref. Idaho Code § 67-6508
Sec. 2-4. Maps, Plats and Replats.
Any and all maps, plats and replats of
land which require the approval of the
Council shall first be submitted to the
Commission for its suggestions and the
Commission shall have a reasonable time,
to be fixed by the Council, within which to
examine such map, plat, or replat before
returning the same with its suggestions.
Sec. 2-5. Hearings.
A. The Commission, prior to
recommending any changes, plans,
rezoning, etc. to the Council, shall
hold a public hearing in accordance
with Idaho Code Section 67-6509, and
the Council prior to adoption of any
such changes, plans or rezoning
recommendations shall hold a public
hearing as set forth in Idaho Code
Section 67-6509.
B. Any person may petition the
Commission for a Plan amendment at
any time. The Commission may
recommend amendments to the Plan to
the Council not more frequently than
every six (6) months to correct errors
in the original Plan or to recognize
substantial changes in the actual
conditions in the area. The
Commission may recommend
amendments to other ordinances
authorized by Idaho Code Title 67,
Chapter 65, to the Council at any time.
(Ord. 98-23, 7/6/98); Ref. Idaho Code
§ 67-6509
Sec. 2-6. Reports.
The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall make reports from time to time as
requested by the Mayor and/or the Council.
(Ord. 98-23, 7/6/98)
Sec. 2-7. Rezone and Annexation
Request.
A. The fees to be paid in connection with
the administration of this Chapter shall
be set from time to time by resolution
of the Council.
B. It is the policy of the City that such
fees shall be charged to applicants for
administration of this Chapter. Such
fees shall reflect the costs of
administration, including but not
limited to conducting studies,
advertising, and preparing and
amending maps.
(Ord. 96-07, 4/15/96, Modified Ord. 98-23,
7/6/98)
§ 3-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 3-3
Chapter 3
PARKS AND RECREATION
COMMISSION
Sec. 3-1: Commission Established
Sec. 3-2: Organization
Sec. 3-3: Duties
Sec. 3-4: Gifts, Bequests
Sec. 3-5: Reports of Commission
Sec. 3-1. Commission Established.
There is hereby established a Parks
and Recreation Commission. The word
“Commission” when used herein shall
mean the Parks and Recreation
Commission. This Commission shall
consist of up to nine (9) voting members,
serving without pay. A non-voting member
of this Commission shall not be considered
in determining the number required for a
quorum or whether a quorum is present.
Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice of
and subject to the approval of the Council.
Except as otherwise provided specifically
herein, the term of office of the
Commission members chosen from the
residents at large shall be three (3) years, or
until their successors are appointed and
qualified, except that the members of such
Commission will be appointed and/or
reappointed to such terms in a manner that
the terms of not more than three (3)
members expire annually hereafter. A
Council member shall be a nonvoting ex
officio member of the Commission. The
members shall hold office at the pleasure of
the Mayor. The Mayor may revoke their
appointment at any time and for any
reasons deemed sufficient by the Mayor,
with the advice and subject to the approval
of the Council. Vacancies in such
Commission, occurring otherwise than the
expiration of term, shall be filled by the
Mayor with the advice of and subject to the
approval of the Council, for the unexpired
term. Where possible, this Commission
shall include at least one (1) student
enrolled at least three quarters (3/4) time in
a post secondary educational program, who
shall serve a one (1) year term, which term
may be renewed. At least one (1) student
enrolled in high school or an equivalent
educational program shall serve as a nonvoting
member of this Commission for a
one (1) year term, which term may be
renewed. This Commission may also
include at least one (1) Latah County
resident who does not reside within City
limits who shall serve as a voting member
of this Commission for a three (3) year
term.
(Ord. 89-02, 1/9/89; Ord. 2008-23, 10/20/2008; Ord.
2009-24, 12/07/2009)
Sec. 3-2. Organization.
The members of the Commission shall
meet and organize by electing one of their
members chairperson and such other
officers as may be necessary, every year,
on the first regularly scheduled meeting
after January 1. The Commission shall
have the power to adopt by-laws, rules and
regulations for the proper conduct of the
Parks and Recreation Commission. Said
by-laws, rules and regulations are subject
to the approval by the Mayor and Council.
Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail at all
regular scheduled meetings.
Sec. 3-3. Duties.
The Parks and Recreation Commission
shall advise the Mayor and Council on
matters pertaining to public playgrounds,
athletic fields, recreation facilities, and
other recreation activities on any properties
owned or controlled by the City, or on
other properties with consent of the owner
and occupants thereof. It shall review and
recommend to the Council on matters
concerning the conduct of recreation and
cultural activities that will employ the
leisure time of the people in a constructive
and wholesome manner. The Commission
shall plan and recommend short and longterm
improvements, which will provide for
the recreation and cultural needs of the
§ 3-3 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 3-5
people and the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall have the authority to
make recommendations regarding Park and
Recreation policy, program, personnel and
budget.
Sec. 3-4. Gifts, Bequests.
The Parks and Recreation
Commission, may, with the prior consent of
the Council, solicit gifts and/or bequests of
money and other property for parks and
recreation purposes. If any gift or bequest
of money or other property should be
offered to the Parks and Recreation
Commission, the Commission shall inform
the Clerk in writing of such offer, and it
shall be the duty of the Clerk to submit the
offer to the Council for acceptance or
refusal at the meeting of the Council next
following the date on which the Clerk is
informed of the offer.
Sec. 3-5. Reports of Commission.
The Parks and Recreation Commission
shall make reports from time to time as
requested by the Mayor and/or the Council.
§ 4-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 4-3
Chapter 4
ARTS COMMISSION
Sec. 4-1: Commission Established
Sec. 4-2: Organization
Sec. 4-3: Duties
Sec. 4-4: Reports
Sec. 4-1. Commission Established.
There is hereby established an Arts
Commission. The word “Commission”
when used herein shall mean the Arts
Commission. This Commission shall
consist of not more than twelve (12) voting
members, serving without pay. A nonvoting
member of this Commission shall
not be considered in determining the
number required for a quorum or whether a
quorum is present. Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice of and subject to
the approval of the Council. This
Commission of not more than twelve (12)
members shall also consist of not more than
three (3) Latah County residents who do
not reside within City Limits. One (1) exofficio
member thereof shall be a member
of the Council, who shall not vote and to
serve a term of one year. The other
members thereof may be appointed at large.
Except as otherwise specifically provided
herein, the term of office of the
Commission members shall be four (4)
years, or until their successors are
appointed and qualified, except that the
members of such Commission first
appointed shall be appointed such that the
terms of four (4) members shall expire
annually thereafter. The members shall
hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor.
The Mayor may revoke their appointment
at any time and for any reasons deemed
sufficient by the Mayor, with the advice of
and subject to the approval of the Council.
Vacancies in such Commission, occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term, shall
be filled by the Mayor with the advice and
subject to the approval of the Council, for
the unexpired term. Where possible, this
Commission shall include at least one (1)
student enrolled at least three quarters (3/4)
time in a post secondary educational
program, who shall serve a one (1) year
term, which term may be renewed. At least
one (1) student enrolled in high school or
an equivalent educational program shall
serve as a non-voting member of this
Commission for a one (1) year term, which
term may be renewed. This Commission
shall also include at least one (1) Latah
County resident who does not reside within
City limits who shall serve as a non-voting
member of this commission for a four (4)
year term.
(Ord. 2008-23, 10/20/2008)
Sec. 4-2. Organization.
The members of the Commission shall
meet and organize by electing one of their
members chairperson and such other
officers as may be necessary, every one
year, on the first regularly scheduled
meeting after January 1. The Commission
shall adopt rules and regulations for the
proper conduct of the Arts Commission.
Said rules and regulations are subject to the
approval by the Mayor and Council.
Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail at all
regularly scheduled meetings.
Sec. 4-3. Duties.
The Arts Commission shall represent
the City's interest in art matters; act as a
spokesperson for art matters in the City and
keep the Mayor and Council informed on
all such matters; coordinate arts
organizations and arts activities in the City;
provide information and assistance for arts
organizations, artists and anyone interested
in cultural advancement of the community;
develop cooperation between existing
organizations in the City with schools and
regional, State and national art
organizations; search for sources of private,
local, State and Federal funds and grants
available to promote the arts in the City and
surrounding communities; offer advice and
assistance in aesthetic matters of the City
regarding community planning or in any
§ 4-3 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 4-4
other artistic activities as may be referred
to it by the City; and encourage and aid
programs for the cultural enrichment of the
Moscow and surrounding communities.
Sec. 4-4. Reports.
The Arts Commission shall make
reports from time to time as requested by
the Mayor and/or the Council.
(Ord. 99-39, 12/20/99)
§ 5-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 5-3
Chapter 5
FARMERS MARKET COMMISSION
Sec. 5-1: Commission Established
Sec. 5-2: Purpose and Duties
Sec. 5-3: Organization
Sec. 5-4: Meetings
Sec. 5-5: Reports
Sec. 5-1. Commission Established.
There is hereby established a Farmers
Market Commission. The word
“Commission” when used herein shall
mean the Farmers Market Commission.
(Ord. 2013-03, 03/18/2013)
Sec. 5-2. Purpose and Duties.
A. The purpose of the Commission is to
suggest ways to promote and improve
the Farmers Market, propose and/or
review Market policies, keep abreast of
trends and opportunities for advancing
Market interests, products, standards,
and offerings, and to otherwise act in
an advisory role to the Council.
B. The Commission shall:
1. meet regularly to discuss Market
concerns;
2. review and/or propose Market
policies and report findings/suggestions
to the Council at least annually;
3. work with City staff to suggest
ways to promote and improve Farmers
Market;
4. advise City staff on Market issues,
where requested;
5. keep abreast of trends and
opportunities for advancing Market
interest, products, standards, and
offerings; and
6. create increased awareness of
Market needs and opportunities to
insure sustainability and responsible
management and growth.
(Ord. 2013-03, 03/18/2013)
Sec. 5-3. Organization.
Members.
1. Number. This Commission shall
consist of up to nine (9) voting
members serving without pay.
2. Commission Makeup.
a. Voting members of the
Commission shall meet the following
qualification within two (2) years
immediately prior to appointment:
i. One (1) season produce
Market Vendor;
ii. One (1) season crafts
Market Vendor;
iii. One (1) season specialty
food Market Vendor;
iv. Moscow Chamber of
Commerce representative;
v. University of Idaho
Extension representative; and
vi. Four (4) Commission
members, where such members and
their immediate family have none of
the qualifying characteristics of any
other voting member in subsection a.
during their service on the
Commission. For purposes of this
subsection vi., “immediate family”
shall mean a parent, step-parent,
spouse, child, step-child, in-law,
grandparent, step-grandparent,
grandchild, step-grandchild, aunt,
uncle, niece, or nephew of a voting
Commission member.
b. Ex Officio Council member.
One (1) member of the Council who
shall serve as an ex-officio, non-voting
member and who shall serve a one (1)
year term.
3. Appointment/Vacancy.
a. Appointment. Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and subject to
the approval of the Council.
b. Vacancy. A vacancy in the
Commission, occurring other than by
expiration of the member’s term, shall
§ 5-3 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 5-5
be filled for the unexpired balance of
the term by the Mayor, with the advice
and subject to the approval of the
Council.
c. Removal. A Commission
member shall hold office at the
pleasure of the Mayor. Any
Commission member may be removed
from the Commission by the Mayor for
any reason, with the advice and subject
to the approval of the Council.
d. “No-Show” Removal. Any
Commission member may be removed
from the Commission by the Mayor
following three (3) consecutive
absences that are not excused by the
Chair.
4. a. Term. Except as otherwise
specifically provided herein, the term
of office of a Commission member
shall be thee (3) years or until their
successor is appointed by the Mayor
and such appointment is approved by
the Council.
b. Officers. The Commission
shall meet and organize by electing one
(1) of its members Chair (and such
other officers as may be desired) every
year on the first regularly scheduled
meeting after January 1 or as soon
thereafter as practicable.
(Ord. 2013-03, 03/18/2013)
Sec. 5-4. Meetings.
A. Open meetings. Every meeting of the
Commission or a Commission
subcommittee shall be conducted in
accordance with the Idaho Open
Meetings Law and other applicable law
and regulation.
B. Quorum. A quorum, for purposes of
this Commission, is comprised of onehalf
plus one (1/2 + 1) of all currently
appointed voting Commission
members. A non-voting member of
this Commission shall not be
considered in determining the number
required for a quorum or whether a
quorum is present. Where one-half
plus one (1/2 + 1) of all currently
appointed voting Commission members
is a fraction, the number of members
required for a quorum shall be rounded
up to the next whole number and such
number of currently appointed
members shall be required to comprise
a quorum.
C. Voting. Except as otherwise provided
in this Chapter, every duly appointed
member of the Commission shall be
eligible to vote on any item before the
Commission.
D. Conduct of meetings. Meetings shall
be conducted in a fair and orderly
manner likely to lead to a clear, wellreasoned
decision.
E. Subcommittees. The Commission may
establish subcommittees comprised of
Commission members to advise it
and/or to assist it in carrying out
Commission purposes.
(Ord. 2013-03, 03/18/2013)
Sec. 5-5. Reports.
The Commission shall make reports
from time to time, as requested by the
Mayor and/or the Council.
(Ord. 2006-22, 12/18/2006)
(Ord. 2013-03, 03/18/2013)
§ 6-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 6-2
Chapter 6
FAIR AND AFFORDABLE
HOUSING COMMISSION
Sec. 6-1: Commission Established
Sec. 6-2: Powers and Duties
Sec. 6-3: Reports
Sec 6-1. Commission Established.
There is hereby created the Moscow
Fair and Affordable Housing Commission.
The word “Commission” when used herein
shall mean the Fair Housing Commission.
Except as otherwise specifically provided
herein, this Commission shall consist of not
more than nine (9) voting members, each to
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and subject to the approval of the Council,
to serve without compensation for a term of
three (3) years, subject to removal by the
Mayor with the advice and subject to the
approval of the Council. A non-voting
member of this Commission shall not be
considered in determining the number
required for a quorum or whether a quorum
is present. Not more than one (1) member
of the Commission shall be an officer or
employee of the City. If a vacancy occurs
on the Commission, it shall be filled by the
Mayor with the advice of and subject to the
approval of the council for the unexpired
term. A non-voting Council representative
shall serve as an ex-officio member of the
Commission. The original appointees to
said Commission shall serve staggered
terms. Not more than one (1) member shall
reside outside of the City. Where possible,
this Commission shall include at least one
(1) student enrolled at least three quarters
(3/4) time in a post secondary educational
program, who shall serve a one (1) year
term, which term may be renewed. At least
one (1) student enrolled in high school or
an equivalent educational program shall
serve as a non-voting member of this
Commission for a one (1) year term, which
term may be renewed. This Commission
shall also include at least one (1) Latah
County resident who does not reside within
City limits who shall serve as a non-voting
member of this Commission for a three (3)
year term.
(Ord. 2008-23, 10/20/2008)
Sec 6-2. Powers and Duties.
A. The Commission shall adopt internal
procedures not inconsistent with the
provisions of this or any other
ordinances of the City. These rules
shall provide for notification of
Commission members by the
chairperson in advance of meetings.
B. Meetings of the Commission shall be
held at least once annually at the call
of the chairperson and at such other
times as the Commission may
determine. A quorum of a majority of
the appointed members shall be
necessary before the Commission may
transact business.
C. The Commission may suggest to
Council various ways in which the
City may further fair housing practices
and affordable housing practices.
D. The Commission may suggest ways to
inform public housing industry
providers, real estate owners,
developers, building contractors, and
housing advocates of their respective
responsibilities and rights under the
federal housing law and related
amendments, and any applicable state
or local laws or ordinances.
E. The Commission shall review, on at
least an annual basis, the City Code
Analysis and Impediments to Fair
Housing and Action Plan and shall
make recommendations to the Mayor,
the Council and the City's Fair
Housing Resource Representative for
amendments or changes to such Plan
as it deems necessary.
F. The Commission shall review, on at
least an annual basis, the City's efforts
to promote affordable housing and
shall make recommendations to the
Mayor, the Council, and the City's Fair
Housing Resource Representative to
promote affordable housing practices.
§ 6-2 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 6-3
G. The Commission shall consult with
the City's Fair Housing Resource
Representative on fair housing
planning objectives, communications,
and shall assist the Council and the
City's Fair Housing Resource
Representative in coordination and
execution of the City's Fair Housing
Action Plan, where appropriate.
H. The Commission shall keep abreast of
Federal and State law affecting fair
housing and make recommendations to
the Mayor and Council of necessary
changes in the Moscow Fair and
Affordable Housing Ordinance to keep
the ordinance in conformity with
Federal and State law.
I. The Commission is authorized to
recommend acceptance of Federal,
State, or other assistance in
formulating or carrying out programs
to prevent or eliminate discriminatory
housing practices, and to cooperate
with Federal, State and local agencies
in carrying out such programs.
(Ord. 99-04, 2/16/99; Ord. 2000-21, 9/18/2000)
Sec. 6-3. Reports.
The Commission shall make reports
from time to time as requested by the
Mayor and/or the Council.
§ 7-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 7-5
Chapter 7
BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 7-1: Board Established
Sec. 7-2: Powers of Board of Appeals
Sec. 7-3: Hearings
Sec. 7-4: Fees
Sec. 7-5: Reports
Sec. 7-1. Board Established.
The Board of Adjustment members
shall also serve as the Board of Appeals.
The Building Official shall be an ex-officio
member and shall act as secretary of the
Board of Appeals. Members terms shall be
the same as the Board of Adjustment.
Sec. 7-2. Powers of Board of
Appeals.
The Board of Appeals shall determine
the suitability of alternate materials and
methods of construction and to prove
reasonable interpretation of the
International Building Code, the Uniform
Plumbing Code, the International Property
Maintenance Code , and any other uniform
or international Codes adopted by the City
as directed by the Mayor and/or the
Council. The Board of Appeals shall adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its investigations and shall
render all decisions and findings in writing
to the Building Official with a duplicate
copy to the appellant. Appeals from the
Board of Appeals may be made to the local
District Court.
(Ord. 2008-24, 12/01/2008)
Sec. 7-3. Hearings.
Hearings by the Board of Appeals
shall be conducted in a manner consistent
with other public hearing practices of the
City.
Sec. 7-4. Fees.
Fees for appeals before the Board of
Appeals may, from time to time, be
established by the Council by Resolution.
Sec. 7-5. Reports.
The Board of Appeals shall make
reports from time to time as requested by
the Mayor and/or the Council.
§ 8-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 8-5
Chapter 8
AIRPORT BOARD
Sec. 8-1: Airport Board Established
Sec. 8-2: Membership
Sec. 8-3: Appointment and Term of
Office
Sec. 8-4: Authority and Duties
Sec. 8-5: Reports
Sec. 8-1. Airport Board
Established.
In accordance with that certain
cooperative agreement by and between the
City and other units of local government,
all operations and management of the
Pullman-Moscow Regional Airport shall be
vested in an Airport Board.
Sec. 8-2. Membership.
The membership of the Airport Board
shall be as follows: The Mayor of the City
of Pullman, The Mayor of the City, one
person appointed by the City of Pullman,
one person appointed by the City, one
person appointed by the Port
Commissioners of the Port of Whitman
County, one person appointed by the
Commissioners of Latah County, one
person to be appointed by a majority vote
of the six (6) members above designated.
Each appointing authority may appoint an
alternate to serve in the absence or
incapacity of any Airport Board member
appointed by it.
(1981 Code)
Sec. 8-3. Appointment and Term of
Office.
The members and alternate
representing the City shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and subject to
the approval of the Council. The term of
office for Board members chosen from City
residents shall be three (3) years or until
their successors are appointed and
qualified. The Airport Board member shall
hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor.
The Mayor may revoke such Board
member's appointment at any time and for
any reason deemed sufficient by the Mayor,
with the advice of and subject to the
approval of the Council. Vacancies on said
Airport Board, occurring otherwise than the
expiration of their term, shall be filled by
the Mayor with the advice of and subject to
the approval of the Council for the
unexpired term.
(Ord . 86-15, 5/5/86)
Sec. 8-4. Authority and Duties.
The authority, duties, and organization
of the Airport Board shall be as set forth in
the Pullman-Moscow Regional Airport
Cooperative Agreement.
Sec. 8-5. Reports.
The Airport Board shall make reports
from time to time as requested by the
Mayor and/or the Council.
§ 9-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 9-3
Chapter 9
SUSTAINABLE ENVIRONMENT
COMMISSION
Sec. 9-1: Statement of Intent and
Purpose
Sec. 9-2: Commission Established
Sec. 9-3: Organization
Sec. 9-4: Duties
Sec. 9-5: Rules of Conduct
Sec. 9-6: Reports
Sec. 9-1. Statement of Intent and
Purpose.
The City intends, by the establishment
of this Sustainable Environment
Commission, to solicit advice and
information about sound environmental
management practices for promoting the
public health and safety of the citizens of
Moscow.
(Ord. 2008-23, 10/20/2008)
Sec. 9-2. Commission Established.
There is hereby established a
Sustainable Environment Commission.
This Commission shall consist of up to
nine (9) voting members serving without
pay. A non-voting member of this
Commission shall not be considered in
determining the number required for a
quorum or whether a quorum is present.
Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent
and approval of the City Council. Not
more than three (3) members of the
Commission may reside outside the city
limits. Except as otherwise specifically
provided herein, the term of office of the
Commission members chosen from the
residents at large shall be three (3) years, or
until their successors are appointed and
qualified, except that the members of such
Commission will be appointed and/or
reappointed to such term that the terms of
approximately one-third (1/3) of the
members expire annually thereafter. There
shall be one (1) ex-officio member who
shall be a member of the City Council, who
shall not vote, and whose term shall be two
(2) years. Where possible, this
Commission shall include at least one (1)
student enrolled at least three quarters (3/4)
time in a post secondary educational
program, who shall serve a one 91) year
term, which term may be renewed. At least
one (1) student enrolled in high school or
an equivalent educational program shall
serve as a non-voting member of this
Commission for a one (1) year term, which
term may be renewed. This Commission
shall also include at least one (1) Latah
County resident who does not reside within
City limits who shall serve as a non-voting
member of this Commission for a three (3)
year term.
The members shall hold office at the
pleasure of the Mayor. He may revoke
their appointment at any time and for any
reason he deems sufficient, with approval
of the City Council. Any vacancy in such
Commission occurring other than through
the expiration of a term, shall be filled by
the Mayor, with approval by the City
Council, for the unexpired term.
(Ord. 2008-23, 10/20/2008)
Sec. 9-3. Organization.
The members of the Commission shall
meet and organize by electing one of their
members chairperson, and such other
officers as may be necessary, every year on
the first regularly scheduled meeting after
January 1. Roberts Rules of Order shall
regulate the conduct of business. A
majority of members of the Commission
shall constitute a quorum. The
Commission may establish subcommittees
and advisory committees to advise and
assist in carrying out the duties of the
Commission. Where possible, this
Commission shall coordinate efforts with
other local boards, commissions, and
groups. A record of meetings, hearings,
testimony, resolutions, studies, findings,
and actions taken shall be maintained.
§ 9-4 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 9-6
Sec. 9-4. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Commission
to advise and inform the City Council about
sound environmental management practices
for promoting the public health and safety
of citizens of Moscow. The duty of the
Commission shall include, but not be
limited to, conducting public hearings;
receiving public comment; and gathering,
assessing, and evaluating information
pertaining to the health and environmental
concerns of the City. The Commission
shall maintain a data bank at City Hall to
assist it in monitoring health and
environment situations. Further, the
Commission may implement programs with
the consent of the Council to achieve the
stated duties.
Specifically, the Commission will
make recommendations to the Council on
the following matters:
A. Pesticide/Chemical Use: recommending
voluntary guidelines for the use of
pesticides and other potentially
harmful chemicals in and around the
city by:
1. encouraging adoption of Integrated
Pest Management (IPM) on all
property within the City;
2. developing procedures to notify the
public as necessary when and where
chemical application is to occur,
subject to voluntary provision of prior
notification by applicators when such
application involves property not
owned by the City.
B. Air Quality
1. informing the public regarding
proper use of solid fuel heating
appliances to reduce emissions;
3. developing procedures to notify
the public when an air pollution alert
has been declared;
3. develop recommendations to deal
with air quality issues which affect
Moscow residents.
C. Water Quality: recommending programs
for the protection of water
quality and quantity (as it relates to
water conservation) with emphasis on
groundwater, surface waterways and
drainages within Moscow and a buffer
zone extending five hundred feet
(500’) in width beyond the city limits
boundary.
D. Waste Stream: aiding the City in
implementing programs relative to
waste reduction, recycling, and
deposits specifically by providing
review of the solid waste reduction
and education program.
E. Any other health and environmental
issues as may be directed by the City.
(Ord. 2003-09; 04/08/03)
Sec. 9-5. Rules of conduct.
The Commission shall address issues
and concerns relating to health and the
environment not currently being addressed
by other local boards, commissions or
groups. The Commission may offer
assistance to other local entities in relation
to health and environmental concerns.
Sec. 9-6. Reports.
The Commission shall make full and
complete annual reports to the Mayor and
Council. Other reports shall be made to the
Mayor and/or Council as necessary.
(Ord. 2002-10, 04/16/02; Ord. 2003-09; 04/08/03)
§ 10-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 10-3
Chapter 10
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION
Sec. 10-1: Purpose
Sec. 10-2: Commission Established
Sec. 10-3: Organization
Sec. 10-4: Powers and Duties
Sec. 10-5: Reports
Sec. 10-6: Funding of Commission
Sec. 10-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
promote the educational, cultural,
economic, and general welfare of the public
of the City through the preservation and
protection of buildings, sites, monuments,
structures, and areas of historic importance
or interest within the City; to protect and
preserve the heritage of the City by
preserving and regulating historic
landmarks, properties, and districts which
reflect the elements of the City’s cultural,
social, economic, political, archaeological,
and architectural history; to preserve and
enhance the environmental quality of the
City’s neighborhoods; to establish and
improve property values; and to foster
economic development.
Sec. 10-2. Commission Established.
There is hereby created a Historic
Preservation Commission which shall
consist of nine (9) members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and approval of the Council. A non-voting
member of this Commission shall not be
considered in determining the number
required for a quorum or whether a quorum
is present. The word “Commission” when
used herein shall mean the Historic
Preservation Commission. Members of the
Commission must be residents of Latah or
Whitman Counties and shall demonstrate
an interest in the historical and
architectural development of the City , and
shall be appointed with due regard to the
proper representation of such fields as
history, architectural history, architecture,
landscape architecture, urban planning,
engineering, archaeology, and law. Except
as otherwise specifically provided herein,
members shall serve terms of three (3)
years with the exception of the initial
Commission, three (3) of whom shall serve
a term of two (2) years and three (3) of
whom shall serve a term of one (1) year.
Members may be reappointed with the
advice and approval of the Council.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments and the
appointee for an unexpired term shall serve
the remainder of that term. Members of the
Commission shall serve without
compensation, but may be reimbursed by
the City for expenses incurred in
connection with their duties. The members
of the Commission shall hold office at the
pleasure of the Mayor. The Mayor may
revoke their appointment at any time and
for any reason deemed sufficient by the
Mayor, with the approval of the Council.
A Council member shall be a nonvoting, ex
officio member of the Commission. Where
possible, this Commission shall include at
least one (1) student enrolled at least three
quarters (3/4) time in a post secondary
educational program, who shall serve a one
(1) year term, which term may be renewed.
At least one (1) student enrolled in high
school or an equivalent educational
program shall serve as a non-voting
member of this Commission for a one (1)
year term, which term may be renewed.
This Commission shall also include at least
one (1) Latah County resident who does not
reside within City limits who shall serve as
a non-voting member of this Commission
for a three (3) year term.
(Ord. 2008-23, 10/20/2008)
Sec. 10-3. Organization.
At their first meeting the appointed
Commissioners shall elect officers who
shall serve one-year terms as chairperson
and vice-chairperson. The chairperson
shall preside at meetings of the
Commission. The vice-chairperson shall, in
the case of absence or disability of the
§ 10-3 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 10-6
chairperson, perform the duties of
chairperson. All meetings of the
Commission shall keep a record of its
resolutions, proceedings, and actions. The
City may provide staff assistance to the
Commission.
Sec. 10-4. Powers and Duties.
The Commission shall be advisory to
the Council and shall be authorized to:
A. Make recommendations to the Council
regarding ordinances pertaining to
historic preservation;
B. Conduct a survey of local historic
properties, landmarks, and sites;
C. Recommend the acquisition of
interests in historic properties,
including adjacent or associated lands,
by purchase, bequest, donation, or
lease;
D. Recommend methods and procedures
necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain, and operate historic
properties under the ownership or
control of the City;
E. Recommend the lease, sale, other
transfer or disposition of historic
properties subject to rights of public
access and upon such terms and
conditions as will ensure the
preservation of the property;
F. Cooperate with the federal, state, and
other local governments in the
pursuance of objectives of historic
preservation;
G. Recommend contracting with the state
or federal government, or any agency
of either, or with any person, firm,
cooperation, or organization to
accomplish the purposes of this
Chapter;
H. Participate in the conduct of land use,
urban renewal, and other planning
processes undertaken by Latah or
Whitman County, the City, the state,
or the federal government, and the
agencies of those entities;
I. Provide information for the purposes
of historic preservation to the City;
J. Promote and assist other agencies or
groups in conducting an educational
and interpretive program on historic
preservation and historic properties in
the City;
K. Enter, solely in performance of its
official duties and only at reasonable
times, upon private lands for the
examination or survey thereof;
however, no member, employee, or
agent of the commission may enter
any private property building or
structure without the consent of the
owner or occupier thereof.
Sec. 10-5. Reports.
The Historic Preservation Commission
shall make reports from time to time as
requested by the Mayor and/or the Council.
Sec. 10-6. Funding of Commission.
For the purpose of providing funds for the
Commission, the Council may:
A. Provide funds from current revenue;
B. Receive and expend monies from
other sources; or
C. Use any combination of the above.
Any funds received by the
Commission may be accumulated from
year to year and need not be expended
during one fiscal year.
(Ord. 90-18, 9/17/90); Ref. Idaho Code § 67-4601 et
seq.
§ 11-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 11-2
Chapter 11
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
Sec. 11-1: Purpose and Duties
Sec. 11-2: Organization
Sec. 11-3: Member Obligations and
Responsibilities
Sec. 11-4: Ex Officio Membership
Sec. 11-5: Reports
Sec. 11-1. Purpose and Duties.
The Mayor and City Council create
the City of Moscow Transportation
Commission, which shall have the
following charge:
A. To provide advice and
recommendations to the Mayor and
City Council regarding intermodal
transportation issues as directed with
the goal of establishing a system of
transportation and circulation within
and around the City of Moscow that
will make it possible for all people
utilizing various modes of
transportation to reach their
destination safely and easily with
minimum disturbance to adjacent uses.
B. To recommend to the Mayor and the
Council policies and programs with
the objective of implementing
transportation goals and objectives of
the Moscow Comprehensive Plan.
C. To advise the Mayor and City Council
as to the long range transportation
needs of the City, to provide advice on
integrating various transportation
elements including, but not limited to,
motorized vehicular traffic, bicycle
traffic, pedestrian traffic, rail, air
travel and public transportation.
(11/2/98) (Ord. 2003-08; 04/08/03)
Sec. 11-2. Organization.
A. The Transportation Commission shall
consist of up to nine (9) members
serving without pay. A non-voting
member of this Commission shall not
be considered in determining the
number required for a quorum or
whether a quorum is present. The
word "Commission" when used herein
shall mean the Transportation
Commission. Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and subject to
the approval of the Council. Members
shall be selected without respect to
political affiliation. Except for any
three quarter (3/4) time post secondary
educational program student
member(2), an appointed member of
the Commission must have resided in
Latah County for two (2) years prior
to his or her appointment and must
remain a resident of Latah County
during his or her service on the
Commission. Persons living within
the delineated Area of City Impact
shall be entitled to representation on
the Commission. Such representation
shall, as nearly as possible, reflect the
proportion of population living within
the City compared to the population
living within the Area of City Impact.
The term of office of the Commission
members chosen from the residents at
large shall be five (5) years or until
their successors are appointed and
qualified. The members shall hold
office at the pleasure of the Mayor.
The Mayor may revoke such
appointment at any time and for any
reason deemed sufficient with the
advice and subject to the approval of
the Council. Vacancies in such
Commission occurring otherwise than
the expiration of the term shall be
filled by the Mayor with the advice
and subject to the approval of the
Council for the unexpired term.
Where possible, this commission shall
include at least one (1) student
enrolled at least three quarters (3/4)
time in a post secondary educational
program, who shall serve a one (1)
year term, which term may be
renewed. At least one (1) student
enrolled in high school or an
equivalent educational program shall
§ 11-2 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 11-5
serve as a non-voting member of this
Commission for a one (1) year term,
which term may be renewed.
B. Where possible, Commission
members shall be appointed in a
manner which will allow members to
represent a variety of transportation
modes including, but not limited to,
motorized vehicles, non-motorized
vehicles and conveyances, pedestrians
and public transportation.
C. The Commission may establish
subcommittees and/or advisory
committees to advise and assist it in
carrying out duties of the
Commission. Where possible, this
Commission shall coordinate efforts
with local boards, groups and agencies
as well as State boards, groups and
agencies.
D. The Public Works Director and the
Community Development Director
shall be staff liaisons to the
Commission and a record of meetings,
findings and actions shall be
maintained.
(Ord. 2003-08; 04/08/03; Ord. 2006-22,
12/18/2006; Ord. 2008-23, 10/20/2008)
Sec. 11-3. Member Obligations and
Responsibilities.
Commission members may be
removed from the Commission following
three (3) consecutive absences that are not
excused by the Chair. Following the third
consecutive unexcused absence, the Chair
may request the Mayor for removal of such
Commission member.
(Ord. 2003-08; 04/08/03)
Sec. 11-4. Ex Officio Membership.
A Moscow City Council
representative shall be a non-voting ex
officio member of the Commission. In
addition, there shall be the following nonvoting
members or their respective
designees who shall not vote and, except
where specifically provided herein, whose
terms shall coincide with their terms of
service with the organizations which they
represent:
A. Chair, Moscow Tree Committee
B. President of the Moscow Area
Chamber of Commerce
C. Executive Director, Disability Action
Center
D. District Engineer, Idaho Transportation
Department District No. 2
E. Latah County Planner
F. Chair, North Latah Highway District
G. Chair, Moscow Planning and Zoning
Commission
H. Superintendent, Moscow School
District
I. President, University of Idaho
J. Region 2 Public Transportation
Advisory Council
K. Chair, Local Public Transportation
Advisory Commission
L. Representative, Local Railroad
Service Provider
M. Manager, Moscow/Pullman Regional
Airport
N. At least one (1) student enrolled in a
high school or equivalent educational
program for a one (1) year renewal
term
(Ord. 2003-08; 04/08/03; Ord. 2008-23,
10/20/2008)
Sec. 11-5. Reports.
The Commission shall make reports
from time to time as requested by the
Mayor and/or the Council.
(Ord. 98-37, 11/2/98)
§ 12-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 12-2
Chapter 12
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
Sec. 12-1: Purpose and Duties
Sec. 12-2: Organization
Sec. 12-3: Member Obligations and
Responsibilities
Sec. 12-4: Reports
Sec. 12-1: Purposes and Duties.
A. To affirm, encourage and initiate
programs and services within the City
designed to eliminate discrimination,
improve human relations, and
effectuate the spirit and intent of
applicable human rights legislation. In
these efforts, the Commission may
enlist the support of community groups
and public agencies.
B. To recommend to the Mayor and the
Council policies and programs with the
objective of implementing Commission
goals and objectives concerning the
civil and human rights of persons and
groups in the community.
C. The Commission shall work with City
officials to ensure that the City
continues to be a leader in extending
equal opportunity to its inhabitants,
including but not limited to:
employment opportunities in city
government, training for city jobs,
equality of services provided, equality
of all before the law, and equal
treatment of all by holders of City
licenses, contracts and privileges.
D. The Commission shall endeavor to
ascertain the status of civil and human
rights in the community.
(Ord. 2004-25, 05/03/04)
Sec. 12-2. Organization.
A. The Commission shall consist of from
nine (9) to eleven (11) members
serving without pay. A non-voting
member of this Commission shall not
be considered in determining the
number required for a quorum or
whether a quorum is present. The word
"Commission" when used herein shall
mean the Human Rights Commission.
Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and subject to the approval of the
Council. Members shall be selected
without respect to political affiliation.
Except as otherwise specifically
provided herein, the term of such
member shall be for a period of three
(3) years. The terms of such
membership shall be staggered as
follows: one third (1/3) of the
membership shall be appointed for an
initial term of one (1) year and one
third (1/3) of the membership shall be
appointed for an initial term of two (2)
years. Remaining and subsequent
appointees shall serve the full three (3)
year term. Except for a non-voting
member, an appointed member of the
Commission must remain a resident of
the City during his or her service on the
Commission. The members shall hold
office at the pleasure of the Mayor.
The Mayor may revoke such
appointment at any time and for any
reason deemed sufficient with the
advice and subject to the approval of
the Council. Vacancies in such
Commission occurring otherwise than
the expiration of the term shall be filled
by the Mayor with the advice and
subject to the approval of the Council
for the unexpired term. A Council
member shall be a non-voting, ex
officio member of the Commission.
Where possible, this Commission shall
include at least one (1) student enrolled
at least three quarters (3/4) time in a
post secondary educational program,
who shall serve a one (1) year term,
which term may be renewed. At least
one (1) student enrolled in high school
or an equivalent educational program
shall serve as a non-voting member of
this Commission for a one (1) year
term, which term may be renewed.
This Commission shall also include at
least one (1) Latah County resident
who does not reside within City limits
§ 12-2 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 12-4
who shall serve as a non-voting
member of this Commission for a three
(3) year term.
B. Where possible, Commission members
shall be appointed in a manner which
will allow members to represent the
wide variety of lifestyles, heritages,
beliefs and affiliations within the
community.
C. The members of the Commission shall
meet and organize by electing one (1)
of their members chairperson, and
electing such other officers as
necessary for the efficient conduct of
business.
D. The Commission may establish
subcommittees and/or advisory
committees to advise and assist it in
carrying out duties of the Commission.
Where possible, this Commission shall
coordinate efforts with local boards,
groups and agencies as well as State
boards, groups and agencies.
(Ord. 2004-25, 05/03/04; 2007-15, 12/03/2007;
Ord. 2008-23, 10/20/2008)
Sec. 12-3. Member Obligations and
Responsibilities.
Commission members may be removed
from the Commission following three (3)
consecutive absences that are not excused by
the Chair. Following the third consecutive
unexcused absence, the Chair may request
the Mayor for removal of such Commission
member.
(Ord. 2004-25, 05/03/04)
Sec. 12-4. Reports.
The Commission shall make reports
from time to time as requested by the Mayor
and/or the Council.
(Ord. 2004-25, 05/03/04)
§ 13-1 TITLE 3— COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 13-6
Chapter 13
MOSCOW TREE COMMISSION
Sec. 13-1: Purpose
Sec. 13-2: Commission Established
Sec. 13-3: Organization
Sec. 13-4: Duties
Sec. 13-5: Coordination and
Communication
Sec. 13-6 Funding
Sec. 13-1: Purposes.
The Moscow Tree Commission shall
advise the Mayor and the Council regarding
preservation, protection and management of
the community forest of the City, act as an
appellate body for licensing and/or
certification pursuant to the Community
Forestry Ordinance and shall coordinate its
activities regarding public trees and public
parks by communicating with the
Community Forestry Administrator.
(Ord. 2006-02, 02/06/06; 2007-16, 12/03/2007)
Sec. 13-2. Commission Established.
A Commission of seven (7) citizens
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council to serve three (3)
year appointments with staggered terms.
The Community Forestry Administrator
shall serve as staff representative. A
Council member shall be appointed to serve
as Council liaison.
(Ord. 2006-02, 02/06/06; 2007-16, 12/03/2007)
Sec. 13-3. Organization.
The Moscow Tree Commission shall
elect a chair, vice chair, and secretary from
within its membership, shall hold regular
public meetings as required by the chair, and
shall cause the secretary to maintain a
written record of its deliberations and
proceedings.
(Ord. 2006-02, 02/06/06)
Sec. 13-4. Duties.
A. The Moscow Tree Commission shall be
advisory in nature with the purpose of
providing advice to the Mayor and the
Council as to the preservation,
protection and management of the
community forest of the City, in
accordance with the intents and
purposes of this Chapter.
B. The Moscow Tree Commission will
report its findings and recommendations
to the Mayor and Council as requested
by the Mayor and the Council, or as is
appropriate.
C. The Moscow Tree Commission shall
hear appeals from license and/or
certification applicants who are
aggrieved of some action or omission
taking place pursuant to the
license/certification procedures of the
Community Forestry Ordinance.
D. The Moscow Tree Commission shall
hear appeals from controllers and/or
licensees who are aggrieved by the
granting or denial of a permit required
by this Code.
E. The Moscow Tree Commission will
help develop and implement educational
and other programs addressing
community forestry issues.
(Ord. 2006-02, 02/06/06; 2007-16, 12/03/2007)
Sec. 13-5. Coordination and
Communication.
The Moscow Tree Commission will
coordinate its activities regarding public
trees in public parks by communicating with
the Moscow Parks and Recreation
Commission and the Community Forestry
Administrator.
(Ord. 2006-02, 02/06/06; 2007-16, 12/03/2007)
Sec. 13-6. Funding.
The Moscow Tree Commission shall
recommend an annual budget to the Mayor
and the Council. The Moscow Tree
Commission is authorized to seek outside
funding for its projects as may be approved
by the Council in accordance with City
budgetary procedures.
(Ord. 2006-02, 02/06/06)
§ 14-1 TITLE 3 — COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS § 14-5
Chapter 14
MOSCOW PATHWAYS
COMMISSION
Sec. 14-1: Purpose
Sec. 14-2: Commission Established
Sec. 14-3: Organization
Sec. 14-4: Duties
Sec. 14-5: Reports
Sec. 14-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Moscow Pathways
Commission is to promote and improve the
development of a path system in and
around Moscow, embracing three (3)
important community concerns: (1) active
transportation; (2) recreation; and (3)
resource conservation/enhancement, and to
otherwise act in an advisory role to the
Council.
(Ord. 2015-03, 02/17/2015)
Sec. 14-2. Commission Established.
A Commission of seven (7) citizens
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council to serve three (3)
year appointments with staggered terms
and serving without pay. The seven (7)
members shall consist of at least six (6)
citizens of Moscow and one (1) may be a
citizen of Latah County who does not
reside within City limits. The City Parks
and Recreation Director or designee shall
serve as staff liaison. A Moscow City
Council member shall be a non-voting exofficio
member of the Commission.
The first year of the Commission, three
(3) members will be appointed for three (3)
year terms; two (2) members will be
appointed for two (2) years terms; and two
(2) members will be appointed for one (1)
year terms. All subsequent appointments
will be for three (3) year terms, unless it is
an appointment to fill a vacated position;
then, that appointment will be through the
end of the vacated position’s term.
(Ord. 2015-03, 02/17/2015)
Sec. 14-3. Organization.
The Moscow Pathways Commission, at
the first meeting each year, shall elect a
chair, vice chair, and secretary from within
its membership that will serve one (1) year
terms in those positions; shall hold regular
public meetings to discuss Pathway
business; and shall cause the secretary to
maintain a written record of its
deliberations and proceedings.
(Ord. 2015-03, 02/17/2015)
Sec. 14-4. Duties.
A. The Moscow Pathways Commission
shall be advisory in nature with the
purpose of providing advice to the
Mayor and the Council as to the
preservation, protection and
management of the pathway system in
and around the City, in accordance
with the intents and purposes of this
Chapter.
B. The Moscow Pathways Commission
will help develop and implement
educational and other programs
addressing community needs related to
the development and operation of the
path system.
(Ord. 2015-03, 02/17/2015)
Sec. 14-5. Reports.
The Moscow Pathways Commission
shall make reports, findings, and
recommendations from time to time as
requested by the Mayor and/or Council, or
as is appropriate.
(Ord. 2015-03, 02/17/2015)

TITLE 04

Chapter 1 
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1:  Title 
Sec. 1-2:  Authority 
Sec. 1-3:  Purpose 
Sec. 1-4: Adoption of 
 Comprehensive Plan 
Sec. 1-5:  Scope of Zoning Code 
Sec. 1-6: Definitions 
Sec. 1-7:  Nonconformities 
 
Sec. 1-1.  Title. 
 Title 4, Land Use Regulations, of the Code, the Chapters and subparts contained therein, and its appurtenant maps shall be known as the "Moscow Zoning Code."  The words “the Zoning Code” or “this Zoning Code” shall mean all or any part of the Moscow Zoning Code. 
 
Sec. 1-2.  Authority. 
 This Zoning Code is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 65, Title 67 and Chapter 13, Title 50 of the Idaho Code and to the home rule authority of Idaho cities granted by Article 12, Section 2 of the Idaho Constitution and Section 302 of Title 50, Idaho Code. 
 
Sec. 1-3.  Purpose. 
 The provisions of this Zoning Code shall be applied to fulfill the following purposes: 
A. Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the Moscow community. 
B. Encourage the most appropriate use of land within the City's jurisdiction to protect the natural and human environment. 
C. Mitigate the effects of incompatible land uses upon neighborhoods, public facilities, and the community as a whole. 
D. Provide for public improvements which are serviceable and durable and which provide for effective service delivery by all public agencies. 
E. Preserve the positive aspects of existing neighborhoods while improving the neighborhoods which have fallen into disrepair. 
F. Provide adequate public services and community amenities in newly developing neighborhoods. 
G. Further the goals of the enabling statutes which grant authority to the City to enact ordinances regulating land use and development. 
 
Sec. 1-4. Adoption of Comprehensive Plan. 
 The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Moscow is hereby adopted by reference as the policy guide for the application of the provisions of this Title.  The words “the Plan” or “this Plan” shall mean the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Moscow throughout this Title.  Three copies of the Plan, as it now exists and may be subsequently amended, shall be retained by the Clerk, available for public inspection during regular City business hours. 
 
Sec. 1-5. Scope of Zoning Code.   
 This Zoning Code shall apply to buildings, structures, and lands situated within the City and to those buildings, structures and lands hereafter annexed to the City, and to those buildings, structures and lands situated within the Area of City Impact.  The regulations set forth in this Zoning Code for each zoning district shall be minimum standards and shall be applied uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, particularly as follows: 
A. No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located. 
B. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
 
 
1. to exceed the height or bulk as herein required; or 
2. to accommodate or house a greater number of families than herein allowed; or 
3. to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or  
4. in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Code. 
C. No part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with this Zoning Code, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building or use, unless otherwise provided herein. 
D. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Zoning Code shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.  Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Zoning Code shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Zoning Code. 
 ((Ord. 1402, 11/5/79; Res. 93-03, 2/1/93; Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018)  
 
Sec. 1-6. Definitions. 
 For the purpose of this Zoning Code, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:  
A. All words used in the present tense include the future tense; all words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number include plural number; unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.  The word "used" shall be deemed also to include "designed, intended or arranged to be used." 
B. Where applicable, uses have been named and defined using the 2012 North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) which is the standard used by the Federal government in classifying business establishments.  The uses that are defined by NAICS will have an associated NAICS code in parenthesis following the named use (i.e., Bowling Centers (NAICS 713950)).  In many cases, this Code has used an abbreviated definition, which is further defined using the 2012 NAICS Manual that is published on the United States Census Bureau website.  Many NAICS subsectors include multiple industries that are included within the subsector.  In some circumstances, certain industries have specifically been excluded from subsectors because of incompatibility with certain zoning districts. 
C. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally. 
D. Definitions used herein: 
 1. Accessory Dwelling Unit.  A secondary dwelling unit that is accessory to a single family dwelling on a single lot, containing complete housekeeping facilities and which is added to, created within, or detached from the principal dwelling unit and subject to the Specific Use Standards of this Code. 
 2. Accessory Use.  A minor or second use for which a lot, structure or building is designed or employed in conjunction with but subordinate to its primary use.  The term is synonymous with "secondary use." 
 3. Affected Person.  A person who shows to the City, by a preponderance of evidence, that such person has an interest which may be adversely affected by the issuance or denial of a permit authorizing development or by a decision of the City.
 4. Agencies, Brokerages and Other Insurance Related Activities (NAICS 5242).  Establishments primarily engaged in (1) acting as agents (i.e., brokers) in selling annuities and insurance policies; or (2) providing other employee benefits and insurance related services, such as claims adjustment and third party administration. 
 5. Agriculture, Animal Production and Aquaculture (NAICS 112).  Establishments that raise or fatten animals for the sale of animals or animal products and/or raise aquatic plants and animals in controlled or selected aquatic environments for the sale of aquatic plants, animals, or their products. 
 6. Agriculture, Crop Production (NAICS 111).  Establishments such as farms, orchards, groves, greenhouses, and nurseries, primarily engaged in growing crops, plants, vines, or trees and their seeds. 
 7. Alley.  A passageway open to public travel which affords generally a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting lots and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
 8. Alterations.  A change or rearrangement of the structural parts of existing facilities, or an enlargement by extending the sides or increasing the height or depth, or the moving from one (1) location to another.  In buildings for business, commercial, industrial or similar uses, the installation or rearrangement of partitions affecting more than one-third (1/3) of a single floor area shall be considered an alteration. 
 9. Animal Slaughtering and Processing (NAICS 31161).  Establishments primarily engaged in one (1) or more of the following:  (1) slaughtering animals; (2) preparing processed meats and meat byproducts; and (3) rendering and/or refining animal fat, bones, and meat scraps.  This industry includes establishments primarily engaged in assembly cutting and packing of meats (i.e., boxed meats) from purchased carcasses.  
 10. Antenna Tower.  A structure to house or hold a device which transmits or receives television, radio, or telephone communications but excluding those which are used as accessory to a residential use. 
 11. Amusement and Recreation Industries (NAICS 713990).  Establishments (except amusement parks and arcades; gambling industries; golf courses and country clubs; skiing facilities; marinas; fitness and recreational sports centers; and bowling centers) primarily engaged in providing recreational and amusement services. 
 12. Archery/Shooting Ranges.  A controlled area of activity, located indoors, specifically designed for the discharging of projectiles at targets. 
 13. Automobile and RV Dealers (NAICS 4411).  Establishments primarily engaged in retailing new and used automobiles and light trucks, such as sport utility vehicles, and passenger and cargo vans. 
 14. Automotive Repair and Maintenance (NAICS 8111).  Establishments involved in providing repair and maintenance services for automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and all trailers.  Establishments in this industry group employ mechanics with specialized technical skills to diagnose and repair the mechanical and electrical systems for automotive vehicles, repair automotive interiors, and paint or repair automotive exteriors. 
 15. Basement.  That portion of a building partly underground and having at least one-half (1/2) of its height more than five feet (5’) below the adjoining finish grade. 
 16. Bed and Breakfast Inn.  Establishments primarily engaged in 
providing short-term lodging (durations of less than twenty-one (21) consecutive days per guest) for compensation in private homes or accessory buildings where the owner resides upon the property and where breakfast may or may not be provided. 
 17. Bedroom.  A room within an apartment unit other than a living room, kitchen, bathroom, eating area or utility room which may be used for sleeping purposes. 
 18. Boarding House.  A building occupied by its owner in which not more than six (6) roomers, lodgers and/or boarders are housed or fed for compensation on a weekly or longer basis. 
 19. Bowling Centers (NAICS 713950).  Establishments engaged in operating bowling centers.  These establishments often provide food and beverage services. 
 20. Broadcasting (NAICS 515).  Establishments that create content or acquire the right to distribute content and subsequently broadcast the content. 
 21. Building Area.  The total ground coverage of a building or structure which provides shelter measured from the outside of its external walls or supporting members or from a point four feet (4’) in from the outside edge of a cantilevered roof, whichever covers the greatest area. 
 22. Building or Structure.  "Building" means any structure having a roof, but excluding all forms of vehicles even though immobilized.  When a use is required to be within a building, or where special authority granted pursuant to this Zoning Code requires that a use shall be within an entirely enclosed building, then the term "building" means one so designed and constructed that all exterior walls of the structures shall be solid from the ground to the roof line, and shall contain no openings except for windows and doors which are designed so that they may be closed. 
 23. Building or Structure, Accessory.  A subordinate building or structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the main building on the same lot, attached to or located adjacent to a home, or on the same lot, including awnings, steps, porches, carports, garages, and storage buildings.  Accessory buildings or structures may contain incidental uses such as but not limited to workshops, artist studios, hobby spaces, and accessory living spaces for residents of the main building which are not to be rented out for compensation unless otherwise permitted by this Code. Size limitations contained within this Code pertaining to accessory buildings or structures shall apply to the enclosed building footprint (the enclosed land area occupied by such accessory structure). 
 24. Building or Structure, Detached.  A building surrounded on all sides by open space and which is located more than two feet (2’) from the principal/primary structure. 
 25. Building Height.  The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point on the roof or parapet wall. 
 26. Building Line.  The line of that face or corner or part of a building nearest the property line. 
 27. Building Material Sales and Garden Equipment/Supplies (NAICS 444).  Establishments that retail new building material and garden equipment and supplies from fixed point-of-sale locations.  Establishments in this subsector have display equipment designed to handle lumber and related products and garden equipment and supplies that may be kept either indoors or outdoors under covered areas. 
 28. Business, Professional, Political, Social Advocacy, Grantmaking, and Similar Organizations (NAICS 8132, 8133, 8139).  See individual NAICS sectors for definitions. 
 29. Cemeteries and Crematories (NAICS 812220).  Establishments primarily engaged in operating sites or structures reserved for the interment of human or animal remains and/or cremating the dead. 
 30. Child Care Facility.  Any business, place of business or establishment which provides Child Care.  This definition includes any premises, location, play area, playground, organization, institution, partnership, school, home, residence, dwelling, group home, foster home, place or facility whether such business or concern calls itself a mini school, kindergarten, nursery, pre-school, club, cooperative, mother’s-day-out, learning center or any other business whose activity is the same or substantially similar to a Child Care operation or concern.   
  a. The definition of Child Care Facility shall not include: 
   (1) Any institution, school or facility operated by or under the direction of the State of Idaho, by any agency or political subdivision of the State of Idaho, or by any other public body or public entity. 
   (2) Any elementary, junior high, or high school licensed and designated as such by the State of Idaho. 
   (3) Any medical or hospital facility operated pursuant to license issued by the State of Idaho. 
  b. There shall be four (4) classifications of Child Care Facility: 
   (1) Family Child Care Facility:  A Child Care Facility providing Child Care for five (5) or fewer children; 
   (2) Group Child Care Facility:  A Child Care Facility providing Child Care for six (6) to twelve (12) children; 
   (3) Small Child Care Facility:  A Child Care Facility providing Child Care for thirteen (13) to twenty (20) children; and 
   (4) Large Child Care Facility:  A Child Care Facility providing Child Care for twenty-one (21) or more children. 
   (5) The number of children in each of the above classifications (1) through (4) may be increased with the addition of school-aged children (first grade and up) from 3:00 p.m. until 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, on teacher work days, and on snow days, without affecting the classification level. 
 31. Civic and Social Organizations (NAICS 813410).  Establishments primarily engaged in promoting the civic and social interests of their members.  Establishments in this industry may operate bars and restaurants for their members. 
 32. Coffee/Espresso Stand.  A beverage service establishment where drive-up window service is the primary customer access. 
 33. Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment Repair and Maintenance (NAICS 811310).  Establishments primarily engaged in the repair and maintenance of commercial and industrial machinery and equipment. 
 34. Commercial Banking (NAICS 522110).  Establishments primarily engaged in accepting demand and other deposits and making commercial, industrial, and consumer loans.  Commercial banks and branches of foreign banks are included in this industry. 
 35. Community Center.  A building or group of buildings in which members of a community may gather for group activities, social support, educational activities, cultural activities, and other purposes.  They may sometimes be open for the whole community or for a specialized group within the greater community. 
 36. Conditional Use.  "Conditional use" means a use permitted in one (1) or more zoning district as defined by this Zoning Code but which, because of characteristics  peculiar to such use, or because of size, technological processes or equipment, or because of the exact location with reference to surroundings, streets and existing improvements or demands upon public facilities, requires a special degree of control to make uses consistent with and compatible to other existing or permissible uses in the same zoning district(s). 
 37. Conditional Use Permit.  "Conditional Use Permit" means the documented evidence of authority granted by the Board of Adjustment to locate a conditional use at a particular location. 
 38. Construction Contractor Services (NAICS 238).  Establishments whose primary activity is performing specific activities (e.g., pouring concrete, site preparation, plumbing, painting, and electrical work) involved in building construction or other activities that are similar for all types of construction, but that are not responsible for the entire project. 
 39. Consumer Goods Rental (NAICS 5322).  Establishments primarily engaged in renting personal and household-type goods. Establishments classified in this industry group generally provide short-term rental although in some instances, the goods may be leased for longer periods of time. These establishments often operate from a retail-like or store-front facility. 
 40. Correctional Institutions (NAICS 922140).  Government establishments primarily engaged in managing and operating correctional institutions.  The facility is generally designed for the confinement, correction, and rehabilitation of adult and/or juvenile offenders sentenced by a court. 
 41. Credit Unions (NAICS 522130).  Establishments primarily engaged in accepting members' share deposits in cooperatives that are organized to offer consumer loans to their members. 
 42. Dance Halls.  Establishments where amplified sound or music is provided for entertainment. 
 43. Data Processing, Hosting, and Related Services (NAICS 518).  Establishments that provide the infrastructure for hosting and/or data processing services.  
 44. Dormitory.  A building typically located at a college or university, containing a number of private or semiprivate rooms for residents, usually along with common bathroom facilities and recreation areas. 
 45. Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages) (NAICS 722410).  Establishments known as bars, taverns, nightclubs, or drinking places primarily engaged in preparing and serving alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption.  These establishments may also provide limited food services. 
 46. Dwelling, Single Family.  A detached building or manufactured home designed for, and occupied exclusively by, one (1) family.  The classification “single family dwelling” shall include any home in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally and/or physically handicapped or elderly persons reside; and which is supervised.  Resident staff, if employed, need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally or physically handicapped or elderly persons residing in the home.  No more than two (2) such staff shall reside in the dwelling at any one (1) time.   
 47. Dwelling, Townhouse.  A structure which contains three (3) or more attached single family dwelling units that share a single common wall and where each unit is located upon a separate platted lot to allow for individual sale. 
 48. Dwelling, Twinhome.  A structure which contains two (2) attached single family dwelling units that share a single common wall and where each unit is located upon a separate platted lot to allow for individual sale. 
 49. Dwelling, Two (2) Family.  A building containing two (2) kitchens and designed to be occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
 50. Dwelling, Multi-Family.  A building designed to house three (3) or more families living independently of each other and having one (1) yard in common. 
 51. Dwelling Unit.  A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping facilities for one (1) family.  The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include motel, hotel, tourist home, bed and breakfast inn, or boarding house. 
 52. Educational Services (NAICS 611).  Establishments that provide instruction and training in a wide variety of subjects.  The instruction and training is provided by specialized establishments, such as schools, colleges, universities, and training centers. 
 53. Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance (NAICS 8112).  Establishments primarily engaged in repairing electronic equipment, such as computers and communicationsequipment, and highly specialized precision instruments. 
 54. Established Grade.  The high point of the sidewalk at the front or side lot line as established by the City. 
 55. Fairgrounds.  An area where outdoor fairs, circuses, exhibitions, etc. are held. 
 56. Family.   
  a. For purposes of this “family” definition: 
   (1) “related” shall mean persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, and/or guardianship or other duly authorized relationship, and 
   (2) “family” shall not mean any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, federation, bed and breakfast inn, boarding house, residential rental unit, or other like use or organization, and 
   (3) there shall be no more than one (1) “family” per dwelling unit, unless otherwise permitted by this Code. 
   (4) “living together as a single housekeeping unit” shall mean where all occupants of the dwelling unit enjoy a common right to use the entire dwelling, despite informal arrangements among members to designate certain areas as individual sleeping spaces, and where such persons share household living arrangements, including, but not limited to, rental or mortgage payments, utility payments, groceries, chores, maintenance of the premises, and common sanitary, living, and cooking supplies and/or facilities. 
   (5) “related by blood” shall mean persons related in any combination of the following:  parents, step-parents, children, step-children, siblings, step-siblings, half-siblings, uncles, aunts, nephews, nieces, grandparents, grandchildren, great grandparents, great grandchildren, and first cousins. 
 
  b. One (1) or more related persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or  
  c. Not more than four (4) persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, when one (1) or more of them is not related to any other person in such dwelling unit; or 
  d. Two (2) persons who are not related and any number of additional persons related to either of such two (2) unrelated persons, as long as all persons are living together as a single housekeeping unit in such dwelling unit; or 
  e. Eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally and/or physically handicapped or elderly persons reside; and which is supervised.  Resident staff, if employed, need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally or physically handicapped or elderly persons residing in the home.  No more than two (2) such staff shall reside in the dwelling at any one (1) time. 
 57. Farm and Garden Machinery and Equipment Merchant Wholesalers (NAICS 423820).  Establishments primarily engaged in the merchant wholesale distribution of specialized machinery, equipment, and related parts generally used in agricultural, farm, and lawn and garden activities. 
 58. Fitness Centers (NAICS 713940).  Establishments primarily engaged in operating fitness and recreational sports facilities featuring exercise and other active physical fitness conditioning or recreational sports activities, such as swimming, skating, or racquet sports. 
 59. Floor Area.  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and from the center line of division walls.  Floor area shall include:  basement space, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, mechanical equipment rooms or attic spaces with headroom of seven feet (7’) six inches (6”), exterior steps or stairs, terraces, breezeways and open spaces. 
 60. Fraternity, Sorority Or Student Cooperative.  A building occupied by and  maintained exclusively for students affiliated with an academic or professional college or university, or other recognized institution of higher learning and regulated by such institution. 
 61. Functional Open Space.  Land within a development which is permanently reserved as open space, free from permanent structures, useful for recreational or social use by the residents of the development, or others; such space shall not include streets, roadways or parking areas. 
 62. Funeral Homes and Funeral Services (NAICS 812210).  Establishments primarily engaged in preparing the dead for burial or interment and conducting funerals (i.e., providing facilities for wakes, arranging transportation for the dead, selling caskets and related merchandise).  Funeral homes combined with crematories are included in this industry. 
 63. Garage and/or Workshop, Private.  An enclosed space for the storage of one (1) or more private vehicles for residents of the premises. 
 64. Garden, Accessory.  The use of land for growing of produce and/or plants that is accessory to a permitted principal use, and where the produce from the garden is primarily grown for the consumption and use or donation by the person(s) residing or employed upon the subject property.  Accessary Gardens may include the keeping of animals and fowl as permitted by this Code.  On-site retail sales are not 
 
 
 permitted in association with Accessary Gardens unless specifically permitted under this Code. 
 65. Garden, Community.  The collective use of land for growing of produce and/or plants conducted by a group of people, where the site is commonly divided into plots that individuals may rent for the season, where the produce or plant materials grown upon the site are intended for consumption, use, or donation by the person(s) cultivating the land.  On-site retail sales are not permitted in association with Community Gardens unless specifically permitted under this Code. 
 66. Garden, Market.  The use of land for growing of produce and/or plants that is conducted by a single individual or a group of individuals where the produce or plant materials grown upon the site are intended to be sold for consumption by others.  Market Gardens may include the keeping of animals and fowl as permitted by this Code.  On-site retail sales are not permitted in association with Market Gardens unless specifically permitted under this Code.   
 67. Gasoline Stations (NAICS 447).  Establishments that retail automotive fuels (e.g., gasoline, diesel fuel, gasohol, alternative fuels) and automotive oils or retail these products in combination with convenience store items. These establishments have specialized equipment for the storage and dispensing of automotive fuels.   
 68. General Freight Trucking (NAICS 4841).  Establishments primarily engaged in providing general freight trucking. 
 69. Golf Courses and Country Clubs (NAICS 713910).  Establishments primarily engaged in operating golf courses (except miniature) which also may include dining facilities and other recreational facilities that are known as country clubs.  These establishments often provide food and beverage services, equipment rental services, and golf instruction services. 
 70. Golf Facilities, Miniature.  Establishments engaged in operating a novelty golf game played with a putter on a miniature course usually having tunnels, bridges, sharp corners, and obstacles.  These establishments often provide food and beverage services. 
 71. Government Office Buildings.  A building or rooms in which the business of a department of government administration is carried out.  Government office buildings include, but are not limited to, courthouses, local city government offices, and libraries.  
 72. Habitable Floor.  Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof.  A floor used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor." 
 73. Health Care Services (Ambulatory) (NAICS 621).  Establishments that provide health care services directly or indirectly to ambulatory patients and do not usually provide inpatient services.  Health practitioners in this subsector provide outpatient services, with the facilities and equipment not usually being the most significant part of the production process. 
 74. Hospitals (NAICS 622).  Establishments that provide medical, diagnostic, and treatment services that include physician, nursing, and other health services to inpatients and the specialized accommodation services required by inpatients.  Hospitals may also provide outpatient services as a secondary activity.  Establishments in the Hospitals subsector provide inpatient health services, many of which can only be provided using the specialized facilities and equipment 
that form a significant and integral part of the production process.   
 75. Hotels and Motels (NAICS 721110).  Establishments primarily engaged in providing short-term lodging in facilities known as hotels, motor hotels, resort hotels, and motels.  The establishments in this industry may offer food and beverage services, recreational services, conference rooms and convention services, laundry services, parking, and other services. 
 76. Kitchen.  Any rooms used or intended or designed to be used for cooking and/or preparation of food. 
 77. Large Retail Establishment.   
  a. A single retail establishment; or any combination of retail establishments in a single building with shared private off-street parking (such as a shopping mall); or any combination of retail establishments in separate and abutting buildings which are planned, constructed, and/or managed as a single property with shared private off-street parking (such as a shopping center); and  
  b. Which is greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area.  
 78. Laundries and Drycleaners (NAICS 812310).  Establishments primarily engaged in (1) operating facilities with coin-operated or similar self-service laundry and dry cleaning equipment for customer use on the premises; and/or (2) supplying and servicing coin-operated or similar self-service laundry and dry cleaning equipment for customer use in places of business operated by others, such as apartments and dormitories. 
 79. Lot.  A lot, in the meaning of this Zoning Code, is a single tract of land, no matter how legally described, whether by metes and bounds and/or by lot or lots and block designation as in a recorded plat, which at the time of applying for a building permit is designated by its owner or developer as the tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit of land under single ownership or control and assigned to the particular use for which the building permit is being secured and having frontage on or access to a public street. 
 80. Lot Area.  The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot, excluding areas of dedicated and prescriptive public or railroad rights-of-way.  The lot area shall include all utility easements and any flag pole portion of a flat lot.   
 81. Lot, Corner.  A lot at the junction of and fronting on two (2) or more intersecting streets. 
 82. Lot, Depth.  The mean dimension of the lot from the front street line to the rear line. 
 83. Lot, Flag.  A lot with access provided to the part of the lot designated for use as a building site by a narrow corridor. 
 84. Lot, Interior.  A lot fronting on one (1) street. 
 85. Lot Line, Front.  The front lot line is the property boundary that abuts a public or private street; the front lot line for an undeveloped corner lot is either one (1) of the property boundaries that abuts a public or private street, as selected by the property owner. 
 86. Lot Line, Rear.  The boundary line of a lot that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
 87. Lot Line, Side.  Any lot line not a rear lot line or a front lot line shall be considered a side lot line. 
 88. Lot Line, Street Side.  The street side lot line is the property boundary on a corner lot that abuts a public or private street which is not considered the front lot line. 
 89. Lot, Through.  A lot fronting on two (2) streets that do not intersect on the parcel's lot lines. 
 
 90. Lot, Width.  The dimension of the lot line at the street, or in an irregular shaped lot the dimension across the lot at the building line, or in a corner lot the narrow dimension of the lot at a street or building line. 
 91. Manufactured (Mobile) Home Dealers (NAICS 453930).  Establishments primarily engaged in retailing new and/or used manufactured homes (i.e., mobile homes), parts, and equipment. 
 92. Manufactured Home.  A structure as defined by Idaho Code Section 39-4105(14) and which meets the following additional standards: 
  a. The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet; and 
  b. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12”) above grade; and 
  c. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof of at least three feet (3’) in vertical rise for each twelve feet (12’) in horizontal run; and 
  d. The manufactured home shall have any exterior siding and roofing material which is approved by the City for site-built homes; and 
  e. The manufactured home shall not be permitted within an area defined as a historic district under Section 67-4607, Idaho Code.   
 93. Manufacturing, Aerospace Product and Parts Manufacturing (NAICS 3364).  Establishments primarily engaged in one (1) or more of the following:  (1) manufacturing complete aircraft, missiles, or space vehicles; (2) manufacturing aerospace engines, propulsion units, auxiliary equipment or parts; (3) developing and making prototypes of aerospace  
 products; (4) aircraft conversion (i.e., major modifications to systems); and (5) complete aircraft or propulsion systems overhaul and rebuilding (i.e., periodic restoration of aircraft to original design specifications). 
 94. Manufacturing, Beverage (NAICS 3121).  Establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing soft drinks, ice, and purifying and bottling water; manufacturing brewery products; winery products; and distillery products.  Also included is (1) the artificially carbonating of water; (2) the brewing of beer, ale, malt liquors, and nonalcoholic beer; (3) growing of the grapes, and the manufacturing of wine and brandy, or making of wine or brandy from purchased materials, and the blending of wines and brandies; and (4) the distilling of potable liquors (except brandies) and the blending of liquors and other ingredients. 
 95. Manufacturing, Computer and Electronic Product (NAICS 334).  Establishments that manufacture computers, computer peripherals, communications equipment, and similar electronic products, and establishments that manufacture components for such products. 
 96. Manufacturing, Electrical Equipment, Appliance, and Component (NAICS 335).  Establishments that manufacture products that generate, distribute and use electrical power. 
 97. Manufacturing, Light.  The manufacturing, compounding, treatment, processing, assembling, packaging, or testing of goods or equipment that is primarily indoors and which does not present any adverse effect upon surrounding property from smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare, air pollution, or water pollution.
 
 
 98. Manufacturing, Medical Equipment and Supplies (NAICS 3391).  Establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing medical equipment and supplies. 
 99. Manufacturing, Pharmaceutical and Medicine (NAICS 3254).  Establishments primarily engaged in one (1) or more of the following:  (1) manufacturing biological and medicinal products; (2) processing (i.e., grading, grinding, and milling) botanical drugs and herbs; (3) isolating active medicinal principals from botanical drugs and herbs; and (4) manufacturing pharmaceutical products intended for internal and external consumption in such forms as ampoules, tablets, capsules, vials, ointments, powders, solutions, and suspensions. 
 100. Manufacturing, Heavy.  The extraction, processing or treatment of raw materials, or the manufacturing, compounding, treatment, processing, assembling, packaging, testing, handling, or storage of explosive or radioactive materials or products. 
 101. Motorized Vehicle.  A motor driven conveyance capable of carrying one (1) or more passengers. 
 102. Movie Theaters (NAICS 512131).  Establishments primarily engaged in operating motion picture theaters (except drive-ins) and/or exhibiting motion pictures or videos at film festivals, and so forth. 
 103. Museums and Art Galleries (NAICS 712110).  Establishments primarily engaged in the preservation and exhibition of objects of historical, cultural, and/or educational value. 
 104. Nonconforming Building Use.  The use of a building or structure which was a lawful use at the time this Zoning Code was passed but which use, because of the passage of this Zoning Code, does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which the use exists. 
 105. Nonconforming Use.  A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time this Zoning Code becomes effective and which does not conform with the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
 106. Nursing and Residential Care Facilities (NAICS 623).  Establishments that provide residential care combined with either nursing, supervisory, or other types of care as required by the residents.  In this subsector, the facilities are a significant part of the production process and the care provided is a mix of health and social services with the health services being largely some level of nursing services. 
 107. Off-Street Parking.  Parking facilities for motor vehicles located on private property. 
 108. Parking Lots and Garages (NAICS 812930).  Establishments primarily engaged in providing parking space for motor vehicles, usually on an hourly, daily, or monthly basis and/or valet parking services.  For the purposes of this Code, a parking lot is an off-street parking facility designed for more than four (4) parking spaces. 
 109. Personal and Household Goods Repair and Maintenance (NAICS 8114).  Establishments primarily engaged in home and garden equipment and appliance repair and maintenance; reupholstery and furniture repair; footwear and leather goods repair; and other personal and household goods repair and maintenance. 
 110. Personal Care Services (NAICS 8121).  Establishments such as barber and beauty shops, that provide appearance care services to individual consumers. 
 111. Parking Space.  A usable space for the storage of one (1) passenger automobile or commercial vehicle, exclusive of access drives, aisles, or ramps, within a public or private parking lot or a building that meets the parking standards of this Code. 
 112. Pet Care Services (NAICS 812910).  Establishments primarily engaged in providing pet care services (except veterinary), such as boarding, grooming, sitting, and training pets. 
 113. Planned Unit Development (PUD).  The PUD is characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units and/or other buildings where clustering of buildings and utilization of open space will allow for enhanced land  use.  Through a PUD, a development may be planned as a unit and the density of use may be calculated on the basis of the entire project, rather than on a lot by lot basis.  Individual uses and structures in a PUD need not comply with specific building locations, height, building size, floor area, lot size and open space requirements of the underlying basic zone provided that requirements set forth herein are complied with, and the development as a whole is harmonious with the community, particularly adjacent land uses. 
 114. Principal Use.  The primary or predominant use(s) to which a property is or may be devoted. 
 115. Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services (NAICS 541).  Establishments engaged in processes where human capital is the major input.  These establishments make available the knowledge and skills of their employees, often on an assignment basis, where an individual or team is responsible for the delivery of services to the client.  The individual industries of this subsector are defined on the basis of the particular expertise and training of the services provider. 
 116. Public Service and Utility Facility.  Public facilities necessary to serve the neighborhood or community, including, but not limited to, fire stations, police stations, national guard armories, fire training facilities, pumping stations, electrical substations, and telephone switching facilities.  
 117. Publishing Industries (except Internet) (NAICS 511).  Establishments engaged in the publishing of newspapers, magazines, other periodicals, and books, as well as directory and mailing list and software publishing. 
 118. Public Utility.  A public service corporation performing some public service and subject to special governmental regulations, or a governmental agency performing similar public services, the services by either of which are paid for directly by the recipients thereof.  Such services shall include, but are not limited to, water supply, electric power, gas and transportation for persons and freight. 
 119. Railroad Yards (NAICS 488210).  Establishments primarily engaged in providing specialized services for railroad transportation, including servicing, routine repairing (except factory conversion, overhaul or rebuilding of rolling stock), and maintaining rail cars; loading and unloading rail cars; and operating independent terminals. 
 120. Real Estate Services (NAICS 531).  Establishments that are primarily engaged in renting or leasing real estate to others; managing real estate for others; selling, buying, or renting real estate for others; and providing other real estate related services, such as appraisal services. 
 121. Religious Facilities (NAICS 813110).  Establishments primarily engaged in (1) operating religious organizations, such as churches, religious temples, and monasteries; and/or (2) establishments primarily engaged in administering an organized religion or promoting religious activities. 
 122. Rental and Leasing Services (NAICS 532).  Establishments that provide a wide array of tangible goods, such as automobiles, computers, consumer goods, and industrial machinery and equipment, to customers in return for a periodic rental or lease payment. 
 123. Restaurants (NAICS 72251).  Establishments primarily engaged in one (1) of the following:  (1) providing food services to patrons who order and are served while seated (i.e., waiter/waitress service), and pay after eating; (2) providing food services to patrons who generally order or select items (e.g., at a counter, in a buffet line) and pay before eating; or (3) preparing and/or serving a specialty snack (e.g., ice cream, frozen yogurt, cookies) and/or nonalcoholic beverages (e.g., coffee, juices, sodas) for consumption on or near the premises. 
 124. Retail Sales (NAICS 44-45).  Establishments engaged in retailing merchandise, generally without transformation, and rendering services incidental to the sale of merchandise. 
 125. Riding Stables.  Establishments where horses are kept for riding, driving, or stabling for compensation. 
 126. RV (Recreational Vehicle) Parks and Campgrounds (NAICS 721211).  Establishments primarily engaged in operating sites to accommodate campers and their equipment, including tents, tent trailers, travel trailers, and RVs (recreational vehicles).  These establishments may provide access to facilities, such as washrooms, laundry rooms, recreation halls and playgrounds, stores, and snack bars. 
 127. Savings Institutions (NAICS 522120).  Establishments primarily engaged in accepting time deposits, making mortgage and real estate loans, and investing in high-grade securities.  Savings and loan associations and savings banks are included in this industry.  
 128. Sawmills (NAICS 321113).  Establishments primarily engaged in sawing dimension lumber, boards, beams, timbers, poles, ties, shingles, shakes, siding, and wood chips from logs or bolts. 
 129. Scrap Yards / Material Recycling (NAICS 423930).  Establishments primarily engaged in the merchant wholesale distribution of automotive scrap, industrial scrap, and other recyclable materials.  Included in this industry are auto wreckers primarily engaged in dismantling motor vehicles for the purpose of wholesaling scrap. 
 130. Securities, Commodity Contracts, and Other Financial Investments and Related Activities (NAICS 523).  Establishments that are primarily engaged in one (1) of the following:  (1) underwriting securities issues and/or making markets for securities and commodities; (2) acting as agents (i.e., brokers) between buyers and sellers of securities and commodities; (3) providing securities and commodity exchange services; and (4) providing other services, such as managing portfolios of assets; providing investment advice; and trust, fiduciary, and custody services. 
 131. Self-Storage Facilities (NAICS 531130).  Establishments primarily engaged in renting or leasing space for self-storage.  These establishments provide secure space (i.e., rooms, compartments, lockers, containers, or outdoor space) where clients can store and retrieve their goods. 
 132. Setback.  The distance that buildings or uses must be removed from their lot lines.  Setbacks shall be measured, where applicable, from proposed or actual public or private street right-of-way lines.  When measuring front and street side yard setbacks for lots that abut a Local Residential Street, as designated upon the Thoroughfare Plan within the City’s Comprehensive Plan, the front and street side setbacks shall be measured from the building lot side of the public sidewalk to the nearest point of the wall of the main building on the lot.  In such cases where sidewalks do not exist in the front or street side of a building lot, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the point of measurement based upon the location of adjacent principal structures, the likelihood of future sidewalk installation, and the anticipated location of such future sidewalk. 
 133. Sign.  A presentation, display, or representation of words or letters, or of a figure, design, picture, painting, color pattern, logo, emblem, symbol, trademark or other representation so as to give notice, advertise, call attention to, or identify an entity. 
 134. Software Publishers (NAICS 5112).  Establishments primarily engaged in computer software publishing or publishing and reproduction.  Establishments in this industry carry out operations necessary for producing and distributing computer software, such as designing, providing documentation, assisting in installation, and providing support services to software purchasers.  These establishments may design, develop, and publish, or publish only. 
 135. Stadiums and Sports Arenas (NAICS 713940).  Establishments primarily engaged in operating fitness and recreational sports facilities featuring exercise and other active physical fitness conditioning or recreational sports activities, such as swimming, skating, or racquet sports. 
 136. Street.  A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
 137. Telecommunications Services (NAICS 517).  Establishments that provide telecommunications and the services related to that activity (e.g., telephony, including Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP); cable and satellite television distribution services; Internet access; telecommunications reselling services).  The Telecommunications subsector is primarily engaged in operating, and/or providing access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound, and video. 
 138. Temporary Use.  A land use established for a limited duration which does not require permanent site improvements.  Temporary Uses include, but are not limited to, the erection of temporary structures for activities such as fruit and vegetable sales, Christmas tree sales, fireworks sales, art sales, and other retail sales permitted in the zoning district within which the proposed use is to be located. 
 139. Use.  The purpose land, a building or a structure now serves or for which it is occupied, maintained, arranged, designed or intended. 
 140. Use District.  A portion or portions of the City designated on the Moscow Zoning Map as one (1) or more of the categories listed and described in this Zoning Code. 
 141. Variance.  A modification of the bulk and placement requirements of the ordinance as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space, height of buildings, or other ordinance provision affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots. 
 142. Veterinary Services (NAICS 541940).  Establishments of licensed 
 veterinary practitioners primarily engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery for animals; and establishments primarily engaged in providing testing services for licensed veterinary practitioners. 
 143. Warehousing and Storage (NAICS 493).  Establishments that are primarily engaged in operating warehousing and storage facilities for general merchandise, refrigerated goods, and other warehouse products.  These establishments provide facilities to store goods.  They do not sell the goods they handle.  These establishments take responsibility for storing the goods and keeping them secure.  They may also provide a range of services, often referred to as logistics services, related to the distribution of goods. 
 144. Wholesale Uses (NAICS 423).  Establishments that sell capital or durable goods to other businesses. 
145. Yard.  An open unoccupied space, except as otherwise permitted in this Code, in the front, rear or side on the same lot with a building or proposed building, which extends along a lot line and at right angles to the lot line to a depth or width specified in the setback requirements of the zoning district where the property is located. 
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 1-7.  Nonconformities. 
A. Intent: 
1. Within the zoning districts established by this Zoning Code or amendments thereto, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of uses and structures which were lawful before this Zoning Code was enacted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Zoning Code or future amendment.  It is the intent of this Zoning Code to permit these nonconformities to continue  until they are removed, destroyed or lost by time, but not to encourage their survival.  Further it is the intent of this Zoning Code that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zoning district. 
2. Nonconforming uses are declared by this Zoning Code to be incompatible with permitted uses in the same zoning district.  A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Zoning Code by attachment to a building or by the addition of other uses, of a nature which would otherwise be prohibited in the same zoning district. 
3. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Zoning Code shall be deemed to require a change in the City-approved plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code and upon which actual building construction has since been diligently pursued.  Actual construction includes the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastening in a permanent manner.  Where excavation, demolition, or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun in preparation for rebuilding, such excavation, demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on. 
B. Nonconforming Lots of Record:  In any zoning district in which single family dwellings are permitted, where any single lot of record existing as of the effective date of adoption of this 
Zoning Code has been previously approved by the City, a single family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on such lot. 
This provision shall apply even if such lot otherwise fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, which are generally applicable in the district.  Such lot shall conform to yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to lot area or width for the zoning district in which such lot is located.  
Variance of yard requirements may be granted only pursuant to the procedure set forth in this Zoning Code. 
C. Nonconforming Use of Land (or land with minor structures only):  Where at the time of passage of this Zoning Code, or of an amendment thereto, lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this Zoning Code or an amendment, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000), such use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
1. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code; and 
2. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that physically occupied by such use on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code; and 
3. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Zoning Code for the zoning district in which such land is located.  This provision shall not apply when the discontinuance or abandonment is caused by government action impeding access to the premises; and 
4. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this Zoning Code shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
D. Nonconforming Structures:  Where a lawful structure exists on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code that could not be built under the terms of this Zoning Code by reason of standards for area, lot coverage, height, yards, the structure's location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be retained if it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any manner which increases its nonconformity, except as provided in M.C.C. 4-1-8(D)(4) below; and 
2. Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by no fault of the owner (fire, flood, natural disaster, etc.), it may be reconstructed having the same zoning nonconformities, but no more than as existed before the damage occurred;  
3. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located after it is moved; and 
4. A nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered with the same zoning nonconformities through the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. 
E. Nonconforming Uses of Structures or of Structures and Premises in Combination:  If lawful use of individual structures with a replacement cost of Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000) or more, or of such structures and land in combination, exists on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code that would not be allowed in the zoning district under the terms of this Zoning Code, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Zoning Code in the zoning district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.  An exception would be when destruction of an existing structure and use in combination occurs by no fault of the owner (fire, flood, natural disaster, etc.), the structure and use in combination may be replaced to its original size and use prior to the destruction; and 
2. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; and 
3. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is replaced by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located.  The nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed; and 
4. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which the structure is located.  This provision shall not apply when the discontinuance or abandonment is caused by government action impeding access to the structure or premises; 
F. Repairs and Maintenance: 
1. Ordinary repairs and maintenance may be done on any nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure. 
2. Further, upon order of any official charged with protecting the public safety, any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by such official may be strengthened or restored to a safe condition. 
(Ord 2016-15, 11/21/2016; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 


Chapter 2 
 
ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 2-1: Establishment of Zoning Districts 
Sec. 2-2: Adoption of Moscow Zoning Map 
Sec. 2-3: Rules for Determination of Zoning Districts 
Sec. 2-4: District Purposes 
Sec. 2-5: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts  
 
Sec. 2-1. Establishment of Zoning Districts. 
 Pursuant to the policies contained in this Zoning Code and the Plan, the City is divided into zoning districts as depicted upon the Moscow Zoning Map which is hereby adopted and made a part of this Title and Ordinance, as though fully set out herein.  Zoning districts depicted on the Moscow Zoning Map shall  correspond to the zoning districts established by this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 2-2. Adoption of Moscow Zoning Map. 
 The original of the Moscow Zoning Map, signed by the Mayor, attested by the Clerk, and kept in the office of the City Engineer, shall serve as the true record of zoning district boundaries of the City.  A copy shall be retained by the Clerk.  Provisions shall be made on the Moscow Zoning Map for notation of changes to zoning district boundaries.  Change notations shall be initialed by the Mayor upon the original Moscow Zoning Map. 
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 2-3. Rules for Determination of Zoning Districts. 
 Where uncertainty exists as to the classification or boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the Moscow Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines; 
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines; 
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits; 
D. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A through C herein shall be so construed. 
E. Distances not specifically indicated on the Moscow Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
F. When physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Moscow Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A through E herein, the zoning district boundaries shall be determined in a manner consistent with the purposes of this Zoning Code. 
G. Where a district boundary line appearing on the Moscow Zoning Map divides a platted lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Chapter, the requirements of the less restrictive zoning district shall apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extension shall not include any part of such lot more than thirty (30) feet beyond a zoning district boundary line. 
H. If the zoning district of any property as indicated on the Moscow Zoning Map should conflict with a textual description, the Moscow Zoning Map shall prevail. 
I. If the zoning of a parcel of land is not shown on the Moscow Zoning Map, the parcel of land shall be deemed to be zoned FR, Farm, Ranch, Outdoor Recreation Zoning District. 
J. All land hereafter annexed to the City shall be classified FR, Farm, Ranch, Outdoor Recreation Zoning District, 
pending study, public hearing and specific zoning district classification. 
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 2-4. District Purposes. 
A. Agriculture/Forestry Zoning District (AF). 
 Purpose:  The purpose of the Agriculture/Forestry (AF) zoning district is to foster agriculture and forestry land uses while providing for limited, low-density residential land uses which will not conflict with farm and forest practices nor place inappropriate demands on rural public services nor promote the indiscriminate conversion of farm and forest land to other uses. 
B. Farm, Ranch, and Outdoor Recreation Zoning District (FR). 
 Purpose:  This classification is intended to permit current agricultural, outdoor recreation and other open land uses to be maintained and at the same time to set minimum standards for the development of similar new uses in order that this open zoning district be protected against spasmodic, disorderly and indiscriminate development until such time as another appropriate use of the land in this zoning district has been determined.  It is also intended that newly annexed areas of the City be placed in this classification until land use studies determine the character and appropriate use of such areas. 
C. Suburban Residential Zoning District (SR). 
 Purpose:  This classification is to create and protect a permanent single family residential neighborhood at a very low density.  Where properly located and controlled, specified rural uses, including pasturage of livestock, may be allowed.  Because large areas are contained within lots in this zoning district, the demand for parking is to be satisfied by spaces located entirely on private property.  Public improvements are to be designed to serve the rural, low intensity uses permitted in this zoning district; for this reason and because some uses permitted in the SR zoning district may not be compatible with more intensive zoning districts, the following conditions shall apply to the designation of land in the SR zoning district. 
 1. Local streets developed to a reduced standard specially applicable in the SR zoning district shall not provide primary access to development with a higher density than permitted in the SR zoning district. 
 2. The minimum size of an SR zoning district shall be ten (10) acres. 
 3. The SR zoning district shall be located only in areas specifically designated A or A/LR on the Comprehensive Plan Map.  Because the SR zoning district may interfere with higher density, more efficient land use, it should be applied where such interference would be unlikely, such as in areas primarily rural in character and not close to schools, public facilities and shopping areas.  The SR zoning district should not be applied where the reduced street standards permitted would interfere with present or future transportation needs for the area in which the SR zoning district is proposed. 
 4. After zoning and development of land in the SR zoning district occurs, changes from this zoning district can only take place concurrently with or after redevelopment of streets and utilities to standards applicable in the proposed zoning district for which the person is applying. 
D. Low Density, Single Family Residential Zoning District (R-1). 
 Purpose:  The R-1 zoning district is a low density residential zone appropriate where the following circumstances are present: 
 1. Single family dwellings predominate in the area. 
 2. The physical character of the area does not lend it to more intense development, either by virtue of irregular topography, restricted access, division of the land into subdivision lots of a size greater than the minimum lot size required by this zoning district, or the application of the Plan policies to the land in question. 
E. Moderate Density, Single Family Residential Zoning District (R-2). 
 Purpose:  The R-2 zoning district is a moderate density residential zone appropriate where the following circumstances are present: 
 1. Single family dwellings predominate. 
 2. The terrain is not harshly irregular and smaller lot sizes can be accommodated without extensive earthwork. 
 3. Utilities and other public facilities are adequate for the densities allowed. 
 4. Existing lot development patterns and policies embodied in the Plan will also guide application of this zoning district. 
F. Medium Density Residential Zoning District (R-3). 
 Purpose:  The R-3 zoning district provides for an increase over the density allowed by the R-2 zoning district by permitting different types of housing construction.  It is appropriate where activity levels are moderate, terrain permits construction of somewhat larger structures, and where public systems and neighborhood facilities can accommodate a greater intensity of land use as guided by the Comprehensive Plan. 
G. Multiple Family Residential Zoning District (R-4). 
 Purpose:  The R-4 zoning district provides for the most intense residential land uses permitted in the community.  It is to be applied where activity levels are high and adequate public facilities are available, especially near the University of Idaho campus or the City Central Business Zoning District.  Adequate transportation access should be given high priority in determining the appropriate location for R-4 zoning districts. 
H. Residential/Office Zoning District (RO). 
 Purpose:  The RO Zoning District is a moderately intensive zone including both offices and high density housing.  It serves as a transitional Zoning District between residential Zoning Districts and commercial or industrial Zoning Districts.  The RO Zoning District is appropriately applied in the following circumstances: 
 1. On the perimeter of commercial or industrial districts where they abut residential land uses; 
 2. Where transportation network use is greater than desirable for lower density residential uses; 
 3. Where landforms create sites which are reasonably accessible by transportation systems and which are buffered from nearby residential areas; and 
 4. Where the development patterns in a neighborhood will allow development of moderate intensity to occur without producing adverse visual impact or harm to the transportation network. 
I. Neighborhood Business Zoning District (NB). 
 Purpose:  The NB Zoning District is the lowest intensity commercial Zoning District permitted within the City.  It is intended to apply to areas of less than two (2) acres, where commercial services may be provided in convenient locations serving adjoining residential neighborhoods rather than the community as a whole.  The commercial services permitted are those where traffic generation, access requirements, impacts of lighting, neighborhood need for services, and noise production will be compatible with residential uses.  The NB Zoning District is appropriately applied in the following circumstances: 
 
 
 1. Where local commercial facilities will serve the everyday needs of a limited neighborhood area; 
 2. Where activity levels associated with small scale office development can be accommodated or tolerated by surrounding land uses and existing public services; 
 3. Where a neighborhood core is identified which is easily accessible by pedestrian or vehicular circulation; and 
 4. Where such commercial development will result in minimal interference with residential uses in the vicinity of the NB Zoning District. 
J. Research, Technology and Office Zoning District (RTO). 
 Purpose:  The RTO Zoning District is intended to create a high quality professional environment for research, technology, office and other primary job industries to be established within the City of Moscow.  This Zoning District is appropriate where adequate infrastructure is available and where neighboring land uses will enhance, or not detract from, the intent and uses of the RTO Zoning District.  The RTO Zoning District should be located adjacent to or in close proximity to arterial or collector streets.   
K. Central Business Zoning District (CB). 
 Purpose:  The principal purpose of the CB Zoning District is to provide a location for groups of compatible commercial uses having the common characteristic of not involving more than incidental and minimal assembly, fabrication or storage of commodities; for example, establishments dispensing retail commodities, and those providing professional and personal services to the individual.  The CB Zoning District is the most intensive commercial Zoning District.  To promote pedestrian use, unbroken, street-level, commercial frontage is encouraged in this Zoning District. 
 
L. General Business Zoning District (GB). 
 Purpose:  The principal purpose of the GB Zoning District is to provide for the location and grouping of compatible retail enterprises having the common characteristics of dispensing commodities, providing professional services or providing personal services to the individual, but which do not involve more than incidental or limited assembly, fabrication or storage of commodities.  The GB Zoning District is appropriately applied in the following circumstances: 
 1. On the periphery of the CB Zoning District where retail uses are appropriate yet the distance to community parking facilities indicates a need for on-site parking. 
 2. At dispersed commercial centers where the grouping of retail and office uses is appropriate to serve community or regional needs. 
M. Motor Business Zoning District (MB). 
 Purpose:  The MB Zoning District is intended to provide for the location and grouping of compatible uses having similar operation as they involve enterprises which depend primarily on the transient motor vehicle-based trade.  By concentrating such uses the City intends to increase public convenience when utilizing such services and, within the regulation, to allow such activities to render the maximum service. 
N. Industrial Zoning District (I). 
 Purpose:  The I Zoning District is designed to encourage sound industrial development in the City by providing a protective environment primarily for such development. 
O. Urban Mixed Commercial Zoning District (UMC). 
 Purpose:  The principal purpose of the UMC Zoning District is to provide a location for urban mixed development including a range of compatible commercial uses such as retail, eating 
 and drinking, and hospitality establishments, professional and personal service uses, as well as residential uses.  The UMC Zoning District is intended to promote the urban development form, promote a mixture of commercial and residential land uses.  This Zoning District is appropriately applied in close proximity to the Central Business District and the downtown area where the urban form of development is appropriate and intensity of allowed commercial land uses can be accommodated.   
P. University Zoning District (U). 
 Purpose:  The purpose of the University Zoning District is to create a district that will protect and maintain the university environment, and provide for the location and grouping of compatible uses found on or in close proximity to the University of Idaho Campus. 
 (Ords. 97-12, 04/07/97; 97-14, 04/07/97; 97-33, 11/03/97; 98-15, 04/20/98; 98-13, 04/20/98; 98-18, 06/01/98; 2003-24, 11/17/2003; 2005-07, 02/07/2005; 2005-27, 08/15/2005; 2005-33, 12/19/2005; 2006-03, 02/07/2006; 2006-20, 11/06/2006; 2007-11, 09/17/2007; 2008-22, 10/20/2008; 2010-10, 06/07/2010; 2010-24, 11/15/2010; 2011-11, 08/15/2011; 2011-15, 09/19/2011; 2013-05, 04/01/2013; 2013-15, 08/19/2013; 2013-16, 10/21/2013; 2014-06, 05/19/2014; 2014-16, 10/06/2014; 2014-19, 11/17/2014; 2015-04, 03/02/2015; 2015-06, 04/06/2015; 2015-07, 05/04/2015; 2015-11, 07/06/2015; 2015-12, 08/03/2015; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 2-5. Overlay and Specific Plan Districts. 
A. General Provisions. 
 Overlay and Specific Plan Districts.  All land within the City shall be assigned a base zoning district established in Section 4-2-1.  In addition, some lands may be designated one or more overlay district.  Where a property is assigned an overlay district, both sets of regulations apply, with those of overlay controlling in case of conflict between the two.  An overlay district may apply additional requirements or allow exceptions to the standard regulations of the base zone. 
B. Legacy Crossing Overlay Zoning District (LCO). 
 1. Purpose.  With the retraction of historic agricultural industrial uses from the downtown area and in special consideration of its unique and sensitive characteristics, the City finds that redevelopment within the LCO area requires an increased level of review to ensure the logical and orderly redevelopment and provision of public services within the LCO area.   
 2. Relationship to Underlying Zoning.  It is the intent of the LCO that the underlying zoning district designation shall specify the permitted land uses within the LCO and the LCO review process shall be contained to the review of design of proposed development within the LCO. 
 3. Development Review.  Prior to the issuance of any building permit for a new principal structure, or for a substantial improvement (as defined by this Code) to any existing principal structure, all development proposals within the LCO shall be reviewed for conformance with the LCO Design Guidelines, as duly adopted by Resolution of the Council, in accordance with the provisions of this Section.  
 4. Development Review Process.  Review of a proposed LCO development shall consist of three (3) stages:  a Pre-application Meeting; a Preliminary LCO Development Review; and a Final LCO Development Review.   
  a. Pre-application Meeting.  The pre-application meeting is intended to provide the opportunity to identify and discuss the conformance of the proposed development concept with the underlying zoning designation and the intents, purposes and requirements of the LCO Design Guidelines, and to provide an informal review opportunity of a proposed development prior to 
 substantial design investment by the applicant.   
   i. Required Pre-application Meeting Materials.  The applicant shall provide concept plans which show the proposed development, including a concept site plan, building elevations,  and the number, floor area, and proposed use of all proposed structures and land areas of the development site.  Such plans shall be of adequate scale, resolution and detail to provide the Zoning Administrator with adequate information to assess the conformance of proposed development to the LCO Design Guidelines.  
   ii. Upon completion of the Pre-application Meeting, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with comments and suggestions for any recommended amendments and/or modifications to the development concept for use in further development of the application. 
  b. Preliminary Development Review.   
   i. Preliminary LCO Development Application Materials.  Prior to review by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant shall submit five (5) copies the following development application materials to the Zoning Administrator: 
    (a) A development site plan that includes all the following: 
     (i) Property boundary lines and individual lot lines of each parcel which is to be created for separate ownership;  
     (ii) Existing and proposed grade plan in two foot (2’) maximum contour intervals of the development site and extending a minimum of twenty feet (20’) outside the development site;  
     (iii) The location of all buildings and all off-street parking areas;  
     (iv) The location of all planned and existing thoroughfares and walks, their widths and nature of their improvements, and whether they are to be public or private;  
     (v) The location of easements for water lines, fire hydrants, sewer and storm sewer lines, and other utilities;  
     (vi) Areas to be conveyed, dedicated, reserved or used for parks, playgrounds or any other public use;  
     (vii) Landscaping and tree planting plans including the location of existing trees and shrubs which are to be retained; 
     (viii) Any other details deemed necessary during the Pre-application Meeting to demonstrate conformance with the LCO Design Guidelines. 
    (b) Elevation drawings of all proposed structures including a description of proposed building materials and all proposed land uses including a computation of total square footages dedicated to the proposed uses; and  
    (c) Lighting and signage plans. 
   ii. All submitted plans shall be drawn to a standard engineer’s or architect’s scale and may contain multiple categories of the above-listed information on any one (1) plan drawing, provided that such plan drawing represents all information in an accurate and readily identifiable manner.  Plans shall contain information and detail as necessary to determine compliance with applicable codes, and to determine conformance with the LCO Design Guidelines and intent of this Section. 
   iii. Determination of Completeness.  Upon receipt of the Preliminary Review submission from Applicant, the Zoning Administrator shall distribute the proposed development plans to the appropriate development review parties for review 
and comment upon the proposed development plans.  Upon determination that the application materials are complete and in substantial conformance with applicable City standards and requirements, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the Preliminary LCO Development Application for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
   iv. Preliminary Review Public Comment Period.  Prior to the Preliminary Review by the Commission, notice of the proposed development shall be published in the paper of record and posted upon the subject property.  Such notice shall describe the nature of the proposed development, the location where materials relating to the proposed development may be viewed, and provide fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of publication and posting for written comments regarding the proposed development to be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. All written comments received by the Zoning Administrator shall be included with the preliminary review materials for the Commission’s consideration. 
   v. Preliminary Development Review Process.  The Preliminary Review shall be conducted by the Commission as a regular agenda item.  The Commission shall evaluate the conformance of the proposed development with the LCO Design Guidelines and may give approval of the proposed development, or approval subject to required modifications or conditions, or may deny the development proposal.  All decisions of the Commission shall be based upon the criteria established within the LCO Design Guidelines.  If the proposed development will include Conditionally Permitted Uses or require a Variance, the Commission shall serve as the hearing body for the proposed Conditional Use or Variance in conjunction with the Preliminary Review. 
   vi. Appeal of the Preliminary Decision.  The decision of the Commission relative to a proposed LCO development may be appealed to the Council by the applicant or by any affected person, as defined by this Code, in accordance with this Code.   
   vii. Duration of Preliminary Approval.  Preliminary approval of a LCO development proposal shall expire eighteen (18) months following the date of approval by the Commission and shall be automatically null and void on such date unless final approval has been granted prior to such time.   
  c. Final Review.  The final review process is intended to provide an opportunity to review the final development plans for conformance with the intent of the Preliminary Development Review approval. 
   i. Final LCO Development Application Review Materials.  The applicant shall provide five (5) copies of the proposed final LCO development plans to the Zoning Administrator not less than twenty-one (21) days in advance of the meeting of the Commission at which the proposed final development plans shall be reviewed.  The final LCO development plan submission shall include final version of all materials required for the Preliminary development review, in addition to the following items: 
    (a) Evidence of clear title to any lands to be conveyed or reserved for parks, scenic ways, playgrounds, schools, public buildings, or other public purposes; 
    (b) Final plans for location of water, sewer, drainage and all other utilities, and plans for street improvements and grading;  
    (c) A final phasing plan; and 
    (d) Any proposed development agreements, deed restrictions, or other commitments necessary to assure compliance with the proposed final LCO development plan. 
   ii. Final LCO Development Review Process.  If the proposed final LCO development plan is substantially similar to the LCO development plan application submitted to the Commission for preliminary approval and, if it adequately incorporates all required conditions or modifications, it may be considered as a regular agenda item at a meeting of the Commission.  The Commission may grant final approval, may grant final approval with minor modifications or conditions, or may deny the application if it is not in substantial conformance with the preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary review approval.  Phased building permits and construction shall be allowed in accordance to phasing plans presented and approved within the original approval. 
   iii. Appeal of the Final Decision.  The decision of the Commission relative to a proposed LCO development final approval may be appealed to the Council by the applicant or by any affected person, as defined by this Code, in accordance with this Code.   
   iv. Duration of Final LCO Development Approval.  If building permits required for the approved LCO development are not obtained within twenty-four (24) months following the date of final approval by the Commission, such LCO development final approval shall be immediately revoked and shall be automatically null and void on such date.  Within twenty four (24) months following the date of LCO development final approval by the Commission, the applicant of such LCO development may request one (1) extension of not more than twelve (12) months from the date of the request for extension.  The request for extension shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the Commission.  No further extension shall be granted. 
  d. LCO Project Amendment.  After final approval of a LCO Development, the Zoning Administrator shall administer the permitting and development review process for the project.  The Zoning Administrator shall be allowed to approve minor amendments to the project that do not substantively alter the intent and considerations, or specific conditions of the Commission’s project approval.  If the Zoning Administrator finds that the proposed amendment substantively alters the intent and considerations, or specific conditions of the Commission’s approval, the proposed amendment shall be consider by the Commission as a regular agenda item. 
 (Ord. 2012-09, 06/04/2012; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 


 
 
Chapter 3 
 
PERMITTED LAND USES 
 
Sec. 3-1: Introduction of Land Use Table 
Sec. 3-2: Interpretation of Land Use Table 
Sec. 3-3: Authorized Uses 
Sec. 3-4: Land Use Table 
Sec. 3-5: Specific Use Standards 
Sec. 3-6: Limitations on Uses Table 
Sec. 3-7: Performance Standards 
 
Sec. 3-1. Introduction of Land Use Table. 
 The Land Use Table within Section 3.4 below lists the uses allowed within all base zoning districts.  Each of the listed uses is defined in City Code Section 4-1-6, Definitions. 
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 3-2. Interpretation of Land Use Table. 
A. Permitted Uses.  “P” in a cell indicates that the use is allowed by right, without special conditions other than those imposed upon other uses by right in the district.  Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Code. 
B. Permitted Accessory Uses.  “PA” in a cell indicates that the use is allowed only as accessory or incidental to a permitted principal use.  An accessory use is generally designed or employed in conjunction with but subordinate to its primary use.  
C. Conditional Uses.  “C” in a cell indicates that in the respective zoning district the use is allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures in City Code Section 4-8-4, Conditional Uses.  Conditional Uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Code.  A “C” designation does not constitute an authorization or assurance that such use will be permitted.  Rather, each Conditional Use Permit application shall be evaluated against the relevant criteria and standards contained within City Code Section 4-8-4(B), and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate appropriate. 
D. Uses Subject to Specific Requirements.  “P.”, “PA.”, or “C.” in a cell indicates that the use is subject to specific requirements contained within footnotes at the end of the use table.  
E. Prohibited Uses.  A blank cell indicates that the use is not permitted in the respective zoning district. 
 (Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 3-3. Authorized Uses. 
 This Zoning Code is an exclusive zoning ordinance wherein the stated uses are the only uses which are permitted in each zoning district.  Those uses not listed as permitted or conditionally permitted are not authorized.  The question whether a specific use is encompassed by a listed use shall be subject to the Zoning Administrator's or designee’s reasonable discretion.  Further, if a proposed use is not specifically listed within the Land Use Table, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall make a determination as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed, based upon the most comparable use listed within the table.  
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
 
Sec. 3-4. Land Use Table. 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 3-5.  Specific Use Standards. 
A. Accessory Dwelling Units: 
 1. Applicability and Purpose.  These standards shall apply to Accessory Dwelling Units which are permitted by this Code.  These standards are intended to help promote the benefits of Accessory Dwelling Units, while also preserving neighborhood character and creating predictability and certainty for established neighborhoods. 
 2. Specific Standards. 
  a. General.  Accessory Dwelling Units must meet all applicable regulations for the zoning district in which they are located, except as otherwise expressly stated within this Section.  Lots that currently do not meet the minimum lot size for a single family dwelling shall be ineligible for an Accessory Dwelling Unit. 
  b. Size.  The floor area of the Accessory Dwelling Unit may  
 
 not exceed six hundred (600) square feet or forty percent (40%) of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling, whichever is less. 
  c. Maximum Occupancy.  The number of persons allowed to reside within an Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be limited to two (2). 
  d. Owner Occupancy.   
   i. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for an Accessory Dwelling Unit, the property owner must record a deed restriction upon the property which states that the property owner will reside on the property, within either the principal dwelling or Accessory Dwelling Unit.  The deed restriction must be approved by the City Attorney and shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, and subsequent purchasers of the property. 
   ii. Owner occupancy means a property owner, as reflected in real property records, 
who makes his or her legal residence at the property, as evidenced by voter registration or similar means and actually resides at the property for more than six (6) months out of any given year.  Owner occupancy may also include a named natural person with an ownership or benefit in a private trust, but shall not extend to corporate trusts.  
   iii. The Community Development Director may waive this requirement for temporary absences of greater than six (6) months for military service, employment sabbatical, or family medical leave qualified absences.  Temporary leave waivers for other reasons must be reviewed and approved by the City Council. 
   iv. In the event the owner is unable to reside on the property as required herein, only one (1) of the dwelling units on the property may be occupied.  
  e. Off-street parking.  One (1) off-street parking space shall be required for the Accessory Dwelling Unit, in addition to that required for the principal dwelling. 
B. Accessory Home Occupations. 
 1. Purpose.   
  Accessory home occupations are uses that occur within dwellings and which are accessory and incidental to the principal use of the subject property for residential purposes.  It is the intent of this Section to allow accessory home occupations that are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and land use where the nature of the accessory home occupation use is and remains secondary to the principal use of the subject property as a dwelling.  This Section recognizes that many types of accessory home occupations can be conducted within a residential dwelling with little or no adverse effect(s) on the surrounding neighborhood. 
 2. Description of Accessory Home Occupation Types. 
  For the purposes of this Section there shall be two (2) classifications of accessory home occupations as follows: 
  a. Type I Accessory Home Occupation.  A Type I Accessory Home Occupation is a non-residential use conducted solely by the inhabitants of the dwelling within such dwelling unit, or allowable accessory structure thereto; where there are no on-site employees or customer services provided; and where the conduct of the use does not change the character or nature of the dwelling or surrounding area.  Examples include, but are not limited to, artists, crafts people, writers, graphic artists, computer programmers and software developers, consultants and similar uses.  Private instruction (such as music instruction, private tutoring, other and similar uses) involving no more than four (4) students upon the premises at any one time shall be deemed to be a Type I Accessory Home Occupation. 
  b. Type II Accessory Home Occupation.  A Type II Accessory Home Occupation is a non-residential use conducted by the inhabitants of the dwelling with up to one (1) additional on-site employee, and/or with on-site customer service provided upon 
the subject property, and where the conduct of the use does not change the character or nature of the dwelling or surrounding area. 
 3. Accessory Home Occupation Use Regulations. 
  a. Allowed Uses.  Type I Accessory Home Occupations shall be an allowed use in all residential Zoning Districts, but shall be subject to the performance standards included herein.  Type II Accessory Home Occupations shall be a Conditionally Permitted Use in all residential Zoning Districts and shall also be subject to the performance standards included herein. 
  b. Prohibited Accessory Home Occupation Uses.  The following uses shall not be allowed as either a Type I or Type II Accessory Home Occupation, but may otherwise be permitted under this Code: 
   i. Animal clinics or kennels; 
   ii. Bed and breakfast; 
   iii. Boarding house; 
   iv. Child Care Facilities; 
   v. Dispatch centers, where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; 
   vi. Manufacturing utilizing power tools or similar equipment such as furniture refinishing or building, cabinet making, metal fabrication or cutting, employing welding or cutting, or other similar uses, except for minor and incidental use of such equipment deemed allowable by the Zoning Administrator; 
   vii. Medical clinics;   viii. On-site retail sales involving on-premises customer service, except as may be permitted as an accessory use to a Type II Accessory Home Occupation; 
   ix. Repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines (such as automobiles, lawnmowers, motorcycles, snow-mobiles and other similar equipment); 
   x. Restaurants; 
   xi. Schools;  
   xii. Towing services; and 
   xiii. Other uses with similar operating characteristics as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
 4. Accessory Home Occupation Performance Standards. 
  a. Outdoor Activities.  All activities shall be conducted wholly within the principal structure or a permitted accessory structure thereto.  External storage or display of goods or equipment shall be prohibited. 
  b. Appearance of Structure and Site.  The dwelling and subject property shall remain residential in character and the Accessory Home Occupation use shall not be discernable from the exterior of the principal structure or permitted accessory structure thereto.  No alterations of the structure or subject property which would change the residential appearance of the dwelling and subject property shall be permitted.  Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of parking lots, paving of setbacks,  
 external signage not otherwise permitted by this Code, or adding commercial exterior lighting. 
  c. Vehicles.  No more than one (1) vehicle shall be discernable as being used in association with the Accessory Home Occupation.  The maximum size of such vehicle used in association with the Accessory Home Occupation shall be no more than one (1) ton capacity and shall not include any trailer. 
  d. Deliveries.  Deliveries and/or pick-ups of supplies or products associated with the Accessory Home Occupation shall be allowed only between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. local time.  
  e. Nuisances.  Unless otherwise permitted by law, no Accessory Home Occupation shall produce any detectable fumes, odors, dust, heat, noise, vibration, glare, electro-magnetic field, electrical interference, or other effects outside the dwelling which is incompatible with the characteristics of the residential Zoning District or is otherwise a violation of this Code. 
C. Child Care Facilities. 
 The following standards are required for approval of Child Care Facilities when such uses are classified as permitted uses within zoning districts and shall serve as guidelines to which additional conditions may be added when Child Care Facilities require conditional use permits to operate within a zoning district: 
 1. Parking and Loading Facilities: 
  a. Child Care Facilities shall provide off-street parking adequate to meet the requirements of City Code Section 4-6-5. 
  b. Child Care Facilities shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the following standards: 
   i. Quantity of Loading Spaces required: 
    (a) Group Child Care:  one (1). 
    (b) Small and Large Child Care:  two (2). 
   ii. Required loading spaces may be provided in one of the following ways: 
    (a) On-street, subject to the approval of the City Engineer, when the space is reserved or otherwise generally available, and which is located on the same side of the street as the Child Care Facility.  On-street loading space shall be at least thirty feet (30’) from any street intersection. 
    (b) Off-street where the travel path from the loading space(s) to the Facility entrance does not cross vehicle maneuvering and travel areas. 
 2. Play Area and Screening.  Child Care Facilities shall provide a contained or fenced outdoor play area sufficient to comply with the spatial standards required by City Code.  Sight-proof fencing or sight-proof landscaping shall be provided on perimeters of such outdoor play areas where necessary to protect the privacy of neighbors’ yards. 
 3. Additional Large Child Care Facility Standards.  To ensure that traffic generated by a large Child Care Facility will not disrupt a residential neighborhood 
characterized by low volumes of vehicular traffic, such Facilities shall be: 
  a. Located on City street that has an average daily traffic (ADT) of at least five hundred (500) vehicles per day; or 
  b. Located within three hundred feet (300’) of a school and provide after school service for school age children; or  
  c. Permitted when the facility is located in a church, grange hall, social center or other large public assembly building; or 
  d. Upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. 
 4. Site Plan Required.  To ensure compliance with these standards, a site plan shall be submitted for all Child Care Facilities indicating parking, loading, traffic flow characteristics and related signage. 
 5. Use of public right-of-way for Child Care loading is discretionary and subject to the approval of City Engineer in consideration of the availability and demand of on-street parking in the subject area and the proximity of the proposed loading space to intersections, current and future traffic conditions, and other similar considerations.  
D. Drive-Through Facilities. 
 1. Applicability and Purpose.  These standards shall apply to establishments that utilize drive-through windows as part of their business operations.  These standards are intended to ensure that the design and operation of drive-through facilities provide functional and safe traffic circulation, access, and vehicle queuing.  The standards are also meant to ensure that drive-through facilities are compatible with the surrounding area and minimize their impacts on adjacent uses.   
 2. Development Standards.  Drive-Through Facilities shall comply with the following design standards and requirements. 
  a. Number of Spaces Required.  Drive-Through Facilities with one (1) service window shall provide room for five (5) queuing spaces.  When there are two (2) or more service windows provided, there shall be room for four (4) queuing spaces per service window. 
  b. Size of Space.  The dimensions of a vehicle queuing space shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12’) in width and twenty feet (20’) in length.  
  c. Turning Radius.  The minimum drive-through lane inside turning radius shall be twenty feet (20’). 
  d. Demarcation.  Drive-through lanes shall be clearly demarcated with striping or curbing. 
  e. Additional Queuing.  The design, signage or operational characteristics of the Drive-Through Facility shall prevent or discourage vehicles from waiting for service on public sidewalks or streets. 
  f. Landscaping.  Drive-through lanes adjacent to public streets shall provide a landscape buffer of a minimum of three feet (3’) in width and shall contain one (1) tree of one and one half inch (1.5”) caliper every forty (40) lineal feet and one (1) shrub every six feet (6’). 
E. Educational Services (Elementary and Secondary Schools). 
 1. Purpose.  The following standards are required to ensure the safety and placement of loading spaces that are intended to serve as student pick-up and drop-off locations for Elementary and Secondary Schools.   
 2. Loading Standards.  Elementary and Secondary Schools shall provide off-street turn-out areas for student pick-up and drop-off, in addition to the required off-street parking found within Section 4-6-2.  Loading space shall be provided for at least two (2) vehicles provided in a manner that would not result in a safety hazard to children being picked up or delivered.  Such space may be provided in one of the following ways:  
  a. On-street, when the space is reserved or otherwise generally available, and which is located on the same side of the street as the School.  On-street loading space shall be at least thirty feet (30’) from any intersection.  
  b. Off-street, where ingress and egress would not require backing movements by vehicles.  
  c. Other loading space determined to be safe by the City Engineer considering existing street and traffic conditions and anticipated use of the loading facility. 
F. Gardens Market, Community and Accessory. 
 1. Applicability and Purpose.  These standards shall apply to Market Garden and Community Garden uses where such uses are located within SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Zoning Districts, and shall serve as guidelines where such uses are considered as a Conditionally Permitted Use.  These standards are intended to reduce the potential for adverse impacts to adjacent residential uses and to mitigate potential nuisances. 
 2. Specific Standards. 
  a. Permitted Accessory Structures.  Hoop houses, green houses, shed and other minor accessory structures without permanent foundations and of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in size shall be permitted in association with the operation of a permitted Market or Community Garden use.  If the associated Market or Community Garden use ceases, such structures shall be removed from the property. 
  b. Hours of Operation. 
   i. Operation of Market and Community Gardens shall be limited to sunrise or 7:00 a.m. local time, whichever is earlier, and must end at sunset or 9:00 p.m. local time, whichever is later.  Operation shall be defined as people engaged in the operation of the use present upon the site. 
   ii. Where permitted, retail sales shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. local time. 
   iii. Use of motorized equipment shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. local time. 
   iv. The pickup of produce by those who have purchased shares, such as a Community Supported Agriculture (CSA), shall be permitted during daylight hours and shall not be considered retail sales. 
  c. Lighting.  Exterior and interior lighting use associated with the operation of a Market or Community Garden shall be limited and shall not result in light trespass or glare upon adjacent residential uses. 
  d. Use of Machinery.  The use of motorized equipment and machinery shall be limited to typical residential scale equipment, except that larger equipment may be used on an infrequent basis during spring and fall preparation activities. 
  e. General Nuisance Prohibition.  Operation of Market and Community Gardens shall be conducted in a manner so as to limit dust, noise, drainage, overspray of chemicals, or smells that would constitute a public nuisance. 
  f. Signage.  Signage advertising and/or identifying a permitted Market or Community Garden use shall be allowed as provided within the City Sign Code. 
  g. Keeping of Animals.  The keeping of animal and fowl in association with a Market Garden shall be permitted per the animal regulations of City Code. 
  h. Off-Street Parking.  In order to preserve the residential character of neighborhoods, no Off-Street Parking shall be required for Market and Community Gardens.  Any Off-Street Parking provided for Market and Community Gardens shall be limited in nature and shall not be fully improved or paved.  Grassed or small graveled seasonal parking areas shall be permitted. 
  i. Exceedance of Standards.  These standards may be exceeded with approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
G. Large Retail Establishments. 
 Large Scale Establishments.   
  a. New Large Retail Establishments.  Every new Large Retail Establishment shall comply with the provisions of this Section and the City of Moscow Large Retail Establishment Design Manual (Design Manual), as adopted or amended by Resolution of the Council.  Any substantive deviation from a standard required by the Design Manual shall require a Variance.  
  b. Expansion of Existing Large Retail Establishments.  The following is required for expansion(s) of a Large Retail Establishment:  
   i. Any one (1) time expansion of an existing Large Retail Establishment shall comply with Subsection (4)(d) Stormwater Management (for any proposed additional impervious surface areas).  Additionally, the provisions of the Design Manual shall apply to the greatest extent feasible in consideration of the existing site development, as determined by the reviewing body.  
   ii. Conditions of Reconstruction.  If any existing Large Retail Establishment should be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than seventy (70%) percent of the replacement cost of the whole structure at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of the Design Manual (to the greatest extent feasible in consideration of the existing site development, as determined by the Zoning Administrator).   
  c. Large Retail Establishments that includes less than one hundred forty (140) parking stalls shall not be subject to Section 2.2, Parking Lots, of the Design Manual. 
  d. Large Retail Establishments Greater Than Sixty Five Thousand (65,000) Square Feet.  In addition to other requirements contained in the Design Manual, every application for a new Large Retail Establishment of greater than sixty five thousand (65,000) square feet of gross floor area or any application for the expansion of more than thirty percent (30%) of any existing Large Retail Establishment, where such expansion would result in the creation of a Large Retail Establishment of greater than sixty five thousand (65,000) square feet of the gross floor area, shall address and include all of the following items: 
   i. Site location and existing and future streets and pathways.  The applicant shall show, as part of the application, that the proposed development does not preclude the logical and orderly extension of existing public streets and pathways and does not preclude the development of future planned streets and pathways, as generally identified within the City’s Comprehensive Plan.  
   ii. Multimodal Traffic Study.  The applicant shall provide a Traffic Impact Study (including pedestrian, bicycle, transit and motorized travel) in accordance with City Traffic Impact Study Standards.  Such Traffic Impact Study shall include an assessment of the impacts of the proposed development upon vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle and transit transportation systems and services anticipated in the vicinity of the development for twenty (20) years from the anticipated date of completion of the proposed development.  Such Traffic Impact Study shall include an analysis of all proposed measures to mitigate impacts of the proposed development.  All Traffic Impact Studies shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. 
   iii. City Services and City Infrastructure Impact Assessment.  The applicant shall provide a public utility service impact analysis of the proposed use and its anticipated impacts upon the City’s physical infrastructure and the service delivery of essential City services including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, police, fire and sanitation services.  Such assessment shall include an analysis of the proposed development’s anticipated service demand, adequacy of existing service infrastructure, and an assessment of the impacts the proposed use may have upon other users and the service provider.  Such analysis shall also include any potential and proposed measures necessary to mitigate such impacts.  Payment of costs for increasing service capability and/or over-sizing or upgrading of service infrastructure, as necessary to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development, shall be the responsibility of the applicant.  All City services impact studies shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. 
   iv. Stormwater Management.  Stormwater runoff shall not be discharged into the public storm sewer system or into any natural drainage system, without being detained in accordance with this Code and without being treated to the most current quality standards, as prescribed by the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality in the catalog of Stormwater Best Management Practices for Cities and Counties.  Stormwater facilities shall be designed to detain and release stormwater at a rate that shall not exceed the pre-development stormwater discharge rates for the two (2) year storm, ten (10) year storm, and twenty-five (25) year storm events and shall be designed as treatment train systems (i.e. multiple devices and/or methods to improve water quality and increase evaporation).  Treatment trains shall include a vegetative primary treatment component, such as a bio-filtration swale, filter strips, or other similar devices.  The level of water quality treatment shall be designed for two (2) year storm event post development flows.  Stormwater facilities shall be aesthetically pleasing amenities consistent with Design Manual Central Features and Community Spaces Guidelines and Standards.  Regionally viable vegetation shall be planted inside open earthen detention ponds.  Above ground detention vaults or ponds with slopes greater than three to one (3:1) or those containing vertical walls shall be provided with a six foot (6’) high fence or wall at the top of the slope for security and safety purposes.  A type “B” landscape buffer yard, as described in this Zoning Code, shall be required around the outside perimeter of the fence or wall.  Storage, display, or sale of chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers, liquid petroleum and any product containing any chemical listed in the Code of Federal Regulations Title 40, Chapter 1, Subpart d, Part 131.369, as amended, shall be prohibited in areas not protected from weather (such as parking lots) and from areas not located or designed to prevent contamination of stormwater runoff.  All stormwater management plans shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. 
   v. Standards for Materials Submitted.  Each study, report, analysis, certification, or assessment required by the City or offered by the applicant shall be paid for by the applicant and shall be conducted by professionals educated, trained and experienced in the appropriate field and shall be mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the City.   
  e. Community Meeting Required.  All proposed new Large Retail Establishments and expansions of existing Large Retail Establishments greater than thirty percent (30%) of the existing gross floor area shall require a community meeting in accordance with the following requirements: 
   i. Meeting Purpose.  The purpose of the community meeting is to allow the applicant for a Large Retail Establishment to present the proposed development to the community and other members of the public prior to consideration by the City so that the parties can discuss and consider neighborhood and community impacts, mitigation, design and construction elements, and the like.  Conduct by all participating in the community meeting should be respectful, should avoid personal attack, and should be directed toward gathering and exchanging information regarding the proposal(s).   
   ii. Meeting Notice and Location.  Notice of a community meeting shall be given to all property owners within six hundred feet (600’) of the subject property, shall be posted upon the subject property of a size and location that renders such notice visible and legible to persons in the vicinity of the subject property, published in the local newspaper and provided to local media.  Such notice shall be provided at least fourteen (14) days before the community meeting.  Mailed notice shall be made by U.S. mail to the current or last known property owners of record as determined by review of the records in possession of Latah County.  Alternatively, the City may provide a list of property owners to the applicant upon request and receipt of the appropriate fee.  
    The community meeting shall be set at a date, time, and place reasonably calculated to facilitate the attendance of the public.  Evening meetings during the work week are encouraged. 
   iii. Meeting Content and Conduct.  The applicant or applicant’s representative shall chair and conduct the meeting according to orderly procedures.  The chair should provide the participants in the community meeting a fair chance to be heard.  The chair will have the authority to recognize participants in the meeting and to maintain order in the conduct of the meeting.  Formal rules of evidence will not apply during the meeting but the chair may limit the duration of comments or presentation where necessary to give the broadest number of participants the opportunity to express their views.  Each meeting shall be conducted so that those in attendance can discuss the project/proposal which is the subject of the application(s) to be filed.  Where more than one (1) application is to be considered, the meeting shall include discussion of all related matters.  For example, where there is to be a submittal for a rezoning along with the Large Retail Establishment, both shall be thoroughly discussed in the community meeting and shall satisfy any Neighborhood Meeting requirement of this Code. 
   iv. Submission of Meeting Materials Required.  Where community meetings are required, the following community meeting materials shall be submitted with the application(s). 
    (a) Time, date and location of the community meeting, 
    (b) Names and addresses of property owners to whom notice was sent, 
    (c) Names and addresses of all attendees, 
    (d) Summary of comments, suggestions and discussion, 
    (e) Applicant’s response to comments, suggestions and discussion, including any modifications made or intended to be made to the project proposal/application as a result of the community meeting comments, 
    (f) Materials utilized or submitted (including plans, proposals, designs, power point presentations, maps, handouts, petitions, letters, studies, etc.) shall be submitted with the application for the related project(s). 
     A verbatim transcript is not required nor is a video and/or audio tape (unless the applicant wishes to submit it).  The summary of comments, suggestions and discussion should be extensive enough to allow the reader to understand what occurred. 
  f. Design Manual Review.  All applications for new Large Retail Establishments and expansions of existing Large Retail Establishments shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for conformance to the standards and requirements of the Design Manual.  The Zoning Administrator shall review the site plan, landscape plan, and architectural building plans and building elevations for conformance with the requirements of the Design Manual.   
   i. Alternate Compliance Methods.  The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to approve alternate compliance methods to meet the purposes and intents of the specific requirements of the Design Manual where the Zoning Administrator finds such alternate compliance methods are in keeping with the intents and purposes of the Design Manual and where such alternate compliance methods will achieve equivalent or superior mitigation of impacts of the proposed Large Retail Establishment or its expansion.  
   ii. Design Review Decision.  Upon completion of the design review, the Zoning Administrator may approve the proposed development, approve the proposed development with conditions of approval related to specific requirements of the Design Manual, or deny the proposed plans with specific direction to the applicant regarding what specific elements of the development plans must be modified to comply with the Design Manual. 
   iii. Design Review Decision Appeal.  Appeals or design review decisions by the Zoning Administrator shall be made to the Council. 
H. Telecommunications Facilities. 
 1. Applicability. 
  This Section shall apply to antenna towers, antenna support structures, antennas and their ancillary facilities (telecommunications facilities) any of which are used to provide commercial telecommunications services.  This Section shall not apply to noncommercial antenna towers exclusively used as accessory to a residential use on the same lot. 
 2. Purpose. 
  The provisions of this Section are intended to ensure that telecommunications facilities are located, installed, maintained and removed in a manner that: 
  a. Minimizes the number of antenna towers throughout the community; 
  b. Encourages the co-location of telecommunications facilities; 
  c. Encourages the use of existing buildings, light or utility poles, water towers or other structures for antenna mounting and discourages construction of new antenna towers; 
  d. Ensures that telecommunications facilities are located and designed to minimize visual impact on the surroundings. 
  e. Ensures that regulation of telecommunications facilities does not have the effect of prohibiting the provision of telecommunications services, does not unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent providers of such services, and allows the provision of adequate area coverage by such services. 
 3. Definitions. 
   a. Ancillary Facilities.  Buildings, cabinets, vaults, enclosures, equipment, and the like required for operation of telecommunications systems. 
  b. Antenna.  Any device that transmits and/or receives radio waves, microwaves, or other electro-magnetic radiation for voice, data or video communications purposes including, but not limited to, television, AM/FM radio, micro-wave, cellular telephone and similar forms of communications. 
  c. Antenna Support Structure.  Any structure or building not constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting an antenna but that supports an antenna as a secondary or accessory use. 
  d. Antenna Tower.  Any structure or pole erected primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas that are used to provide commercial wireless communications or telecommunications services. 
  e. Antenna Tower Height.  The overall vertical length of the antenna tower above ground level. 
  f. Co-location.  Placement of one or more antenna(s) on an antenna support structure or the placement of an antenna on an antenna tower on which one or more antennas are already located. 
  g. Lattice Tower.  An antenna tower characterized by a framework of lateral or diagonal cross members that stabilize the tower. 
  h. Monopole.  An antenna tower that consists of a single upright pole, which is self-supporting and without supports or guys. 
 
  i. Telecommunications facilities.  Antenna towers, antenna support structures, antennas and their ancillary facilities that are used to provide commercial wireless communications or telecommunications services. 
  j. Temporary Antenna Tower.  An antenna tower established for the purpose of providing tele-communications services on a temporary basis for a special event or to temporarily replace an antenna tower while it is being repaired. 
 4. Use Regulations 
  a. The installation of lattice towers is prohibited except lattice towers that qualify and are permitted as temporary antenna towers.  Replacement, relocation or alteration of non-conforming lattice towers shall be subject to the Nonconformity Regulations in Section 4-1-6 of this Zoning Code. 
  b. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required before the installation, relocation, replacement, and/or alteration of an antenna tower that exceeds thirty-five feet (35’) in height. 
  c. Co-location shall be a permitted use if the property upon which such antenna is located is within one of the following Zoning Districts:  U, RO, NB, RTO, CB, GB, MB, or I.  An antenna may be co-located as a permitted use on existing antenna towers and antenna support structures in all zoning districts if the antenna extends no more than eighteen feet (18’) above, and projects no more than eight feet (8’) horizontally away from the existing tower or support structure.  Co-location shall also be a permitted use on nonconforming antenna towers if the antenna extends no more than eighteen feet (18’) above, and projects no more than eight feet (8’) horizontally away from, the nonconforming antenna tower. 
  d. A temporary antenna tower as defined herein shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts, subject to site plan approval by the Zoning Administrator.  The duration of the temporary antenna tower at the site shall not exceed the special event time or the time reasonably needed to repair the antenna tower in need of repair. 
 5. Development Standards 
  a. Antenna Tower Setback from Highway Right-of-Way.   
   No antenna tower that exceeds sixty feet (60’) in height shall be permitted within five hundred feet (500’) of US Highway 95 and/or State Highway 8 rights-of-way unless the proposed site is in the U, MB, or I Zoning District, in which case the antenna tower shall be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100’) from said right-of-way. 
  b. Security. 
   Every telecommunications facility shall be protected from unauthorized access by appropriate security measures. 
  c. Lighting. 
    Every antenna and antenna tower shall not be lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other state or federal agency having such authority, and such lighting shall not be more than the minimum required by such agency. 
  d. Noise Reduction. 
   In any SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Zoning District, and in all other Zoning Districts when the adjacent property is zoned SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 or occupied by a dwelling, hospital, school, library, or nursing home or similar use, noise generating equipment shall be sound-buffered by means of baffling, barriers, or other suitable means to reduce sound level measured at the property line to forty five decibels (45 dB). 
  e. Signage. 
   The placement of signage on antenna towers is prohibited, except for the placement of security signage, which shall not exceed six (6) square feet on each side of the antenna tower and shall not be located higher than six feet (6’) above grade.  Additionally, one security sign not to exceed one (1) square foot may be provided on each fifty feet (50’) of wall or fence enclosing the facility. 
  f. Antenna towers shall be separated from the property line of any adjacent property zoned SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 at least a distance equal to the height of the antenna tower, and shall be separated from all other adjacent property lines at least a distance equal to one-half (1/2) the height of the antenna tower. 
  g. Aesthetic Considerations. 
   i. Antenna towers shall be painted a neutral color consistent with the natural or built environment of the subject site and the surrounding area unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration or any other State or Federal agency having such authority. 
   ii. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall have an exterior finish compatible with the natural or built environment of the subject site and the surrounding area and shall also comply with any design guidelines applicable to the particular zoning district in which the facility is located. 
   iii. Antennas and cables shall be of a color identical to or closely compatible with that of the structure to which they are attached unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration or any applicable state or federal agency.  Telecommunications facilities located above ground in or directly adjacent to any SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Zoning Districts shall be surrounded by a minimum six-foot (6’) high decorative wall constructed of brick, stone, or textured concrete block.  Said wall shall be surrounded by a Type “A” Landscape Buffer Yard planted adjacent to said wall or fence or at an alternate location providing equal or better buffering.  Telecommunications facilities in all other Zoning Districts shall be surrounded by a minimum six-foot (6’) high wall or solid or slatted fence.  Said fence or wall shall be surrounded by a Type “A” Landscape Buffer Yard planted adjacent to said wall or fence or at an alternate location providing equal or better buffering. 
   iv. Vehicle or outdoor storage on any antenna tower site is prohibited unless otherwise permitted by the Zoning District in which the tower is located. 
   v. At least one (1) on-site parking stall with a vehicle turnaround area shall be provided at each antenna tower site.  The parking area and driveway to it shall consist of asphalt, concrete, or gravel. 
   vi. Ancillary facilities located above ground for antennas in or directly adjacent to any SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Zoning District shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five feet (25’) from any SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 zoned property, unless the applicant can demonstrate that the specific proposal will present no greater adverse visual and audio impacts to surrounding properties.  Above ground ancillary facilities in any other Zoning District shall be located a minimum of fifty feet (50’) from any SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 zoned property, unless the applicant can demonstrate that the specific proposal will present no greater adverse visual and audio impacts to surrounding properties. 
 6. Co-Location 
  a. Existing Antenna Towers. 
   Prior to the issuance of any permit to relocate, alter or modify any antenna tower, the tower owner shall provide to the City a notarized written commitment to make said antenna tower available for use by others subject to technical and structural limitations and reasonable financial terms.  The failure of an antenna tower owner to agree to shared use or to negotiate in good faith with potential users shall be unlawful and, among other remedies of the City, shall be just cause for the withholding of the issuance of future antenna tower permits to such an owner as well as revocation of antenna tower permits for any antenna tower on which co-location is refused or unreasonably hindered. 
  b. New Antenna Towers. 
   Any new or relocated antenna tower eighty feet (80’) or greater in height shall be designed and constructed to accommodate at least two (2) additional users unless a larger number of users needs to be accommodated as indicated by the response to the Notice provisions herein.  As an alternative, a smaller tower may be approved if the tower owner commits in writing to “swap out” to a larger tower when needed to allow co-location space for additional service providers.  A notarized written commitment to shared use as specified in Subsection 6.a. above shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator by the antenna tower applicant.  The failure of the owner of an antenna tower built with a capacity for shared use to negotiate in good faith with potential users shall be unlawful and shall be a violation of this Ordinance and, among other remedies of the City, shall be just cause for the withholding of the issuance of future antenna tower permits to such an owner as well as revocation of antenna tower permits for any antenna tower on which co-location is refused or unreasonably hindered. 
  c. Antenna Tower Inventories. 
   Prior to the issuance of any permit to install, relocate, replace or alter any antenna tower, the tower owner shall furnish the Zoning Administrator an inventory of all of the owner’s antennas and antenna towers in the City of Moscow and the Area of City Impact.  The inventory shall include the reference name or number, or other description of location including a site map(s), structure type, height, type of antenna tower(s) or antenna support structure(s) and height of all existing antennas and an assessment of available ground space for the placement of additional equipment shelters for potential future users. 
  d. Notice of Antenna Tower Permit Applications. 
   The applicant for any antenna tower permit shall have a copy of the application and a summary containing the height, design, location, type and frequency of antennas delivered by certified mail to all known and potential antenna tower users as identified by a list maintained by the Community Development Department.  Proof of such delivery of the summary shall be submitted with the permit application to the City.  Such notification shall be so mailed no less than sixty (60) days prior to Zoning Administrator decision or Board of Adjustment public hearing and shall specifically solicit co-location discussion between the applicant and recipients of the notice.  The Zoning Administrator may establish a form required to be used for such notifications.  Upon request, the Zoning Administrator shall place on a list the name and address of any user or prospective user of antenna towers to receive notification of applications.  The failure of the party receiving such Notice to use this process or respond to any such Notice may be considered cause for denying requests by such party for antenna tower permits.  Such response shall be provided in writing to the Zoning Administrator within forty-five (45) days of mailing and shall contain a statement specifying desire to co-locate on the applicant’s proposed tower and a statement regarding the responder’s ability to accommodate the needs of the applicant on an existing tower or support structure owned or operated by the responder.  Additionally, the Zoning Administrator shall cause notice of any required public hearing for a proposed antenna tower to be mailed to owners of property within six hundred feet (600’) of the permit application site not less than sixty (60) days prior to the public hearing. 
 7. Permits Required 
  A building permit shall be required to construct, install, relocate, replace, or alter any antenna tower.  An administrative zoning permit shall be required to locate or replace any antenna on an antenna tower or antenna support structure.  A Conditional Use Permit shall be required as specified in Section 4 herein.  
  An application for any of the above-mentioned permits shall include or be accompanied by all of the information necessary to determine and document compliance with the regulations established herein.  Where no application or permit form exists, the application shall be in the form of a letter signed and dated by the applicant, and the permit issuance shall be in the form of a letter of approval signed and dated by the Zoning Administrator or a dated signature by the Zoning Administrator on the applicable site plan. 
  Specific permit application submittal requirements shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator and may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
  a. Permit application. 
  b. Site plan. 
  c. Elevation drawing(s) of the antenna tower or antenna support structure, antenna(s) and ancillary facilities. 
  d. Description of proposed and required lighting including light locations. Documentation of required lighting, as specified in Section 5.c. herein, may be deferred until prior to issuance of building permit if not available at time of application submittal. 
  e. Any plans necessary to depict structural requirements. 
  f. Description of the number and types of antennas being proposed, as well as the expected or known capacity of the antenna tower in terms of the number of antennas the antenna tower can accommodate. 
  g. Antenna tower or antenna location study specifying the search process by which the proposed site was chosen. 
  h. Antenna tower inventory as specified in Section 6.c. herein.  
  i. Notarized written commitment to allow co-location/shared use as specified in Section 6. herein.  
  j. Documentation demonstrating compliance with non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) or radio frequency (RF) emissions standards as established by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).  Such documentation may be deferred until prior to issuance of building permit if not available at time of application submittal. 
  k. Current FCC license to operate. 
  l. Documentation of a review by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and/or the Aviation Division of the Idaho Transportation Department (ITD).  Such documentation may be deferred until prior to issuance of building permit if not available at time of application submittal. 
  m. Name and address of the property owner, telecommunications service provider, and owner of the telecommunications facility on the permit application, and a written statement of approval of the application by the property owner. 
  n. Description of proposed security measures as required in Section 5.b. herein. 
 8. Findings for Conditional Use Permit. 
  Before a Conditional Use Permit for an antenna tower may be issued, the applicant must demonstrate, and the Zoning Board of Adjustment must find, compliance with all of the following: 
  a. No existing antenna towers or antenna support structures within the necessary geographic area for the applicant’s antenna tower meet the applicant’s requirements considering (a) height, (b) structural integrity, or (c) that there are other prohibitive conditions that render existing antenna towers or antenna support structures within the applicant’s required geographic area unsuitable. 
  b. That the design of the antenna tower, including the antennas and ancillary facilities, minimizes visual impact and otherwise complies with provisions and intent of this Section. 
  c. That the proposed antenna tower location minimizes the number and/or size of antenna towers or antenna support structures that will be required in the area. 
  d. That the applicant has not previously failed to take advantage of reasonably available shared use opportunities or procedures provided by this Ordinance or otherwise. 
   These findings shall be required in addition to those required for the Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards provided in Section 4-8-4 of the Zoning Code. 
 9. Abandonment and Removal. 
  All telecommunications facilities shall be removed by the owner of the facility, by the operator of the facility, and/or by the property owner within six (6) months of the time that the facility has substantially ceased being used to provide telecommunications services to the public.  Removal shall not be required when the owner or operator of the facility has, within the aforementioned six (6) months, filed with the City a written request to reuse the antenna tower and the City has approved such request.  Such written request shall detail the circumstances that justify why the antenna tower should not be removed, why it will be unused for six (6) months or more, and shall commit to a date certain, not to exceed twelve (12) months from the date of last use, by which time the antenna tower will again provide telecommunications services to the public.  Before issuance of an antenna tower permit, the applicant for any antenna tower permit shall provide to the City financial security, such as but not limited to an open-ended bond, to ensure removal of the antenna tower and ancillary facilities after the facility is no longer being used to provide telecommunications services to the public. 
 10. Affirmative Duty to Keep City Informed. 
  All telecommunications service providers having telecommunications facilities in the jurisdiction of the City shall be required to report in writing to the Zoning Administrator any change in the status of their operations.  Change in status shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
  a. Change in or loss of license from the FCC to operate. 
  b. Receipt of notice of failure to comply with the regulations of any other authority having jurisdiction over the business or facility. 
  c. Change in ownership of the company that owns the telecommunications facilities or that provides telecommunications services. 
  d. Loss or termination of lease with the property owner or the owner of the telecommunications facilities. 
  e. Abandonment of a facility or non-use of a facility for a period of six (6) months or longer. 
   All telecommunications service providers having facilities in the jurisdiction of the City shall file with the Zoning Administrator an annual written statement verifying continued use of each of their facilities in the City’s jurisdiction as well as continued compliance with state and federal agency regulations. 
I. Temporary Uses. 
 1. Applicability and Purpose.  It is the intent of this Section to allow Temporary Uses upon developed or undeveloped commercial property within the City, subject to the following standards.  These standards are intended to reduce the potential traffic, parking, safety, and nuisance issues associated with the short term nature of Temporary Uses. 
 2. Specific Standards. 
  a. Site Access.  Vehicular ingress and egress from the subject property shall be from an established vehicular approach or a temporary approach as approved by the City Engineer.  Approaches shall be clearly identified and delineated and shall not present a traffic hazard to the adjacent roadway as determined by the City Engineer. 
  b. Site Circulation.  Vehicular circulation shall be delineated and maintained on the subject property in order to reduce the risk of vehicular conflicts and ensure orderly circulation. 
  c. Setbacks.  All temporary structures shall meet the minimum yard setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.  
  d. Vision Triangle.  All temporary structures shall be located outside of street intersection sight triangles.  All displays, goods, or objects placed within street intersection sight triangles shall be in accordance with the City Standard Construction Specifications and drawings as adopted by the Council. 
  e. Duration.  Each Temporary Use may not exceed forty-five (45) days per calendar year, 
  f. Nuisances.  A Temporary Use shall not result in dust, noise, tracking of dirt in the public right-of-way, or other nuisances generated upon the subject property.  
 3. Permit Required.  A Temporary Use Permit shall be required for any Temporary Use conducted on an undeveloped property or a property which does not have an existing developed parking area. 
J. Townhouses. 
 1. Building Development Standards.  
  a. Building Orientation and Front Entry Feature.  The front and main entrance of all townhouse units shall be oriented toward and shall face the adjacent public street.   
  b. Front Entry Feature.  Townhouse units shall include a porch or stoop entry feature that clearly establishes the location of the principal entry of the townhouse unit and the orientation of the unit to the adjacent public street.  This shall be accomplished through the provision of one of the following elements: 
   i. covered front porch feature of no less than four feet (4’) in depth and six feet (6’) in width; 
   ii. covered front stoop of no less than four feet (4’) in depth and four feet (4’) in width; or 
   iii. any other significant entry feature deemed equivalent by the Zoning Administrator. 
  c. Façade and Roof Line Articulation.  Townhouses should be designed as a unified building mass with common architectural styling and details.  The building mass shall be varied by material and color variations, shifts in roof profiles and variation at corner units.  Individual units shall be expressed through façade articulation or vertical divisions between individual units and through roof structure variation that expresses the individuality of each unit. 
  d. Fenestration.  Townhouse units shall include door and/or window openings upon all front and exterior side walls to provide adequate natural light, provide architectural detailing, and to enhance security upon adjacent sidewalks and streets.  Windows and doors shall occupy no less than ten percent (10%) of front wall and exterior side wall areas. 
  e. Building Height.  Maximum building height shall be as specified within the applicable Zoning District. 
  f. Unit Grouping and Spacing.  Townhouse buildings shall contain no more than eight (8) contiguous units.  Spacing between townhouse buildings shall be no less than sixteen feet (16’).  Spacing between townhouse buildings shall include a four foot (4’) wide pedestrian easement and sidewalk joining the alley, or rear of the townhouse development, to the public sidewalk adjacent to the front public street. 
 2. Parking and Access. 
  a. Street Access.  Rear vehicular access to townhouse developments via an existing public alley or a private drive within the townhouse development is preferred; however, front vehicular access can be allowed in accordance with the standards herein.   
  b. Curb Cut Minimum Spacing.  Curb cut spacing shall be no less than twenty-four feet (24’) apart, as measured from the two closest points of the curb cuts.  Front loaded townhouse units curb cuts shall be no more than twenty feet (20’) in width and such curb cuts shall be used to serve the two (2) adjacent units.  Curb cuts for private drives that provide access to rear loaded townhouse units shall be no more than twenty-four feet (24’) in width. 
  c. Garage Design.  The garage door on front loaded townhouse units shall occupy no more than sixty percent (60%) of the townhouse unit width.  Front loaded garage doors shall be recessed from the surrounding structure and shall include design features and windows that complement the townhouse design and shall be painted to match the townhouse unit served by such garage. 
  d. Guest Parking.  Townhouse developments of more than twenty-four (24) units shall provide off-street guest parking at the rate of one (1) stall per each four (4) townhouse units.  Such guest parking shall be located within the required spacing between townhouse buildings or at the rear of the townhouse buildings. 
 3. Open Space Requirements.  Open space shall be provided as follows: 
  a. Private Open Space Requirement.  Each townhouse unit shall provide a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) square feet of functional open space which may be provided via a private yard, balcony, deck, roof garden or patio area.  The smallest dimension of such open space shall not be less than eight feet (8’) and fencing or other privacy screening shall be provided between adjacent private open space areas.  The required front entry feature and required front yard area shall not be used to satisfy the private open space requirement.   
  b. Common Open Space Requirement.  Townhouse developments of more than twenty-four (24) units shall provide functional common open space of seventy-five (75) square feet per unit.  Such common open space shall be of a functional size, the smallest dimension of which shall not be less than thirty feet (30’) and shall include landscaped and turf areas and shall include at least two (2) different furnishings such as benches, picnic tables, children’s play equipment or other similar items. 
 4. Landscaping.  All townhouse projects shall include aesthetically pleasing landscaping material within the required front and street side yard areas of sufficient quantity to buffer and soften the building massing.  Such landscaping shall include a combination of trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials.  Plans for such landscaping shall be required as part of the building permit application and shall be subject to approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
 (Ord. 2010-24, 11/15/2010; 2011-15, 09/19/2011; 2012-23, 12/03/2012; 2013-15, 08/19/2013; 2015-06, 04/06/2015; 2015-07, 05/04/2015; 2018-07, 05-21-2018). 
 
 
 
Sec. 3-6.  Limitations on Uses Table. 
 
 

 
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
  
Sec. 3-7  Performance Standards.   
 Any dissemination incident to a permitted use shall comply with the standards established in this Section. 
A. Unless otherwise permitted by Title 10, Section 11 of this Code, the noise emanating from a premise used for industrial activities shall be muffled so as to not become objectionable due to intermittent beat, frequency or shrillness, and where an industrial use adjoins a residential zoning district, the noise loudness measured at the boundary line shall not exceed forty (40) decibels between the hours of eleven thirty (11:30) p.m. and six (6:00) a.m., local time, and sixty (60) decibels at other hours. 
B. Arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be performed so as not to be seen from any point beyond the outside of the property. 
C. In terms of fire and safety hazards, the storage and handling of inflammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases and explosives shall comply with rules and regulations falling under the jurisdiction of the City Fire Chief, the laws of the State and other local ordinances. 
 Bulk storage of inflammable liquids below ground shall be permitted, and the tank shall be located not closer to the property line than the greatest dimension (diameter, length or height) of the tank. 
D. Provisions must be made for necessary shielding or other preventative measures against interferences occasioned by mechanical, electrical, electronic and nuclear equipment, uses or processes with electrical apparatus in nearby buildings or land uses. 
E. The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be permitted nor the emission of any toxic or corrosive fumes or gases.  Dust created by an industrial operation shall not be exhausted or wasted into the air. 
F. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density equal to or greater than number three (3) of the Ringelmann Chart as currently published and used by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, is prohibited at all times. 
 Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas and roads, shall be minimized by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other acceptable means.  Emission of particulate matter in excess of two-tenths (0.2) grain per cubic foot of conveying gas or air measured at any property line, is prohibited. 
G. Smoke or emission rates:  The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources on any property shall not exceed a net weight of one (1) pound per acre of property during any one (1) hour. 
H. Liquid and solid wastes:  Storage of animal or vegetable waste which attract insects or rodents or otherwise create a health hazard, shall be prohibited.  No waste products shall be exposed to view from eye level from any property line. 
I. Open storage:  All storage of building materials, tires, wheels, fencing or other similar items which are stacked or which must 
be moved by forklift, front-end loader or a similar method shall be located within an area not closer than ten feet (10’) from the street right-of-way line or shall be enclosed with a heavy wire fence or of a similar type, with the top of said fence not less than six feet (6’) in height, or by an attractive hedge or board fence at least six feet (6’) in height.  In case of the open storage of lumber, coal or other combustible material, a roadway shall be provided, graded, surfaced and maintained from the street to the rear of the property, to permit free access of fire trucks at any time. 
 (Ord. 97-33, 11/3/97; 2005-07, 02/07/2005; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 


Chapter 4 
 
BULK AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 4-1: Introduction.  
Sec. 4-2: Bulk and Placement Regulations Table. 
Sec. 4-3: Exceptions to Height Regulations. 
Sec. 4-4: Setbacks. 
Sec. 4-5: Access to Lots and Buildings. 
 
Sec. 4-1. Introduction. 
 This Section establishes parcel and building standards for developments within all zoning districts.  The standards vary depending upon the zone in which the development is located within as well as the building type.  All residential and non-residential development must comply with the standards contained within the Bulk and Placement Regulations Table below.  General exceptions to parcel and building standards as well as standards of how to measure setback requirements can also be found within this Section.  
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 4-2. Bulk and Placement Regulations Table. 
 (See Page 3).  
 (Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 4-3. Exceptions to Height Regulations. 
 The height limitations contained in the district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, solar panels, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. 
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 4-4. Setbacks. 
A. Definition.  A setback is the distance that buildings or uses must be removed from their property lines.  Every lot typically has front, rear, and side setbacks that are determined by the underlying zoning district and the building type upon the lot. 
B. Setbacks Measurement.  Setbacks are measured from the property line unless otherwise indicated.  When measuring front and street side yard setbacks for lots that abut a Local Residential Street, as designated upon the Thoroughfare Plan within the City’s Comprehensive Plan, the front and street side setbacks shall be measured from the building lot side of the public sidewalk to the nearest point of the wall of the main building on the lot, as shown in Figure 1 below.  (See Page 4).  In such cases where sidewalks do not exist in front or street side of a building lot, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the point of measurement based upon the location of adjacent principal structures, the likelihood of future sidewalk installation, and the anticipated location of such future sidewalk. 
C. Permitted Projections into Required Setbacks.  Architectural features that do not provide indoor floor space, including eaves, bay windows, decks, carports, and unwalled porches, may project up to twenty-four inches (24”) into required side yards and up to forty-eight inches (48”) into required front, street side and rear yards. 
D. Exceptions to Required Setbacks:  Structures of thirty inches (30”) or less in height from grade to the top of the structure are exempt from setback requirements.  Deck railings are not to be included when measuring the height of structures for the purposes of this setback exemption so long as they do not exceed forty-two inches (42”) in height and where the rails and material constitute not more than seventy percent (70%) of the railing area. 
E. Alternate Front Setback Requirement.  In any zoning district where established 
 front yards are less than the minimum required front yard for such district, the Zoning Administrator may grant modifications to the front yard setback of new principal buildings on the subject property provided: 
 1. The minimum front yard setback is at least equal to the average setback of the principal buildings located on the lots abutting said subject property; or 
 2. Sixty percent (60%) or more of the principal buildings, within a numbered block on the same side of the street as the subject property, are set back less than the required zoning front yard setback; the average setback of the existing nonconforming structures may be used to establish the minimum front yard of all properties fronting on that side of the street. 
F. Setbacks for Flag Lots.  The setback requirements for flag lots are determined by the underlying zoning district the lot is within.  The front setback requirement shall be measured by drawing a radius of the front setback distance from the center of the flagpole portion of the lot where it enters the main portion of the lot as shown in Figure 2 below (See Page 5). 
 (Ord. 98-14, 4/20/98; 2010-24, 11/15/2010; 2014-18, 10/20/2014; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 4-5. Access to Lots and Buildings. 
 Except as provided below, every lot shall abut a public street right-of-way (other than an alley) for a minimum distance of forty feet (40’).   
 1. Lots on cul-de-sacs and vehicle turnarounds shall abut a public street right-of-way for a minimum distance of twenty feet (20’).   
 2. Approved flag lots shall abut a public street right-of-way for a minimum distance of twenty feet (20’), and the flagpole portion of flag lots shall not exceed one hundred fifty feet (150’) in length and shall not be less than twenty feet (20’) in width at any point.   
 3. Approved twinhome lots shall abut a public street right-of-way for a minimum distance of twenty feet (20’).  Approved townhouse lots shall abut a public street right-of-way for a minimum distance equal to the minimum lot width of the applicable Zoning District. 
 4. Legal lots of record that have been approved by the City Council prior to the adoption of this Zoning Code and which do not abut a public street right-of-way shall be excepted from this requirement where sufficient permanent legal access is available (via public right-of-way, private access easement, or other legal means) to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
 5. Lots within the Agriculture/Forestry (AF), Farm Ranch (FR), and Suburban Residential (SR) Zoning Districts where access is provided by a permanent access easement of no less than twenty feet (20’) in width at any point. 
 6. Flag poles and access easements within the Agriculture/Forestry (AF), Farm Ranch (FR), and Suburban Residential (SR) Zoning Districts may be greater than one hundred fifty feet (150’) in length as long as sufficient Fire Department access is provided. 
 (Ord. 98-14, 4/20/98; 2010-24, 11/15/2010; 2014-18, 10/20/2014; 2018-07, 05/21/2018; 2018-11, 08/20/2018) 
 
 
 
 
Bulk and Replacement Regulations Table follows. 
 
Setback “Figures” follow the above-referenced Table. 
 

(Ord. 2018-07, 05-21-2018) 

Section 4-2. TITLE 4 — ZONING CODE Section 4-2.
PAGE 3
BULK & PLACEMENT REGULATIONS TABLE
AF FR SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RO NB RTO CB GB MB I UMC U
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum lot area (expressed in square feet unless otherwise noted, no minimum lot area for non-residential uses)
Single family detached 40 acres 13 3 acres 1 acre 9,600 7,000 6,000 5,000 1 5,000 1 5,000 1 - -
Twinhome - - - - - 3,250 2,250 2,250 2,250 - -
Townhouse - - - - - 2,000 2 1,800 1,800 1,800 - -
Two family dwelling - - - - - 7,000 5,000 1 5,000 1 5,000 1 - -
Multiple family dwelling - - - - - - 5,000 1 5,000 1 5,000 1 - -
Minimum lot width (in feet, no minimum lot width for non-residential uses)
Single family detached 150 125 100 80 3 60 3 60 3 50 50 50 - -
Twinhome - - - - - 30 25 25 25 - -
Townhouse - - - - - 20 18 18 18 - -
Two family dwelling - - - - - 60 3 50 50 50 - -
Multiple family dwelling - - - - - - 50 50 50 - -
Minimum Setbacks9(in feet)
Front10 30 25 25 25 20 15 15 10 20 25 10 10
Rear 35 30 30 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 4
Side Yard Minimum 35 20 20 5 5 5 5 5 / 6 5 5 / 6 10 20 4
Side Yard Combined Minimum 15 15 5 15 5 15 5 / 6 15 5 / 6
Street Side 20 17 17 17 15 13 13 10 10 20 10
Exceptions to Minimum Setbacks Listed Above
Twinhome and Townhouse Exterior Side
Setback - - - - - 8 8 8 8 -
Garage Door Front Setback
(when door faces said street) 20 40 40 25 20 20 20 20 20 25
Garage Door Street-Side Setback
(when door faces said street) 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
Accessory Structure Side & Rear Setback
(detached, 200 sq ft or less) 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Accessory Structure Rear Setback
(detached, greater than 200 sq ft) 12 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
Common Open Space (minimum 400 square feet per lot or as required below, whichever is greater, residential uses only)
75/du 75/du 75/du 75/du 75/du
AF FR SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RO NB RTO CB GB MB I UMC U
Maximum Building Height 8 (in feet)
Principal Structure 35 35 35 35 35 35 40 40 40 65 65 65 65
Accessory Structure (detached, GREATER than 200 sq ft, and encroaching into required rear yard setback for the parcel)
Building Height 35 35 35 35 35 35 40 40 40 65 65 65
Wall Height7 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 - -
Accessory Structure (detached, 200 sq ft OR LESS, and encroaching into principal structure side or rear yard setbacks)
Building Height 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 - -
13 Exception to minimum forty (40) acre lot size: No more than one (1) parcel of land less than forty (40) acres may be divided from an existing parcel of forty (40) acres or more in the AF
zoning district (a 1/4-1/4 section or full Government Lot shall be treated as a forty (40) acre parcel for the purposes of this Zoning Code). The small parcel shall be at least one (1) acre
in area and must be registered with the Office of the Latah County Clerk and the City Community Development Department. Such exceptions must be reviewed and approved by the
Council and the Board of Latah County Commissioners.
11 Roof drainage must be contained on-site
12 The accessory structure shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the required rear yard for the parcel
7 Dormers may be allowed to exceed 14 feet provided they do not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the length of the wall, each wall measured separately
2 Average net density of a townhouse development shall not be more than fourteen and one-half (14.5) units per acre
9 Minimum setbacks as specified on this table are for building walls. For permitted projections into minimum setback areas, refer to Section 4-5-4(C) of this Code

10 Where established front setbacks are less than the minimum required for such Zone, refer to Section 4-5-4(E) of this Code for an alternate front setback requirement
8
 Building height is defined in Section 4-1-6 of this Code. For exceptions to maximum building height regulations refer to Section 4-3-3 and Section 4-5-3 of this Code.
6
 Minimum side yard setback for multiple family developments on lots greater than 20,000 square feet shall be no less than 10 feet
3 Minimum lot width for lots that have rear alley access is reduced by 10 feet
4
 Or equal to the height of the building, whichever is greater, when adjacent to R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Zones
5
 Side yard combined minimum of 15 feet only applies to lots 55 feet or more in width

Notes
1 Or 800 square feet per dwelling, whichever is greater
where space is blank there is no minimum/maximum requirement, " - " = not applicable, use not permitted in that zone
du = dwelling unit
(Ord. 2018-07, 05-21-2018)

 



Chapter 5 
 
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
 
Sec. 5-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives 
Sec. 5-2:  Definitions 
Sec. 5-3:  General Provisions 
Sec. 5-4:  Administration 
Sec. 5-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction 
Sec. 5-6: Variance and Appeal Procedures 
 
Sec. 5-1. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives. 
A. Statutory Authorization.  The Legislature of the State of Idaho, in Idaho Code Sections 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorized local government units to adopt a floodplain map and floodplain management ordinance that identifies floodplains and that sets forth minimum development requirements in floodplains that are designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
B. Findings of Fact: 
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Moscow are subject to periodic inundation which could result in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
2. These flood losses are caused by development in flood hazard areas, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
3. Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning, adoption, and enforcement of land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain management. 
C. Statement of Purpose.  It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1. Protect human life, health, and property; 
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;  
3. Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in Special Flood Hazard Areas; 
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of Special Flood Hazard Areas; 
7. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazards; and 
8. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
D. Objectives and Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.  In order to accomplish its purpose, this Chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion 
hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion. 
2. Require that development that is vulnerable to floods, including structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3. Preserve and restore natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which carry and store flood waters; 
4. Control the filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. 2015-16, 11/16/2015; 2019-02, 04/15/2019) 
 
Sec. 5-2. Definitions. 
 Unless specifically defined below or in Chapter 1, Title 1 of Moscow City Code (MCC), words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. 
A. Accessory (Appurtenant) Structure.  A structure which is attached to or detached from and is subordinate to a principal residential or non-residential structure on the same parcel and which serves a purpose customarily incidental to the principal structure. 
B. Appeal.  A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpreta-tion of provisions of this Ordinance or request for a variance. 
C. Area Of Shallow Flooding.  A designated Zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH (or VO) on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (1 – 3’) where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident.  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
D. Area Of Special Flood Hazard.  The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.  Zone designation on maps always includes the letters A, AE, or V.  Also known as the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
E. Base Flood.  The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.  Also referred to as the "100-year flood". 
F. Base Flood Elevation (BFE).  The computed elevation to which flood water is anticipated to rise during the “Base Flood”. 
G. Basement.  Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade – i.e., below ground level – on all sides. 
H. Building.  See “Structure”. 
I. Development.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures, or the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of mobile homes; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of materials; specifically including the construction of dikes, berms and levees.   
J. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  The agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
K. Flood Or Flooding.   
1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete 
inundation of normally dry land areas from:  
  a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
 . b. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
  c. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding, as defined in paragraph (2) of this definition,  and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
 2. Collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or similar body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels, or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (1)(a) of this definition. 
L. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).  An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
M. Flood Insurance Study (FIS).  An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.  Also known as a flood elevation study. 
N. Floodplain.  Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.  See "Flood or Flooding". 
O. Floodplain Administrator.  The community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
P. Floodplain Management.  The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
Q. Floodplain Management Regulations.  Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance), and other application of police power.  The term describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
R. Flood Proofing.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
S. Flood Protection Elevation (FPE).  As defined in Idaho Code Section 46-1021(7), “an elevation that shall correspond to the elevation of the one percent (1%) chance flood (one hundred [100] year flood ) plus any increased flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus any required freeboard.”  The flood protection elevation for the City of Moscow is equal to BFE plus two feet (2’) of freeboard; the freeboard accounts for any flood elevation increases due to floodway encroachment as shown in the community’s Flood Insurance Study. 
T. Floodway.  See Regulatory Floodway.  
U. Freeboard.  A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management.  Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed. 
V. Functionally Dependent Use.  A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.  The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
W. Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG).  The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.   
X. Historic Structure.  A structure that is: 
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register.  
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.  
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or  
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
  a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or  
  b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Y. Lowest Adjacent Grade.  The lowest point of the ground level next to the structure.  
Z. Lowest Floor.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a structure's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter. 
AA. Manufactured Home.  A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.  The term “Manufactured Home” does not include a “Recreational Vehicle”. 
BB. Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision.  A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.  
CC. Mean Sea Level.  For purposes of the National Flood Insurance program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a community’s FIRM are referenced. 
DD. New Construction.  For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.  For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.  
EE. Recreational Vehicle.  A vehicle that is: 
 1. Built on a single chassis;  
 2. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;  
 3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and  
 4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.   
FF. Regulatory Floodway.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
GG. Start Of Construction.  Includes substantial improvement and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.  The actual start means either the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation or the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of a building. 
HH. Structure.  A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
II. Substantial Damage.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred. 
JJ. Substantial Improvement.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement.  This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The market value of the structure should be: 
1. The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or
 
2. In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.   
  The term does not include either:  
  a. A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or  
  b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure.  
KK. Variance.  A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this Ordinance. 
LL. Violation.  The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.  A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by the community's floodplain management ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.  To remedy a violation means to bring the structures or other development into full or partial compliance with State or local regulations or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance.  Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provision of this Ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
 
 
MM. Water Surface Elevation.  The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of costal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. 97-18, 05/05/1997; 2002-09, 04/01/2002; 2003-05, 03/17/03; 2015-16, 11/16/2015; 2019-02, 04/15/2019) 
 
Sec. 5-3. General Provisions. 
A. Lands to which this Chapter Applies.  This Chapter shall apply to all areas of Special Flood Hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Moscow. 
B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.  The following Flood Insurance Study and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map, and any revisions thereto as recognized by the Federal Insurance Administration, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this Chapter:  City of Moscow, Latah County, Idaho, revised April 15, 2002.  Copies of this study and map are kept on file with the Moscow Community Development Department.  Upon recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Council may from time to time amend the development regulations and areas of special flood hazard by ordinance. 


C. Penalties for Noncompliance.  No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations.  Violation of the provisions of this Chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation and shall be prosecuted in accordance with MCC Title 4, Chapter 11.  
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Moscow from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
D. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.  This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this Chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E. Interpretation.  In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1. Considered as minimum requirements; 
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted by state statutes. 
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.  The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
G. This Chapter is hereby declared to be severable.  Should any portion of this Chapter be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of this Chapter before the declaration of partial invalidity. 
(Ord. 2002-09, 04/01/2002; 2015-16, 11/16/2015; 2019-02, 04/15/2019) 
 
Sec. 5-4. Administration. 
A. Establishment of Development Permit: 
1. Development Permit Required.  A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in MCC Section 4-5-3(B).  The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in the "Definitions" above, and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in the "Definitions." 
 2. Application for Development Permit.  Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator and shall include: 
 a. Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in questions; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing;  
 b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;  
 c. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood-proofed; 
 d. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing methods of any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria in MCC Section 4-5-5(B)(2); and 
 e. Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
B. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.  The Community 
Development Director or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement this Chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
C. Duties and Responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator:  Duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
1. Permit Review. 
 a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied. 
 b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
 c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway.  If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of MCC Section 4-5-5(C)(1) are met. 
2. Use of Other Base Flood Data.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with MCC Section 4-5-3(B), BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, the Zoning Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer MCC Sections 4-5-5(B), SPECIFIC STANDARDS, and 4-5-5(C), FLOODWAYS. 
3. Information to be Obtained and Maintained. 
 a. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study or required as in MCC Section 4-5-4(C)(2), obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
 b. For all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures: 
  (1) verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level), and 
  (2) maintain the flood-proofing certifications required in MCC Section 4-5-4(A)(2)(d). 
 c. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Chapter. 
4. Alteration of Watercourses. 
 a. Notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
 b. Require that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
5. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries.  Make interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).  The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in MCC Section 4-5-6. 
6. Base Flood Elevation Changes.  Base Flood Elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions.  As soon as practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes available, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with Volume 44 Code of Federal 
Regulations Section 65.3.  Such a submission is necessary so that, upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
7. Notification.  Notify the Federal Insurance Administrator in writing of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction. 
 (Ord. 2015-16, 11/16/2015; 2019-02, 04/15/2019) 
 
Sec. 5-5. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. 
A. General Standards.  In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
1. Development. 
 a. All development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.   
 b. All subdivision preliminary plats/development plans shall include the mapped flood hazard zones from the effective FIRM.  
 c. Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less.  
 d. All development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
 e. All development shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
2. Construction Standards. 
 a. All new construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
 b. All new construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
 c. All new construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
 d. Enclosed Spaces / Crawl-spaces.  All new construction or substantial improvements of an existing structure that includes a fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by the foundation and other exterior walls, and used solely for parking, access, or storage, and subject to flooding, shall be designed to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure.  The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.  Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:  
  (1) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings with a total net area of not less than  
   (a) One (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area;  
   (b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1’) above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below the opening; 
   (c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions without manual intervention.  
  (2) To comply with the “Lowest Floor” criteria of this Chapter, the unfinished or flood 
resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, storage, or entry to the elevated area.  
  (3) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.  
  (4) For crawlspace foun-dation types, construction must follow the guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Structures Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas:  National Flood Insurance Program Interim Guidance, specifically:  
   (a) Below grade crawlspaces are prohibited at sites where the velocity of floodwaters exceed five feet (5’) per second;  
   (b) Interior grade of the crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet (2’) below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);  
   (c) Height of the below grade crawlspace, measured from the lowest interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall, must not exceed four feet (4’) at any point; 
   (d) Shall contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. 
3. Utilities. 
 a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
 b. New and replacement sanitary sewage system shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
 c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
 d. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4. Storage of Material and Equipment. 
 a. Placement, storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
 b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
5. Review of Building Permits.  Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding.  The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, and other relevant information, where available.  Failure to elevate at least two feet (2’) above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. 
B. Specific Standards.  In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in MCC Section 4-5-3(B), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or MCC Section 4-5-4(C)(2), Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are required:1. Residential Construction.  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, constructed at or above the Flood Protection Elevation.  If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in MCC Section 4-5-5(A)(2)(d). 
2. Nonresidential Construction.  New construction and substantial improvement of any non-residential structure must be flood-proofed if the new construction or improvement is not elevated.  The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
 a. Be flood-proofed to one foot (1’) above the Flood Protection Elevation, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. 
 b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; 
 c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.  Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in MCC Section 4-5-4(C)(3)(b). 
 d. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not flood-proofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in MCC Section 4-5-5(A)(2)(d). 
3. Manufactured Homes.  All manufactured homes to be placed, substantially improved, or which have incurred substantial damage within the SFHA shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the Flood Protection Elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of MCC Section 4-5-5(A)(2)(c) to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
4. Recreational vehicles in all areas of Special Flood Hazard, must either: 
  a. Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or 
  b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions, or 
  c. Meet all the requirements for Manufactured Home installation, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
5. Accessory Structures.  Relief from the elevation or dry flood-proofing standards may be granted for an accessory structure containing no more than fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet.  Such a structure must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the structure meets or exceeds the following standards: 
 a. It shall not be used for human habitation; 
 b. The accessory structure shall be used solely for parking and/or storage; 
 c. It shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
 d. It shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation; 
 e. Services such as electrical and heating equipment shall be 
elevated or flood-proofed to or above the Flood Protection Elevation; and 
 f. It shall meet the opening requirements of MCC Section 4-5-5(A)(2)(d). 
C. Floodways.  The following provisions shall apply in a floodway:  
1. A proposed project in the regulatory floodway:  
 a. Must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect in a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed project will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;  
 b. The Administrator may make the encroachment determination for minor projects, such as projects that do not increase the natural grade (e.g., paving a driveway or parking lot at existing grade, open fences and small isolated obstructions such as a mailbox or telephone pole).  
 2. Upon demonstrating that there are no alternatives, the applicant may propose an encroachment in the floodway that will cause an increase in the base flood elevation , provided that the applicant obtain a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA before the development can be approved and permitted.  
(Ord. 97-18, 05/05/1997; 99-12, 04/05/1999; 2003-05, 03/17/2003; 2015-16, 11/16/2015; 2019-02, 04/15/2019) 
 
Sec. 5-6. Variance and Appeal Procedures. 
A. Variances.  Procedures regarding variances are governed by MCC Section 4-8-3. 
B. Criteria for Variances within the Special Flood Hazard Area: 
 1. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level.  As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.  
 2. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.  
 3. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.  
 4. Variances may be issued upon:  
  a. (1) A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;  
   (2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(3)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, creation of nuisances, causation of fraud on, or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; or  
  b. Limited circumstances, where functionally dependent uses are needed, provided that the structure is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and there are no additional threats to public safety; or 
  c. For the repair, rehabilitation or restoration of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
 5. Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not 
personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances.  They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. 
C. Variance Decision.  The decision to either grant or deny a variance shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and denial.  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.  If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its lowest floor below the Flood Protection Elevation and that the cost of flood insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk. 
D. Appeals.  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from the interpretations of the Zoning Administrator.  Procedures regarding appeals are governed by MCC Section 4--8-2 and 4-10-8.  The Board of Adjustment shall consider the following in ruling on an appeal: 
 All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Ordinance, including:  
 1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands with potential for the injury of others;  
 2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;  
 3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;  
 4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;  
 5. The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where applicable; 6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;  
 7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;  
 8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area;  
 9. The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles;  
 10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
 11. The cost of providing government services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, and streets and bridges. 
E. Appeal Decision.  The Board of Adjustment decision on appeal shall be in writing and shall set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for the decision. 
 (Ord. 2015-16, 11/16/2015; 2019-02, 04/15/2019) 


Chapter 6 
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
Sec. 6-1:  Accessory Building 
  Setbacks 
Sec. 6-2:  Off-Street Parking 
  Requirements 
Sec. 6-3:  Loading Requirements 
Sec. 6-4:  <RESERVED> 
Sec. 6-5:  Buffer Yard Requirements 
Sec. 6-6:  Required Garbage 
  Dumpster Areas 
Sec. 6-7:  Moscow Sign Code 
Sec. 6-8:  Fences 
Sec. 6-9:  Outdoor Lighting 
 
Sec. 6-1.  Accessory Building Setbacks. 
 Detached accessory buildings shall comply with all minimum yard requirements applicable to the principal building with the following exceptions: 
A. Detached accessory buildings greater than two hundred (200) square feet in size may encroach into the required rear yard provided that: 
 1. they be set back a minimum of five feet (5’) from the rear lot line;  
 2. they occupy not more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the required rear yard; 
 3. the maximum height of such structures shall be as follows: 
  a. A building with a sloped roof shall have a top plate line not to exceed fourteen feet (14’), and the maximum height of the building shall be the maximum height permitted for a building in the Zone.  Dormers may be allowed to exceed fourteen feet (14’) provided they do not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the length of the wall, each wall measured separately. 
  b. A building with a flat roof (that is, a building with a slope less than 2:12) shall not exceed fourteen feet (14’) in height.   
B. Detached accessory buildings two hundred (200) square feet or less may encroach into the required rear and side yards provided that: 
 1. the building shall not exceed twelve feet (12’) in height; and 
 2. roof drainage is contained on-site. 
C. Accessory buildings and structures attached to a principal building shall observe all yard restrictions applicable to the principal building. 
 (Ord. 97-33, 11/3/97; 2010-08, 05/17/2010; 2015-06, 04/06/2015) 
 
Sec. 6-2. Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
A. General Provisions:  The general provisions for off-street parking and loading are as follows: 
 1. The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading spaces is a continuing obligation of the property owner.  No building permit will be issued until plans are presented to the City which show property that is and will remain available for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space.  The subsequent use of property for which the building permit is issued is subject to a condition of continued satisfaction of the requirements of this Section. 
 2. A building permit shall be obtained before the construction of any off-street parking or loading areas, or before the expansion of any existing off-street parking or loading areas, commences.  A Certificate of Occupancy will be issued only upon completion of all improvements required herein or a temporary and conditional occupancy permit may be issued upon the property owner entering a written agreement insuring the completion of all required improvements within a reasonable period of time, which in no event shall be longer than six (6) months after issuance of the temporary and conditional certificate of occupancy.  In the event that the property owner requires additional time, the Zoning Administrator may authorize an 
 extension up to an additional six (6) months.  Fees for plan review and inspection may be established from time to time by the Council by resolution for parking areas not associated with a structure requiring a building permit. 
 3. Application of Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements: 
  a. General:  Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking regulations of this Section shall apply to all districts and all uses within zoned and unzoned areas. 
  b. New Structure or Use:  Unless otherwise expressly stated, at the time a new structure is erected upon a parcel, or a new use is established on a previously undeveloped parcel, off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
  c. Change in Use:  Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the use of the property changes, additional off-street parking must be provided to serve the new use only when the number of parking spaces required for the new use exceeds by more than ten percent (10%) the number of spaces required for the lawful use that most recently occupied the building, based upon the Off-Street Parking Schedule of this Section.  In other words, a one hundred ten percent (110%) “credit” is given to the most recent lawful use of the property for the number of parking spaces that would be required under this Section, regardless of whether such spaces are actually provided.  Any new spaces that are required shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this Section.  When the number of parking spaces required for the new use exceeds (by more than ten percent [10%] the number of spaces required for the use that most recently occupied the property, additional parking spaces are required only to make up the difference between the amount of parking required for the previous use and the amount of parking required for the new use, based on the standards of this Section. 
  d. Expansion or Enlargement:  Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever an existing building or use is enlarged or expanded to include additional dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity, employees, or other units of measurement used for establishing off-street parking requirements, the provisions of this Section shall apply.  In the case of enlargements or expansions triggering requirements for additional parking, additional off-street parking spaces are required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use.  There is no requirement to address lawfully existing parking deficits.  Additional off-street parking spaces are required only when existing development is enlarged or expanded in any way that results in more than a ten percent (10%) increase in the total number of off-street parking spaces required for the development, based upon the provisions of this Section.. 
  e. Other Parking Areas:  All new parking areas or additions to existing parking areas, whether or not their construction is required by the Off-Street Parking Schedule, shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
  f. Alterations:  Alterations may be made to parking lots where such alterations are made in conformance with the provisions of this Section.  Alterations may be made to nonconforming lots where there is no reduction in the number of parking spaces provided; or there may be a reduction in the number of spaces where the alterations are directed toward bringing the parking area into compliance with the landscaping and/or design requirements of this Section. 
 
  g. Maintenance:  Routine mainte-nance of parking facilities shall be permitted and no building permit shall be required for such maintenance. 
 4. The required number of parking spaces shall be available for the parking of passenger automobiles for residents, customers, patrons, and employees and shall be in addition to spaces used for storage of vehicles or materials, or for the parking of vehicles used in conducting the business or use. 
 5. A plan, drawn to scale, indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirements are to be met, shall accompany an application for a building permit.  Such plan shall show all elements necessary to determine that the requirements of this Section are being met, including the following: 
 a. Individual parking and loading spaces. 
 b. Circulation area necessary to serve spaces. 
 c. Access to streets and property to be served. 
 d. Curb cuts. 
 e. Areas reserved for landscaping, types of plants and any other materials or improvements required for landscaping. 
 f. Dimensions, continuity and substance of fencing or other types of screening. 
 g. Grading, surfacing, drainage and subgrading details. 
 h. Obstacles, if any, to parking and traffic circulation in the finished parking area. 
 i. Specifications for signs, bumper guards and markings to identify individual spaces. 
 j. Traffic control devices and signage. 
 k. Other pertinent details. 
 6. Design requirements for parking lots: 
 a. Parking lots and their associated driveways and vehicle maneuvering areas shall have plant mix asphaltic concrete of two inch (2”) thickness with six inches (6”) of crushed rock base, or Portland cement concrete of four inch (4”) thickness with four inch (4”) crushed rock base surfaces, or an alternative surface of similar durability and utility, approved by the City Engineer.  These standards are designed for passenger vehicles and may not support heavy truck traffic and/or loading.   
 b. Parking lots and required interior landscaping shall be contained by a curb which is at least four inches (4”) high and which is set back a minimum of two feet (2’) from the property line and from exterior landscaping, except where the parking spaces are provided for single family dwellings. 
 c. Individual parking spaces shall be permanently marked to allow users to adequately identify the required individual spaces, except where the spaces are provided for single family or two (2) family dwellings. 
 d. Parking lots and spaces shall be designed such that their use will not require backing movements or other maneuvering within a street right of way.  Parking spaces provided for single family and two (2) family dwellings are exempt from this requirement, unless the street being accessed is a designated arterial street.  The continuation, alteration, expansion, relocation, reconstruction, or replacement of a single or a two (2) family dwelling, for which the parking requires backing or maneuvering within a designated arterial street right-of-way, shall be allowed where such situation existed prior to May 1, 2003, notwithstanding the nonconformity regulations of this Zoning Code.  Additional parking required as a result of the expansion, alteration, recon-struction, or replacement of any such two (2) family dwelling shall meet the parking design standards required at the time of the building permit application.  Where backing movements are proposed within an alley right-of-way, a sidewalk with a minimum width of three feet (3’) shall be provided adjacent to the parking lot between the parking lot and the use served by the parking lot.   
 e. Parking lots and spaces shall be designed such that a vehicle shall not be required to cross another parking space to gain access to a required parking space (tandem configuration) except for parking spaces serving single-family, two (2) family, twinhome, and townhouse dwellings.  Tandem parking may be allowed for multi-family dwellings under the following conditions: 
  i. The purpose of the parking design is to provide enclosed garages for the multi-family dwelling resident use; 
  ii. The tandem parking spaces (the parking space within the garage and in front of the garage) are assigned and furnished for use by the occupants of a single-family dwelling unit without separate, additional compensation; and 
  iii. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the required parking may be provided in a tandem configuration. 
 f. Service drives to off-street parking areas shall be designed to provide maximum safety for vehicles and pedestrians.  Multi-family, commercial and institutional use buildings shall provide a sidewalk connecting the public street to the building entrance.  Where multiple street frontages exist, only one (1) such sidewalk connection shall be required to be provided from one (1) street frontage.  Where multiple buildings exist within the same development site and there exists vehicular access from one (1) parking area to another, only one (1) such sidewalk connection per building shall be required to be provided from one (1) street frontage.  Where any such sidewalk is interrupted by a driveway or traffic aisle, a pedestrian crosswalk shall be clearly marked on the driving and walking surface.  The number of service drives shall be limited to the minimum that will accommodate anticipated traffic.  Minimum width of service drives, including alleys where used for backing or other maneuvering in parking lots, shall be in accordance with traffic aisle widths provided in Figure 1. 
 g. Parking areas with one hundred fifty (150) or more spaces shall include pedestrian walkways or other such facilities to ensure the safe passage of pedestrian traffic through the parking area. 
 7. Each off-street parking space shall be designed to conform to the City Parking Lot Standards, as set forth in Figure 1 (following Section 4-6-5 D). 
  In an R-1 zoning district, if the required off-street parking for a single family dwelling is not provided in a garage or carport, then such space shall be so located that at a future date, it may be covered by a garage structure in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code and the City Code.  In all other zoning districts, if the required off-street parking for a single-family dwelling or a two (2) family dwelling is not provided in a garage or carport, then at least one (1) such space per dwelling unit shall be so located that at a future date it may be covered by a garage structure in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code and the City Code. 
B. Location:  Off-street parking spaces for single and two (2) family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or on a lot adjacent to the use to be served.  For all other uses, the Zoning Administrator may approve off-street parking spaces not located on the same lot or on a lot adjacent to the use to be served.  The distance between an off-street parking space and/or lot and the use the parking is to serve shall be measured as the safe walking distance from the nearest parking space and/or lot to the nearest point of the use it is to serve.  The maximum distance between the parking space and/or lot and the use it is to serve shall be as follows: 
1. For all residential uses other than single and two (2) family dwellings, two hundred fifty feet (250’) . 
2. For uses other than those specified above, five hundred feet (500’). 
C. Special Circumstances: Deviations from the parking standards stated herein may be allowed in the following instances:  (1) joint use, and (2) on appeal, uses not specified. 
1. Joint Use:  The Zoning Administrator may authorize the joint use of parking spaces and/or lots, provided: 


 a. The applicant demonstrates that there is no substantial conflict between the principal operating hours of the building, structure or use for which the joint use of parking spaces and/or lots is proposed. 
 b. The parking spaces and/or lots for such proposed joint use is not farther than five hundred feet (500’) from any building it is to serve. 
 c. Up to eighty-five percent (85%) of the parking spaces and/or lots required by this Section for primarily "nighttime" uses such as theaters, bowling alleys, bars, restaurants and related uses, may be supplied by certain other types of buildings or uses herein referred to as "daytime" uses such as banks, offices, retail personal service shops, clothing, food, furniture, manufacturing or wholesale and related uses.  
 d. Up to eighty-five percent (85%) of the parking spaces and/or lots required by this Section for primarily "daytime" uses may be supplied by "nighttime" uses. 
 e. Up to one hundred percent (100%) of the parking spaces and/or lots required by this Section for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school, may be supplied by the off-street parking spaces and/or lots provided by uses primarily of a "daytime" nature. 
 f. The parties concerned in the joint use of off-street parking spaces and/or lots shall submit a written agreement for such joint use in a form to be recorded, which shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form and content.  Such agreement, when approved by the Zoning Administrator as conforming to the provisions of this Section, shall be recorded in the office of the Latah County Recorder and copies thereof filed with the Clerk. 
2. Uses Not Specified:  In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in this Section, the requirements for off-street parking spaces and/or lots shall be determined by the City.  Such determination shall be based upon the requirements for uses which have similar parking demand-generating characteristics.  The determination of the City may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment by an aggrieved person. 
D. Mixed Use:  In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for the various uses shall be computed separately.  Off-street parking spaces and/or lots for such uses shall not be considered for joint use.  Total requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses. 
 
FIGURE 1 
CITY OF MOSCOW 
PARKING LOT STANDARDS 
 
 angle_parking

 
ANGLE 
PARKING 
  perpendicular_parking

 
 
 
PERPENDICULAR PARKING 
  parallel_parking

 
PARALLEL 
PARKING 
  turning_clearances

 
 
TURNING 
CLEARANCES 
 

 
Two-Way Traffic 
 
 

 

 
One-Way Traffic 
 one-way_traffic

 
E. Off-Street Parking Schedule:  Parking spaces required for designated uses in all zoning districts, except within Section 4-6-5(E)(4) below, are established as follows: 
 1. Compact Spaces:  An allowance of thirty-five percent (35%) of the total number of spaces required may be identified and used as compact car spaces.  These spaces shall be conveniently located and provided with adequate signage. 
 2. Fractional Requirements:  Fractional requirements shall require one (1) space. 
 3. Area Calculation:  Except as otherwise indicated, area measurements are given in gross floor area.  Restroom facilities and areas used for storage may be excluded from the floor area calculation. 
4. Specific Zone Exemptions:  The following zoning districts have off-street parking requirements specific to each respective zone and are not required to meet Section 4-6-5(E)(6) below; however, all other provisions of Section 4-6-5 shall apply.  
 a. Central Business (CB) Zoning District:  Off-street parking is not required within the CB Zoning District. 
 b. Urban Mixed Commercial Zoning District Required Off-Street Parking: 
  i.  Minimum Required.
 
Use of Building or Site 
 Minimum Number of Automobile Parking Spaces Required 
 
Residential Uses 
 50% of the minimum parking required by this Code 
 
Hotels 
 1 per room 
 
Convention/Meeting Spaces 
 1 per 10 fixed seats and 1 per each 100 sf of assembly space without fixed seating 
 
Office, Retail, and Other Uses 
 No minimum parking specified 
 

 
  ii. Maximum Allowed Off-Street Parking.  The maximum allowed off-street surface parking shall be limited to no more than one hundred percent (100%) of the minimum parking required as specified within the minimum required parking table of Section 4-6-5(E)(6) of this Code.  Parking within parking structures or placed under structures shall not be counted toward the maximum allowed off-street parking limitation. 
 c. University Zoning District.  Off-street parking is not required within the U Zoning District since the University of Idaho manages parking on campus through the Parking and Transportation Services Department. 
 
 5. Accessibility:  Where off-street parking is required for multi-family residential, commercial, or institutional uses, accessible parking and access shall be provided in accordance with the most recent standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the most recently adopted building code.  The van accessible space detail, standard accessible space detail, accessible sign detail, and the number of accessible spaces required are shown in Figure 2 below.  The most recently adopted ANSI and building code requirements shall take precedence over Figure 2 in the circumstance where there are differing standards. 
 
 
FIGURE 2 
 
ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 6. Minimum Number of Automobile Parking Spaces Required by use of building or site: 
 
 
 
RESIDENTIAL USES 
 Minimum Number of Automobile Parking Spaces Required² 
 
Dwellings in Residential Zones 
   
 
Single Family (up to 4 unrelated individuals) 
 2 per du, plus 1 per bedroom in excess of 4 bedrooms 
 
Two Family 
 2 per du, plus 1 per bedroom in excess of 4 bedrooms 
 
Twinhome 
 2 per dwelling unit 
 
Townhouse 
 2 per dwelling unit 
 
Single Family (up to 6 unrelated individuals) 
 2 per du, plus 1 per bedroom in excess of 4 bedrooms 
 
Multiple Family (3 or more units) 
 Studio or one bedroom: 1.25 per du                                                                                                                                        Two bedroom: 1.75 per du                                                                                                                        Three or more bedroom: 0.75 per bedroom  
 
Mobile Home Parks 
 2 per mobile home 
 
Group Living 
   
 
Boarding House (occupied by owner, up to 6 boarders) 
 2 per du, plus 1 per bedroom in excess of 4 bedrooms 
 
Dormitories 
 1 per 2 occupants based upon anticipated max occupancy 
 
Fraternity, Sorority, and Cooperative Houses 
 1 per 2 occupants based upon anticipated max occupancy 
 
Accessory Uses 
   
 
Accessory Dwelling Unit 
 1 in addition to principal structure requirements 
 
NON-RESIDENTIAL USES 
 Minimum Number of Automobile Parking Spaces Required² 
 
Agricultural Uses 
   
 
Agriculture, Animal Production 
 None Required 
 
Agriculture, Crop Production 
 None Required 
 
Animals and Fowl (as permitted by City Code Title 10) 
 None Required 
 
Animal Slaughtering and Processing 
 None Required 
 
Gardens (Market and Community) no on-site retail sales 
 None Required 
 
With on-site retail sales 
 None Required 
 
Sawmills 
 None Required 
 
Amusement and Recreation Facilities 
   
 
Archery/Shooting Ranges (indoor only) 
 1.5 per firing lane 
 
Bowling Centers 
 6 per lane 
 
Dance Halls 
 1 per 100 sf 
 
Fitness Centers 
 1 per 300 sf 
 
Golf Courses and Country Clubs 
 4 per hole 
 
Miniature Golf Facilities 
 4 per hole 
 
Movie Theaters 
 1 per 4 seats 
 
Riding Stables 
 1 per 3 stalls 
 
Stadiums and Sports Arenas (Ice/Roller Rinks, Gymnasiums, Ballfields) 
 1 per 8 seats, plus 1 per 100 sf of assembly space without fixed seats³ 
 
Animal-Related Business 
   
 
Veterinary Services 
 1 per 200 sf 
 
Pet Care Services 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Financial, Technology, and Professional Services 
   
 
Agencies, Brokerages and Other Insurance Related Activities 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Broadcasting Studios 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Business, Professional, Political, Social Advocacy, Grantmaking, and Similar Organizations 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Commercial Banking, Savings Institutions, and Credit Unions 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Construction Contractor Services 
 1 per 400 sf of office space 
 
Data Processing, Hosting, and Related Services 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Publishing Industries (except Internet) 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Real Estate Services 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Securities, Commodity Contracts, and Other Financial Investments 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Software Publishers 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Food and Beverage Service 
   
 
Coffee/Espresso Stand 
 1 per 200 sf 
 
Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages)  
 1 per 200 sf 
 
Restaurants   
 1 per 200 sf 
 
Manufacturing 
   
 
Beverage Manufacturing 
 1 per 1,000 sf 
 
Manufacturing, Heavy 
 
Manufacturing, Light 
 
      Aerospace Product and Parts Manufacturing 
 
Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing 
 
Electrical Equipment, Appliance, and Component Manufacturing 
 
Medical Equipment and Supplies Manufacturing 
 
Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing 
 
Public/Institutional Uses 
   
 
Antenna Towers (new) 
 1 stall per site 
 
Co-Location 
 None Required 
 
Cemeteries 
 None Required 
 
Child Day Care Services 
   
 
Family, 5 or fewer children 
 2 per child care facility 
 
Group, 6 to 12 children 
 2 per child care facility plus the loading zone requirements of Section 4-3-4. D. 
 
Small, 13 to 20 children 
 3 per facility plus the loading zone requirements of Section 4-3-4. D. 
 
Large, 21 or more children 
 4 per facility plus the loading zone requirements of Section 4-3-4. D. 
 
Civic and Social Organizations 
 1 per 4 seats or 100 inches of bench seating, plus 1 per 100 square feet of open assembly area 
 
Community/Neighborhood Center 
 1 per 4 seats or 100 inches of bench seating, plus 1 per 100 square feet of open assembly area 
 
Correctional Institutions 
 1 per each 6 beds 
 
Educational Services 
 Kindergarten, Elementary & Middle Schools: 2 spaces per classroom and 1 for every 8 seats in largest assembly area;                                                                          High Schools: 5 spaces per classroom and 1 for every 8 seats in largest assembly area;                                                                       
 
Fairgrounds 
 1 per 8 seats and 1 per 100 sf of assembly space without fixed seats 
 
Funeral Homes and Funeral Services 
 1 per 75 sf used for assembly 
 
Government Office Buildings 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Health Care Services (Ambulatory) 
 1 per 200 sf 
 
Hospitals 
 1 per bed 
 
Museums and Art Galleries 
 1 per 500 sf 
 
Nursing and Residential Care Facilities 
 1 per 3 beds 
 
Public Parks & Recreational Facilities (operated by local government) 
 1 per 8 seats and 1 per 100 sf of assembly space without fixed seats³ 
 
Public Service and Utility Facilities  
 None Required 
 
Religious Facilities 
 1 per 4 seats or 100 inches of bench seating, plus 1 per 100 square feet of open assembly area 
 
Telecommunications Services 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Retail and Personal Services 
   
 
Consumer Goods Rental 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Laundries and Drycleaners 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Personal Care Services 
 1 per 400 sf 
 
Retail Sales (excluding 4411 & 444) 
 1 per 400 sf; 1 per 800 sf for retail stores handling bulky merchandise (furniture, appliances, etc.)                                                                                                           
 
Large Retail Establishment 
 
Storage Services 
   
 
Self-Storage Facilities 
 1 per 300 sf of sales or office area 
 
Warehouses/Wholesale Uses 
 1 per 2,000 sf 
 
Temporary Uses1 
 None Required 
 
Vehicles and Equipment 
   
 
Automobile and RV Dealers 
 1 per 800 sf 
 
Automotive Repair and Maintenance 
 
Building Material Sales & Garden Equipment/Supplies 
 
Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment Repair and Maintenance 
 
Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance 
 
Gas Stations 
 
Heavy Equipment Sales (mobile homes, farm equipment) 
 
Parking Lots and Garages 
 None Required 
 
Personal and Household Goods Repair and Maintenance 
 1 per 800 sf 
 
Railroad Yards and General Freight Trucking 
 1 per 2 employees on maximum work shift, but not less than 1 per 1,000 sf 
 
Rental and Leasing Services 
 1 per 800 sf 
 
Scrap Yards/Material Recycling1 
 1 per 300 sf of sales or office area 
 
Visitor Accommodations 
   
 
Bed and Breakfast 
 0.5 per bedroom 
 
Hotels and Motels 
 1 per sleeping room 
 
RV Parks and Campgrounds 
 1 per each trailer/tent or RV space 
 
 
  
 
NOTES 
 
1 Or applicant provide parking survey and summary to document peak on-street parking demand for the neighborhood for Zoning Administrator and/or Board of Adjustment determination that adequate parking is available.  
 
2 Exemptions to minimum off-street parking requirements in CB, UMC, and U Zones. See Section 4-6-5(E)(4) 
 
3 Or as determined by the Zoning Administrator, in consideration of operating characteristics of the use 
 

 
 
**  Exempt from having to meet minimum number of off-street parking spaces, if requirement would result in five (5) or fewer such spaces.   
 7. Bicycle Parking Incentive:  The total number of required automobile parking spaces for all uses other than single family and two (2) family dwellings may be reduced by ten percent (10%) if bicycle parking is provided in accordance with the following standards: 
a. Required Bicycle Spaces:  The total number of bicycle parking spaces must be equal to four (4) times the total number of reduced automobile parking spaces. 
b. Approved Bicycle Rack Types.  All required bicycle parking support racks shall be of the ‘A’, inverted ‘U’ or modified ‘U’ (or equivalent) style, or a bicycle locker or other storage device which;  
 i. support[s] the bicycle in an upright position by the bicycle frame in a minimum of two (2) locations;  
 ii. prevent[s] the wheel of the bicycle from tipping over; and  
 iii. enable[s] the locking of the frame and one (1) or both wheels. 
 All bike racks or bike lockers shall be securely anchored in the ground.  Nothing within this Section is intended to preclude opportunities for creative and artistic bicycle racks that meet the bicycle support and locking requirements contained herein. 
c. Bicycle Rack Location and Lighting.  Bicycle racks shall be placed as close to the primary building entrance(s) as possible in a convenient location that is clearly visible and well lit for ease of use and to provide protection against vandalism and theft.  Bicycle racks should not be placed so as to block an entrance or inhibit pedestrian flow in or out of a building.   
d. Bicycle Rack Sheltering.  No less than twenty-five percent (25%) of bicycle racks serving commercial or institutional uses, and no less than fifty percent (50%) of bicycle racks serving multi-family residential uses, shall be placed under building overhangs, awnings, free-standing shelter structures, or similar structures that protect the entire bicycle parking space from precipitation. 
e. Bicycle Rack Spacing and Area.  The minimum bicycle parking space shall be twenty four inches (24”) wide by seventy two inches (72”) long.  Spacing between bicycle racks shall be no less than forty eight inches (48”).  Where multiple rows of bicycle racks are installed, a center access aisle of no less than forty eight inches (48”) shall be provided.  Bicycle racks shall be placed no closer 
than twenty four (24”) from any adjacent building wall or other obstruction. 
F. Landscaping Requirements: 
 1. Purpose:  The purpose of these landscaping requirements is to promote the general welfare of the public by:  reducing noise levels and glare; filtering stormwater runoff; reducing the urban heat island effect; filtering vehicular emissions; stabilizing soils to help with erosion and flood control; providing shade to users of the parking lots; promoting safety by directing traffic circulation; promoting attractive off-street vehicular parking areas in the City; and protecting and improving the appearance, character and value of the surrounding properties and neighborhoods.  This objective is to be accomplished by providing external landscape buffers between parking areas and adjoining land uses and by providing landscape islands in the interior of parking lots.  Native plantings and xeriscaping are encouraged for water savings, reduced maintenance, reduction in fertilizers and pesticides, increased pollination, and a reduction in yard waste. 
 2. Application:  Landscaping is required as herein described for all off-street parking lots containing five (5) or more parking spaces. 
 3. Placement of Landscaping in Off-Street Parking Lots: 
  a. Required Exterior Landscaping:  Landscaping shall be provided between off-street parking lots and abutting public rights-of-way and adjacent properties.  The buffer strip in which the landscaping is provided shall be a minimum of three feet (3’) in width and shall contain: 
 i. One (1) tree of one and one-half inch (1.5”) caliper every forty (40) lineal feet 
 ii. One (1) shrub of at least one (1) gallon in size for perennial and at least two (2) gallons in size for deciduous or evergreen, every six feet (6’).  Such shrubs, upon maturity, shall provide visual relief of a minimum of three feet (3’) in height and fifty percent (50%) shall be evergreen.  
 iii. Consideration shall be given to the selection of trees and shrubs that at maturity do not present vehicular sight obstructions at driveway / street intersections.   
  b. Required Interior Landscaping:  Parking lots containing thirty (30) or more parking spaces shall include interior landscaping.  Multiple parking lots on a single property are counted separately for the purpose of interior landscaping.  The Zoning Administrator may determine that parking lots that are separate, but connected by travel aisles, may still be counted separately for the purpose of interior landscaping requirements.  Interior parking lot landscaping shall be in the form of landscaped islands that comply with the following requirements: 
 i. Landscape islands shall have a minimum width of eight feet (8’), as measured inside of perimeter curbing, and a length equivalent to the adjacent parking spaces.   
 ii. There shall be one (1) island for every twelve (12) parking spaces, evenly distributed in the parking lot.  
 iii. The landscape islands shall be protected by curbing and shall contain:  
  (a) One (1) tree of one and one-half inch (1.5”) caliper; 
  (b) Low shrubs of at least one (1) gallon in size for perennial and at least two (2) gallons in size for deciduous or evergreen; and  
  (c) Vegetative ground cover.  
 iv. Landscape islands adjacent to a double row of parking spaces, as shown in Figure 3 below, shall contain two (2) trees of one and one-half inch (1.5”) caliper. 
   v. Consideration shall be given to the selection of trees and shrubs that at maturity will not interfere with parking lot lighting or present vehicular sight obstructions. 
 
   vi. The Zoning Administrator may authorize the relocation of a parking lot tree to another parking lot landscape area if such tree is deemed to interfere with parking lot lighting or vehicular sight distances. 
 (Ord. 97-11, 4/7/97; 97-33, 11/3/97; 2003-10; 04/21/2003; 2005-07, 02/07/2005; 2005-33, 12/19/2005; 2006-19; 11/06/06; 2014-05, 05/19/2014; 2017-05, 05/15/2017; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
 
 
FIGURE 3 


 
 
Sec. 6-3.  Loading Requirements. 
 Each off-street loading space shall measure not less than thirty feet (30’) by twelve feet (12’), shall have an unobstructed height of fourteen feet (14’) and six inches (6”), shall be made permanently available for such purposes, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required in Section 4-6-6 of this Title. 
Table of Minimum Standards:  Required loading spaces shall conform with the standards in the following table: 
 
 Department stores, freight terminals, hospitals, sanitariums, industrial or manufacturing establishments, retail or wholesale stores or storage warehouses, or any similar use which has, or is intended to have, ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, shall provide truck loading or unloading berths as follows.  Required number of berths by square feet of aggregate gross floor area. 
 Ten thousand (10,000) to fifteen thousand (15,000).  One (1) berth. 
 
 
 Sixteen thousand (16,000) to thirty-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (39,999).  Two (2) berths. 
 Forty thousand (40,000) to sixty-five thousand (65,000).  Three (3) berths. 
 For each additional sixteen thousand (16,000).  One (1) additional berth. 
Auditoriums, convention or exhibit halls, sports arenas, hotels, office buildings, restaurants or similar uses which have, or are intended to have, an aggregate gross floor area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or more, shall provide truck loading or unloading berths as follows.  Required number of berths by square feet of aggregate gross floor area: 
 Forty thousand (40,000) to fifty-nine thousand (59,000).  One (1) berth. 
 Sixty thousand (60,000) to ninety-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (99,999).  Two (2) berths. 
 One hundred thousand (100,000) to one hundred sixty thousand (160,000).  Three (3) berths. 
 For each additional sixty thousand (60,000).  One (1) additional berth. 
 
 
Sec. 6-4.  <RESERVED> 
 (Ord. 2010-24, 11/15/2010; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 6-5. Buffer Yard Requirements. 
A. Purpose:  The purposes of this Section establishing standard buffer yard requirements are to provide a visual buffer between uses of different intensity, to reduce erosion and storm-water runoff, to protect property values, and to eliminate potential land use conflicts by mitigating adverse impacts from dust, odor, litter, noise, glare, lights, signs, buildings or parking areas. 
B. Buffer yards required:  Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this section whenever any use, development, or modification to use or development is being reviewed under this Zoning Code. 
C. Table of Required Buffer Yards:  Table 1 titled "Required Buffer Yards Between Zoning Districts" is hereby adopted as part of this Section (see page following).  The letter designation in Table 1 refers to the buffer yard standards established in Figure 2 (see page following). 
D. Buffer Yard Standards:  Buffer yard requirements vary depending on the intensity of both the zoning district of the proposed use and its neighbors.  Three different standards, A, B, and C, are hereby established to accommodate the range of buffer yard needs.  Buffer yards shall conform to the minimum standards provided in Figure 2. 
E. Location:  All required buffer yards shall be located on the perimeter of a lot or parcel upon which the development occurs and shall extend from lot line to lot line, or in an alternative location if the applicant demonstrates that it will provide an equivalent or superior buffering effect between uses.  Buffer yards shall not be located on any portion of a public or private street, dedicated right-of-way or vision clearance triangle. 
F. Plant Size:  The minimum size of plants at the time of planting shall be as follows: 
 1. Canopy trees - One and one-half inch (1.5”) caliper. 
 2. Understory trees - four feet (4’) in height. 
 3. Shrubs – 
  a. deciduous - fifteen inches (15”) in height. 
  b. evergreen - twelve inches (12”) in height. 
 4. Evergreen trees - three feet (3’) in height. 
G. Existing Vegetation:  Existing trees and other vegetation may be used in combination for buffering if they are healthy and will satisfy the requirements of this section. 
H. Fences and Berms: 
 1. A fence provided to meet the requirements of a "C" buffer yard shall be solid, view obscuring, and constructed of natural materials and/or masonry, and shall be at least six feet (6’) in height. 
 2. If a landscaped berm at least three feet (3’) in height is provided in a "B" buffer yard, plantings provided at the "A" buffer yard level will satisfy the buffer yard requirement. 
 3. If a landscaped berm at least three feet (3’) in height is provided in a "C" buffer yard, no fencing shall be required. 
I. Arterial Streets:  Where an arterial street separates the incompatible uses requiring a buffer yard, then if a "C" buffer yard would normally be required, a "B" buffer yard will satisfy the requirement; and if a "B" buffer yard would normally be required, an "A" buffer yard will satisfy the requirement. 
J. Preparation of Buffer Yard Plan:  Whenever buffering is required, a buffer yard plan, which may be incorporated into any other site plan required to be submitted under this Zoning Code, shall be prepared showing the approximate location, height, size and type of all plantings, fences and berms, and irrigation systems.
 
Table 1 
 
Required Buffer Yards 
Between Zoning Districts 
 
zone of proposed use 
zone of adjacent property 

 
 
 FR 
 SR 
  
 R-1 
 R-2 
 R-3 
 R-4 
 RO 
 BN 
 RTO 
 CB 
 GB 
 MB 
 I 
 U 
 
FR 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
  
 
SR 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 B 
 B 
 C 
 C 
  
 
R-1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 B 
 A 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 C 
 C 
  
 
R-2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 C 
  
 
R-3 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 C 
  
 
R-4 
  
  
  
 A 
 A 
  
  
  
 A 
 A 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 C 
  
 
RO 
  
  
  
 A 
 A 
 A 
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
 A 
 C 
  
 
BN 
 A 
 A 
  
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
  
 
RTO 
  
 A 
  
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
  
 
CB 
 A 
 B 
  
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 A 
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
  
 
GB 
 A 
 B 
  
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 A 
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
  
 
BN 
 A 
 B 
  
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 A 
  
  
  
  
  
 A 
  
 
I 
 A 
 B 
  
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 A 
 A 
  
  
  
  
  
 
U 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

 
No buffer yard required if space is blank 
 
 
 


K. Time of Completion:  All buffering required by this section shall be installed prior to occupancy or commencement of use.  A zoning certificate shall be issued only upon completion of all improvements required herein or upon receipt of appropriate financial commitment (subject to the approval of the City Attorney as to form and content) insuring the completion of all required improvements within a reasonable period of time, which in no event shall be longer than twelve (12) months after issuance of the zoning certificate. 
L. Maintenance of Required Buffer Yards:  The maintenance of buffer yards required by this section is a continuing obligation of the property owner.  The use of property for which a zoning certificate is issued shall be conditional upon the continued satisfaction of the requirements of this section. 
 (Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 6-6. Required Garbage Dumpster Areas. 
 Industrial, commercial and multiple family residential developments shall provide on-site locations to be reserved and utilized for the storage of dumpsters adequate in number and capacity to serve the development.  Garbage dumpster areas shall be located such that they do not encroach upon any required parking stalls, do not interfere with vehicle maneuvering, and do not require service trucks to be stopped within street travel lanes (other than alleys). 
(Ord. 97-33, 11/3/97; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 6-7. Moscow Sign Code. 
A. Intents and Purposes. 
 It is the intent and purpose of this Sign Code to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City and to promote visual appeal by regulating and controlling the type, size, location, height, and placement of signs for the following reasons: 
 1. To promote planned and organized signage for each zoning district. 
 2. To give all businesses and institutions an equal opportunity within zoning districts to have signage that will help people find the services they need. 
 3. To prevent the cluttered effect caused by the number of signs, and to prevent overly-intrusive signage though business corridors and within neighborhoods. 
 4. To ensure that pedestrians and motorists are protected from injury and damage which may be caused by the distractions and obstructions of overly-intrusive or improperly placed signs.  Further, it is the intent and purpose of this Sign Code to provide a reasonable balance between the right of business or institution to identify and promote itself with signs and the right of the public to be protected from the potential negative visual impacts and safety hazards which may result from the unrestricted proliferation of signs. 
 5. To prevent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech or any favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial message. 
 6. To regulate political campaign signage in a reasonable and practical manner which is politically neutral and which is in accordance with local, State, and Federal law and regulations. 
B. Sign Definitions. 
 1. Awning:  A shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building, that is constructed of canvas or other cloth type material stretched over a frame. 
 2. Awning Sign:  A sign which is attached to or part of an awning.  An awning sign shall be regulated as a wall sign unless it qualifies as another type of sign. 
 3. Billboard:  A free standing sign controlled by M.C.C. 4-6-13(R)(1)(g). 
 4. Building Identification Sign:  A sign which is limited to providing the 
 name of the onsite building it is identifying, the address and date of establishment of the building and other similar information which does not advertise  for or identify any particular business or activity operating in the building. 
 5. Canopy:  A shelter or roof-like cover supported by either a building and/or poles from the ground. 
 6. Canopy sign:  A sign that is part of or attached to the face of a canopy with the face of the sign in a plane parallel to the canopy.  A canopy sign shall be regulated as a wall sign unless it qualifies as another type of sign. 
 7. Dynamic Display Sign.  A sign that is capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means.  A sign that accurately displays only current time, date, and temperature and which does not contain any copy or commercial message within the dynamic display portion of the sign and which does not exceed ten (10) square feet in size shall not be considered a Dynamic Display Sign for purposes of this Sign Code. 
 8. Entity:  A business, industry, profession, person, institution, organization, enterprise, commodity, service, assemblage, place, subdivision, solicitation, or request for aid. 
 9. Freestanding Sign:  A sign supported primarily by uprights, braces or poles in or upon the ground. 
 10. Institutional Sign:  A sign which advertises an on-site service or function having primarily governmental, social, educational, or religious purposes. 
 11. Marquee:  A permanent, roof-like structure attached to and extending beyond the wall of a building to attract attention to and provide shelter for the main entry (or entries) of a building. 
 12. Marquee Sign:  A sign which is attached to or part of a marquee.  A marquee sign shall be regulated as a wall sign unless it qualifies as another type of sign. 
 13. Monument Sign:  A sign mounted on top of a ground base, such that there is direct contact or not more than twenty-four inches (24”) between the bottom of the sign face and the base of the sign for at least one-half the length of the base. 
 14. Mural:  Any artistic display painted directly onto a wall which does not otherwise qualify as a sign.  Any such artistic display which qualifies as a sign shall be regulated as a wall sign. 
 15. Political Campaign Sign:  A temporary outdoor sign associated with a candidate for public office or with a ballot measure, not including general political positions or issues. 
 16. Portable Sign:  Any sign not attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A-frames or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or printed on vehicles parked or visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
 17. Projecting Sign:  A sign which projects by length or width (not thickness) from and is supported entirely by a wall, canopy, eave, parapet, or marquee.   
 18. Roof Sign:  A sign erected upon or over the top of a roof.  A roof sign shall not include a sign located on a mansard roof if the sign is integrated with the roof design.  For the purpose of this Sign Code, a sign that is architecturally integrated into a mansard roof shall be classified as a wall sign. 
 19. Sign:  A presentation, display, or representation of words or letters, or of as figure, design, picture, painting, color pattern, logo, emblem, symbol, trademark or other representation so as 
to give notice, advertise, call attention to, or identify any entity. 
 20. Suspended Sign:  A sign hanging down or projecting downward from a canopy, eave, awning or other similar projection. 
 21. Temporary Sign:  A sign requiring no structural ground or building support, and displayed solely for temporary and short-term announcement, message, or advertisement or for land or building sale, rent, or lease. 
 22. Wall Sign:  A sign that is part of or attached to, a building wall, window, parapet, eave, or door, that does not otherwise qualify as a projected sign. 
C. Signs Permitted Upon Issuance of a Sign Permit. 
 1. No sign shall be erected, put into place, relocated, enlarged, structurally altered, or illuminated without issuance of a sign permit, unless explicitly exempted herein. 
 2. A non-commercial message of any type may be substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial or non-commercial message without any additional approval, permitting, or fee, provided that:  (a) the sign structure or mounting device is legal, without consideration of content; and (b) the property owner has consented to the substitution of such message. 
D. Exempt Signs. 
Any sign which does not require a permit and which is allowed in addition to other permitted signage, but which must comply with other applicable regulations of this Sign Code are as follows: 
1. All Zoning Districts: 
 a. A directional, warning, street, building identification, traffic control, informational, utility location identification or temporary special event sign which is displayed by or on behalf of federal, state, county, or city government; 
 b. A public utility sign identifying locations of underground utilities or warning of hazardous utilities; 
 c. A parking lot entry, exit, traffic directional or parking sign which does not contain any form of advertisement for or identification of an entity. 
 d. Political Campaign Signs in accordance with this Sign Code. 
2. FR, SR, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Zoning Districts: 
 One (1) sign per lot street frontage noticing the lot on which the sign is posted for sale or lease.  No such sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in size. 
3. R-4, RO and NB Zoning Districts: 
 One (1) sign per lot street frontage noticing the lot on which the sign is posted for sale or lease.  No such sign shall exceed nine (9) square feet in size. 
4. RTO, “U”, CB, UMC and GB Zoning Districts: 
 One (1) sign per lot street frontage noticing the lot on which the sign is posted for sale or lease.  No such sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in size. 
5. AF, MB and “I” Zoning Districts: 
 One (1) sign per lot street frontage noticing the lot on which the sign is posted for sale or lease.  No such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. 
6. CB, GB, UMC and MB Zoning Districts: 
 A sign placed in or on a window or door provided that the total sign area in or on the window or door not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the window or door, in which case the sign shall be counted as a wall sign. 
E. Prohibited Signs. 
1. Portable Signs, as defined in this Sign Code, are prohibited in all zoning districts, except as permitted in Section T of this Sign Code. 
2. Signs prohibited in the public right-of-way:  No sign, sign structure or part thereof except for public traffic and highway signs, shall be located within 
any public right-of-way, except as explicitly provided in this Sign Code.  A sign may project or be suspended over a public right-of-way only in the CB and UMC Zoning District and subject to the following: 
 a. No sign, sign structure, foundation or part thereof shall be located in the ground, attached to or painted upon any structure, utility pole, bridge, or any other appurtenance within the public right-of-way. 
 b. No sign, sign structure or part thereof shall project closer than two feet (2’) from any curb nor closer than four feet(4’) from any built road, street, or alley which has no curb. 
 c. No sign, sign structure, or part thereof shall maintain less than ten feet (10’) to the ground below it or not less than fourteen feet (14’) if the surface below is a driveway. 
 d. No sign shall be located within the street intersection vision triangle of vehicular operators as described in Idaho Code Section 49-221, except as explicitly allowed thereby. 
 e. A sign which does not conform to all relevant provisions of this Sign Code and which is located in or projects or is suspended over a public right-of-way may be removed by the City of Moscow at any time pursuant to Article XII, Section 2 of the Idaho Constitution, and Sections 50-301 and 50-314 of Idaho Code. 
3. A Dynamic Display Sign, except as specifically permitted within the Motor Business (MB), General Business (GB) and Industrial (I) Zoning Districts and subject to the standards contained in this Sign Code. 
F. Nonconforming Signs. 
1. Purpose:  The eventual elimination of existing signs that are not in conformity with the provisions of this Sign Code is as important as the regulation of new signs. 
2. The following nonconformity regulations shall supersede those of M.C.C. 4-1-8 only for the purpose of regulating nonconforming signs: 
 a. Any existing sign that was legally permitted prior to the enactment date of this Sign Code is deemed to be a legally permitted sign under this Sign Code for a period of five (5) years.  After five (5) years from the enactment date of this Sign Code, said non-conforming sign, unless it is brought into compliance with the requirements of this Sign Code, may not be: 
  i. Replaced, including replacement of the sign face or any part thereof, except with a conforming sign; 
  ii. Changed except for signs specifically designed to be readily and routinely changed in words, letters, or numbers; 
  iii. Structurally altered to extend the useful life of any part of the sign or the sign structure; and 
  iv. Expanded, moved or relocated. 
 b. Any entity with a nonconforming sign on a lot or property may not add additional signage of the entity until every sign of that entity on that lot or property is brought into conformance with this Sign Code. 
G. Parks and Recreation Facility Identification Signs. 
 Any sign which identifies a public park or recreation facility on site and does not advertise any other use or entity may be permitted in any zoning district only where such sign does not exceed eight feet (8’) in height as measured from the grade of the adjacent public street; five feet (5’) in width; twenty-four (24) square feet in area; and is set back from the right-of-way at least five feet (5’).  Such signs shall not be installed over a walkway, driveway or roadway and shall comply with all other Sign and Zoning Code requirements.  Only one (1) such sign shall be permitted per six hundred (600) lineal feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 
H. Subdivision Entrance / Identification Signs. 
 Entrance and identification signs to subdivisions or other similar land development projects identifying the name of such subdivision project are permitted subject to the issuance of a  Conditional Use Permit. 
I. Temporary and Special Event Signs. 
 Temporary and special event signs for any permitted use may be displayed for a consecutive period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, for a maximum of thirty (30) days per year with the exception of “Grand Opening” type banners which may be displayed for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.  Only one (1) “Grand Opening” type banner shall be permitted for the life of the business.  A subsequent “Grand Opening” type banner may be permitted when business ownership has transferred to another owner. 
J. Murals. 
Wall signs which use decorative artistry as their most prominent feature to attract attention may be permitted to exceed the maximum allowable size subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. 
K. Historically Significant Signs. 
Signs which an applicant can demonstrate as having significant historical value to a neighborhood or to the community at large may be repaired and/or relocated, regardless of applicable zoning district and nonconformity regulations, subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. 
L. Political Campaign Signs. 
1. Placement of Political Campaign Signs in Zoning Districts.  
 Political Campaign Signs may be posted on private property in the City with the permission of the owner or lessee or their agent(s) or representative(s) in accordance with the following: 
 a. Residential Zoning Districts.  A maximum of six (6) square feet of total area per Political Campaign Sign shall be permitted on private property. 
 b. Commercial Zoning Districts.  A maximum of thirty two (32) square feet of total area per Political Campaign Sign shall be permitted on private property with the permission of the owner or lessee or their agent(s) or representative(s).  Every Political Campaign Sign exceeding thirty two (32) square feet of total area shall comply with regulations applicable to the respective Commercial Zoning District in this Sign Code. 
2. Posting and Removal. 
 No Political Campaign Sign shall be posted more than sixty (60) days preceding the first day of primary, election or vote for the office or ballot measure with which such is associated.  Every Political Campaign Sign shall be removed within seven (7) days following the day of final election or vote for the office or ballot measure with which it is associated. 
3. Removal by City. 
 Political Campaign Signs which do not comply with this Subsection may be removed by the City and held until retrieved by the candidate and/or representative of the campaign or ballot measure with which they are associated. 
M. Sign Area/ Size Calculations. 
1. The area of a sign shall be determined by calculating the area within the smallest rectangle that encloses the outermost edges of the sign face, or any combination of the areas of all such rectangles enclosing the outermost edges of each sign face module, plus any frame work or structure, texture, writing, symbols, logos, or color, and any other form of display that is part of or attracts attention to the sign, or is used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
2. For any sign designed or intended to be readily and routinely changed, the sign face area shall include the entire 
area within which any design elements could be placed, plus any frame or material, texture, writing, symbols, logos, or color, framework or structure, together with any other form of display that is part of or attracts attention to the sign, or is used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
3. The area of two (2) sided or double faced signs shall be calculated using only one (1) sign facing, provided that the intersection of the two (2) sign facings forms not greater than a one hundred thirty-five degree (135°) angle; further provided that when the intersection of the two sign facings forms greater than one hundred thirty-five degree (135°) angle, the sign area shall be calculated as the sum of the areas of both sign facings. 
4. The area of a sign that contains greater than two (2) sign facings shall be calculated as the sum of the areas of all the sign facings. 
N. Permitted Signs in the AF and FR Zoning Districts. 
1. City owned entrance, welcome, and identification signs. 
2. A maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet of total sign area, identifying a permitted institutional, public service, utility facility or commercial use located on the lot. 
3. A maximum of one (1) freestanding sign on each lot street frontage. 
4. No freestanding sign shall exceed twenty (20) square feet in size or ten feet (10’) in height. 
5. Signs may be externally illuminated only; no strobe lights, flashing lights, rotary lights, or beacons shall be permitted, and the source of any illumination shall not be visible from any adjoining street or property. 
6. No roof sign or portable sign shall be permitted. 
7. A projecting or suspended sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet (8’) to the ground below or fourteen feet (14’) if over a driveway. 
8. No projecting sign shall exceed a height of thirty inches (30”) above the building wall. 
O. Permitted Signs in the SR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts. 
1 A maximum of one (1) monument or freestanding sign per lot street frontage. 
2. No monument or freestanding sign shall exceed twenty (20) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10’) in height identifying a permitted institutional, public service, or utility facility located on the lot. 
3. No monument or freestanding sign shall exceed four (4) square feet in size identifying a permitted commercial use located on the lot. 
4. Signs may be externally illuminated only; no strobe lights, flashing lights, rotary lights, or beacons shall be permitted, and the source of illumination shall not be visible from any adjoining street or property. 
5. The total area of wall signs on a building wall shall not exceed one (1) square foot times the length in feet of the wall; each wall calculated separately. 
6. No roof sign or portable sign shall be permitted. 
7. A projecting or suspended sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet (8’) to the ground below or fourteen feet (14’) if over a driveway. 
8. No projecting signs shall exceed a height of thirty inches (30”) above the building wall. 
P. Permitted signs in the R-4, RO and NB Zoning Districts. 
1. A maximum of one (1) monunent or freestanding sign on each lot street frontage. 
2. No monument or freestanding sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size nor ten feet (10’) in height. 
3. The total area of wall signs on a building wall shall not exceed one (1) square foot times the length in feet of 
the wall; each wall calculated separately. 
4. Signs may be externally illuminated only; no strobe lights, flashing lights, rotary lights, or beacons shall be permitted, and the source of any illumination shall not be visible from any adjoining street or property. 
5. No roof sign or portable sign shall be permitted. 
6. A projecting or suspended sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet (8’) to the ground below or fourteen feet (14’) if over a driveway. 
7. No projecting sign shall exceed a height of thirty inches (30”) above the building wall. 
Q. Permitted Signs in the RTO and “U” Zoning Districts. 
1. A maximum of one (1) monument or freestanding sign on each lot street frontage. 
2. No monument or freestanding sign shall exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in size nor ten feet (10’) in height. 
3. The total area of wall signs on a building wall shall not exceed one (1) square foot times the length in feet of the wall; each wall calculated separately. 
4. Signs may be externally illuminated only; no strobe lights, flashing lights, rotary lights, or beacons shall be permitted, and the source of illumination shall not be visible from any adjoining street or property. 
5. No roof sign or portable sign shall be permitted. 
6. A projecting or suspended sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet (8’) to the ground below or fourteen feet (14’) if over a driveway. 
7. No projecting sign shall exceed a height of thirty inches (30”) above the building wall. 
R. Permitted Signs in the CB, UMC and GB Zoning Districts. 
1. A maximum of either one (1) freestanding sign or one monument sign on each lot street frontage. 
2. No freestanding sign shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size not twenty-five feet (25’) in height. 
3. Any freestanding sign erected over a driveway shall maintain a minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14’) to the driveway surface. 
4. A maximum of one (1) projecting sign and one (1) suspended sign per business, profession, institution, organization or enterprise on each lot street frontage.  No projecting sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in size, nor shall it exceed a height of thirty inches (30”) above the building wall.   
5. No suspended sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in size. 
6. A projecting or suspended sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet (8’) to the ground below or fourteen feet (14’) if over a driveway. 
7. No projecting sign shall exceed a height of thirty inches (30”) above the building wall. 
8. The total area of wall signs on a building wall shall not exceed three (3) square feet times the length in feet of the wall, each wall calculated separately. 
9. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated, however, no strobe lights, flashing lights, rotary lights, or beacons shall be permitted and the source of illumination shall not be visible from any adjoining street or property. 
10. No roof sign shall be permitted. 
11. Portable Signs as permitted in Section T of this Sign Code. 
S. Permitted Signs in the MB and “I” Zoning Districts. 
 1. Freestanding Signs: 
  a. No freestanding sign shall be allowed to overhang the public right-of-way. 
  b. No upright, brace, pole, or other part of a sign support structure erected or constructed after the enactment date of this Sign Code, shall 
be closer than five feet (5’) to the public right-of-way. 
  c. Except as provided in paragraph M.C.C. 4-6-13(S)(1)(g) below, no freestanding sign shall contain greater than one hundred (100) square feet of sign area, plus ten (10) square feet for each entity in excess of one (1) advertised on the sign and located on the lot, to a maximum increase of one hundred (100) square feet for such additional entities, plus one-half (1/2) square foot for each one (1) square foot of landscaping to a maximum increase of one hundred (100) square feet for such landscaping; provided that no such sign shall contain greater than three hundred (300) square feet of sign area.  Any sign utilizing the above-mentioned landscaping bonus shall have such landscaping situated at or near the base of the sign in such a manner as to buffer the visual impact of the sign structure to passers by along the street frontage.  The signage landscaping shall be in addition to any other required landscaping and consist of groundcover (such as bark chips, river rock, mulch, etc.) plus trees and shrubs or trees and perennials which will achieve one hundred percent (100%) coverage within ten (10) years of planting.  Annual plantings, ivy and turf may be included provided that they do not cover in excess of fifteen percent (15%) of the landscaped area. 
  d. No freestanding sign shall exceed twenty-five feet (25’) in height. 
  e. Any freestanding sign erected over a driveway must maintain a minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14’) from the bottom of the sign to the driveway surface. 
  f. Except for signs permitted by M.C.C. 4-6-13(S(1)(g) below the total number of freestanding signs on each lot street frontage shall be limited to one (1) per each three hundred feet (300’) of lot street frontage or additional part thereof; however, no freestanding sign shall be permitted on any lot created after the enactment date of this Sign Code that has less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of lot area. 
  g. An additional freestanding sign (billboard) may be permitted to exceed one hundred (100) square feet of sign area, exclusive of increases for multiple entities or landscaping, provided such freestanding sign meets the following requirements: 
   i. it is on a lot that is at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in size or on a lot that was recognize by the City as building lot prior to the enactment date of this Sign Code; 
   ii. it is located on property within fifty feet (50) of U.S. Highway 95 or State Highway 8 right-of-way; 
   iii. it be spaced no closer than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500’) of another sign permitted by this paragraph M.C.C. 4-6-13(S)(1)(g); 
   iv. it not exceed three hundred (300) square feet per facing with no more than two (2) facings that intersect at no greater than a one hundred thirty-five degree (135°) angle (a tri-action sign shall be considered as one which has more than two (2) facings); 
   v. it not exceed twenty-five feet (25’) in height; 
   vi. if illuminated, the source of illumination be external and not directly visible from any location on any adjacent lot or right-of-way. 
   vii. it maintain a minimum clear distance of eight feet (8’) from the bottom of the sign to the ground below it or a minimum of fourteen feet (14’) if the ground below is a driveway. 
 2. Monument Signs. 
  a. A monument sign located within ten feet (10’) of a street right-of-way shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in size plus twelve (12) square feet if a minimum of fifty (50) square feet of landscaping is provided around the base of the sign. 
  b. A monument sign located within ten feet (10’) of a street right-of-way shall not exceed four feet (4’) in height, except that a monument sign not greater than three feet (3’) in width may be allowed a maximum height of eight feet (8’). 
  c. A monument sign located beyond ten feet (10’) from a street right-of-way shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in size plus thirty (30) square feet if a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of landscaping is provided around the base of the sign.  The signage landscaping shall be in addition to any other required landscaping and consist of groundcover (bark chips, river rock, mulch, etc.) plus trees and shrubs or trees and perennials which achieve one hundred percent (100%) coverage within ten (10) years of planting.  Annual plantings, ivy and turf may be included provided that they do not cover in excess of thirty percent (30%) of the landscaped area. 
  d. A monument sign located beyond ten feet (10’) from a street right-of-way shall not exceed fifteen feet (15’) in height. 
  e. The total number of monument signs on each lot street frontage shall be limited to the greater of the following:  one (1) per lot street frontage of fifty feet (50’) or more or one (1) on each two hundred feet (200’) of lot street frontage or additional part thereof. 
 3. Projecting and Suspended Signs 
  a. No projecting sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in size and no suspended sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in size. 
  b. No projecting sign shall exceed a height of thirty inches (30”) above the building wall. 
  c. A projecting or suspended sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet (8’) from the bottom of the sign to the ground below it, or a minimum or fourteen feet (14’) if the ground below is a driveway. 
  d. A maximum of one (1) projecting sign and one (1) suspended sign per business, enterprise, profession, institution, or organization on each lot street frontage. 
 4. Roof Signs. 
  a. A maximum of one (1) roof sign, not to exceed eighty (80) square feet in size, per building. 
  b. No roof sign shall exceed twenty-five feet (25’) in height above the ground. 
 5. Wall Signs. 
  The total area of wall signs on a building wall shall not exceed three (3) square feet times the length in feet of the wall, each wall calculated separately. 
 6. Portable Signs as permitted in Section T of this Sign Code. 
 7. Illumination. 
  Signs may be internally or externally illuminated; no strobe lights, flashing lights, rotary lights, or beacons shall be permitted, and the source of any illumination shall not be visible from any adjoining street or property. 
T. Permitted Portable Signs.  Portable Signs shall be permitted as follows:  
 1. Central Business (CB) and Urban Mixed Commercial (UMC) Zoning District.  Portable Signs shall be permitted within the Central Business (CB) and Urban Mixed Commercial (UMC) Zoning Districts on private property and on public right-of-way and shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
  a. Maximum number permitted shall be one (1) Portable Sign per each one hundred feet (100’) of building frontage.  At least one (1) Portable Sign shall be permitted for each building. 
  b. Maximum size shall be four feet (4’) in height, and three feet (3’) in width. 
  c. Materials shall be solid and durable, and there shall be no lighting. 
  d. Location: 
   i. Portable Signs shall be directly in front of the business they serve. 
   ii. A minimum clear width of at least six feet (6’) shall be maintained on public right-of-way for the safe movement of pedestrians, and the location shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
  e. Anchoring.  Portable Signs shall be suitably anchored, weighted or designed to be resistant to the wind and shall be removed from public right-of-way at the end of each business day and shall not be displayed during the non-business hours of the commercial use such signs advertise. 
  f. Hold Harmless Agreement.  Any person or business placing a Portable Sign upon the public right-of-way in conformance with this Section shall execute an agreement by which the person or business placing such Portable Sign accepts any and all liability for damages of any nature suffered by anyone as a result of the placement or maintaining of such Portable Sign and further shall agree to hold the City harmless from and indemnify the City for any such claims for damages. 
 2. General Business (GB) and Motor Business (MB) Zoning Districts.  Portable Signs shall be permitted in the General Business (GB) and Motor Business (MB) Zoning Districts subject to the following restrictions: 
  a. Maximum number permitted shall be no more than one (1) Portable Sign per each one hundred feet (100’) of lot frontage.  At least one (1) Portable Sign shall be allowed per each lot street frontage.  No more than three (3) Portable Signs shall be permitted for any single lot frontage. 
  b. Maximum Size: 
   i. Sandwich Board Signs:  Four feet (4’) in height and three feet (3’) in width. 
   ii. Freestanding Banner Signs:  Thirteen feet (13’) in height and twenty four (24) square feet in size. 
  c. Portable Signs shall be constructed of solid and durable materials and shall not include lighting or reflective materials. 
  d. Portable Signs shall be suitably anchored, weighted or designed to be resistant to the wind. 
  e. Portable Signs shall not be placed upon public right-of-way and shall not present a visual sight obstruction upon adjacent streets, as determined by the City Engineer.  Where the physical development or other special circumstances of the property prohibit the placement of Portable Signs upon private property, Portable Signs may be allowed upon the adjacent public right-of-way upon the issuance of an encroachment permit from the agency having jurisdiction over said public right-of-way.   
  f. All Portable Signs shall be removed at the end of each business day and shall not be displayed during the non-business hours of the commercial use such signs advertise. 
  g. Portable Signs displayed within private parking lots (such as malls or shopping centers) that are not oriented toward and readily visible from adjacent public streets shall not be regulated by this Sign Code. 
  h. Portable Signs that are tattered, torn, or in a state of disrepair are prohibited. 
U. Dynamic Display Signs.  Dynamic Display Signs shall be permitted as follows: 
 1. Permitted Locations.   
  Dynamic Display Signs shall be permitted only within the Motor Business (MB), General Business (GB), and Industrial (I) Zoning Districts, subject to the standards contained herein.  
 2. Maximum Dynamic Display Sign Area Per Building Lot.  
  The total Dynamic Display Sign area shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet per building lot. 
 3. Maximum Single Dynamic Display Sign Size.  No single Dynamic Display Sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size within the Motor Business (MB) and Industrial (I) Zoning Districts, or fifty (50) square feet within the General Business (GB) Zoning District. 
 4. Dynamic Display Sign Messaging.  Dynamic Display Signs shall not include any illumination or image which moves continuously, appears to be in motion or has any moving or animated parts or video displays or broadcasts.  No Dynamic Display Sign shall include any illumination which is flashing or moving, except as allowed for transition between images or displays.  Dynamic display shall not use blinking, bursting, distorting, flashing, oscillating, rotating, shimmering, sparkling, streaming, tracing, traveling text, and/or twinkling effects. 
 5. Hold Time.   
  Dynamic display shall not change or move more often than once every eight (8) seconds.  
 6. Transitions.   
  Transition from one (1) image or display to the next image or display shall be accomplished in two (2) seconds or less.  Fading, scrolling, and/or dissolving effects may be used as part of such transition.  
 7. Other Sensory Measures.  Dynamic Display Signs shall not emit or utilize any sound or smell that is capable of being detected. 
 8. Display Malfunctions.   
  The Dynamic Display Sign owner shall stop all dynamic display within twenty four (24) hours following receipt of notice from the City that the Dynamic Display Sign is malfunctioning or is otherwise not in compliance with the standards of this Sign Code.  
 9. Brightness.   
  a. Dynamic Display Signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of eight thousand (8,000) nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours or more than five hundred (500) nits during nighttime hours (sunset to sunrise), as measured from the Dynamic Display Sign’s face when such Sign is set at full white display.    
  b. In addition to the illumination limits herein, no Dynamic Display Sign shall result in an increase of more than three tenths (0.3) of one foot candle above existing ambient light levels utilizing the following procedure: 
   Within a time period of at least thirty (30) minutes past sunset and (30) minutes prior to sunrise on the same night, an ambient light first reading shall be taken using an appropriate foot candle meter while the subject Dynamic Display Sign is off or is displaying all black display.  Such first reading shall be taken with the light meter aimed directly at the Dynamic Display Sign at a distance which shall be equal to the square root of the Dynamic Display Area multiplied by one hundred (100) (i.e., [SQRT (sign area in sq. ft. x 100)]).  A second reading from the same location as the first reading shall be taken in the same manner as the first reading while the subject Dynamic Display Sign is displaying full white display.  The difference between the two readings shall not exceed three tenths (0.3) of one foot candle.   
  c. Dynamic Display Signs shall be equipped with automatic dimming technology that automatically adjusts the Dynamic Display Area’s brightness, based on ambient light conditions.  
 10. No Interference with Traffic Control Devices.  No Dynamic Display Sign shall obscure or interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic sign, device, or signal, as determined by the City Engineer. 
 11. Nonconformities.   
  a. Dynamic Display Signs in place on the date of adoption of this Dynamic Display Signs subsection shall comply with all the operational standards of this subsection to the extent that is technically feasible when considering the operational control capabilities of such existing Dynamic Display Sign.   
  b. A Dynamic Display Sign in place on the date of adoption of this Dynamic Display Sign subsection which is designed and intended to display only text messages that do not fit completely within the display area at one time (e.g., scrolling messages, serially displayed messages, etc.) and which do not contain any graphic images, may scroll or display portions of a message that is statically displayed for a duration of no less than one (1) second, if such is done in a consistent and predictable manner that does not result in flashing of the display.  
  c. An existing Dynamic Display Sign that does not meet the structural requirements of this Dynamic Display Sign subsection may continue as a nonconforming sign, subject to the regulation of non-conforming signs in this Sign Code. 
V. Internally Illuminated Signs.  No internally illuminated sign shall exceed the following illumination standards:  
 1. No internally illuminated sign shall exceed a maximum illumination of eight thousand (8,000) nits (candelas per square meter) during local daylight hours (sunrise to sunset) or more than five hundred (500) nits during local nighttime hours (sunset to sunrise), as measured  from the internally illuminated sign’s face. 
 2. In addition to the illumination limits in this illuminated sign subsection, no internally illuminated sign shall cause an increase of more than three tenths (0.3) of one foot candle above existing ambient light levels when measured utilizing the following procedure: 
  Within a time period of at least thirty (30) minutes past sunset and thirty (30) minutes prior to sunrise on the same night, an ambient light first reading shall be taken using an appropriate foot candle meter while the subject sign is off.  Such first reading shall be taken with the light meter aimed directly at the subject sign at a distance which shall be equal to the square root of the illuminated sign area multiplied by one hundred (100) (i.e., [SQRT (sign area in sq. ft. x 100)]).  A second reading from the same location as the first reading shall be taken in the same manner while the subject sign is illuminated.  The difference between the two readings shall not exceed three tenths (0.3) of one foot candle.   
 3. Internally illuminated signs shall be equipped with automatic dimming technology that automatically adjusts the display portions’ brightness, based on ambient light conditions. 
 (Ord. 2006-05, 02/21/06; 2009-01, 01/20/2009; 2009-10, 05/18/2009; 2012-16, 08/06/2012; 2012-19, 09/04/2012; 2013-02, 02/04/2013; 2016-08; 07/18/2016; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 6-8. Fences 
A. Fences may be constructed after obtaining a permit from the City.  All fences shall comply with the following standards: 
 1. Fences within all Zoning Districts, except for the Industrial (I) Zoning District, shall not exceed six feet (6’) in height, except fences located on school grounds, public parks, public utility facilities, and similar public facilities.  Fences shall not exceed eight feet (8’) in height within the Industrial (I) Zoning District. 
 2. Fences within the FR, SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RO, and NB Zoning Districts shall comply with the following standards: 
  a. Fences constructed within required front yards shall not exceed three feet (3’) in height for solid 
 fences, and four feet six inches (4’ 6”) in height for open fences where the posts and material constitute not more than sixty percent (60%) of the fence area. 
  b. Solid fences installed on top of, or within five feet (5’) of fill-retaining walls located at a rear, side, or street side property line shall not exceed a height of six feet (6’) minus one-half (1/2) the elevation difference between the high and low sides of the wall. 
 3. Fences shall not be allowed within the Urban Mixed Commercial (UMC) Zoning District except for the following exceptions: 
  a. Open fences not to exceed four feet (4’) in height, or solid fences or masonry walls not to exceed three feet (3’) in height, where located around outdoor seating and dining areas, private yard areas and similar spaces in front of the principal structure. 
  b. Solid fences not to exceed six feet (6’) in height where used to screen trash and/or recycling receptacles, private rear yard areas, and similar spaces to the side or behind the principal structure. 
  c. Fences and/or masonry walls not to exceed three feet (3’) in height where used to screen off-street parking facilities. 
 4. Fences shall be set back a minimum of one foot (1’) from adjacent public sidewalks, or six feet (6’) from the back of the street curb if no sidewalk exists. 
 5. Fences located within the street intersection sight triangle shall be constructed in accordance with the City Standard Construction Specifications and drawings as adopted by the Council. 
 6. Any fence proposed to be located within the public right-of-way shall require the issuance of an encroachment agreement. 
 7. Barbed wire fences or other fences constructed in a manner that may be hazardous to persons or animals are prohibited in all Zoning Districts except for the Industrial (I) District.  Barbed wire fences within the Industrial (I) Zoning District may be permitted where necessary for security and where all portions of the barbed wire are located no less than six feet (6’) above the ground level. 
 (Ord. 2001-3, 02/05/01; 2005-04, 01/18/2005; 2010-24, 11/15/2010; 2014-16, 10/06/2014; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 6-9. Outdoor Lighting. 
A. Purpose. 
 The purposes of this Chapter are to provide standards for outdoor lighting to minimize detriment to adjoining property owners and the public while maintaining adequate outdoor lighting for security and safety, and to promote energy conservation, the preservation of the night sky, and nighttime enjoyment of properties within the City. 
B. Applicability. 
 The provisions of this Section shall apply to outdoor lighting which exists or is installed, replaced or modified after the effective date of this Section. 
C. Definitions. 
 1. Floodlight:  An outdoor lighting fixture, luminaire or lamp that incorporates a reflector or refractor to concentrate the light output in a particular direction and area. 
 2. Full Cut-off or Fully-Shielded:  An outdoor lighting fixture, shielded or constructed in such a manner that all light emitted by the light fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal. 
 3. Height of Luminaire:  The vertical distance from the ground surface directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest part of the lamp. 
 4. Installation:  The placement of an outdoor light fixture where none currently exists. 
 5. Lamp:  A generic term for an artificial light source (to be distinguished from the whole assembly or luminaire) or an object commonly referred to as “bulb.” 
 6. Light:  The form of radiant energy acting on the retina of the eye. 
 7. Light Fixture:  The assembly that houses, holds, or supports the lamp and/or the lamp(s). The light fixture may include all or some of the following: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, lamp holder, light pole, ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or refractor or lens. 
 8. Light Trespass:  The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property upon which such luminaire is located. 
 9. Lumen:  A unit of luminous flux where one (1) footcandle is one (1) lumen per square foot. For the purposes of this Chapter, the lumen output values shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp. 
 10. Luminaire:  A light fixture and lamp or lamps. 
 11. Modification:  The replacement, relocation, or change in height of an outdoor light fixture. 
 12. Opaque:  Opaque means that a material does not transmit light from an internal illumination source. 
 13. Outdoor Lighting:  The illumination of an outside area or object not within a building by a luminaire. 
 14. Partially shielded:  A luminaire that incorporates a translucent barrier, in and around the lamp, which allows some light to pass through the barrier while concealing the light source. Additionally the lamp is shielded in such a manner that less than ten percent (10%) of the light emitted directly from the lamp or indirectly from the light fixture is projected at angles above the horizontal. 
 15. Replacement:  The substitution of an existing light fixture with another light fixture. 
 16. Uplighting:  A luminaire directed to shine light rays above the horizontal plane. 
D. Allowable Outdoor Lighting.   
 1. General Standards. 
  All outdoor lighting within the City shall be full cut-off and designed, installed and maintained in order to prevent light trespass upon adjacent property or a public street, unless otherwise specifically allowed by this Chapter.  Outdoor lighting existing as of the adoption date of this Section and which does not comply with the full cut-off and trespass requirements regulations herein shall be made compliant with such within twenty (20) years from the adoption date of this Section. 
 2. Height Standards. 
  No luminaire shall exceed the height specified for each Zoning District and described as the distance between grade at base of the supporting pole or structure to the top of the luminaire unless otherwise specified herein: 
  a. SR, R-1, R-2, R-3:  fifteen feet (15’)  
  b. AF, FR, R-4, R-O, NB, RTO:  twenty feet (20’)  
  c. CB, GB, MB, I:  twenty-five feet (25’) 
  d. U:  thirty-five feet (35’) 
 3. Residential Zoning District  Outdoor Lighting Standards.  
  a. All outdoor lighting on property within residential Zoning Districts of the City shall be full cut-off with the following exceptions: 
   i. All luminaires with a maximum output of four hundred (400) lumens, regardless of number of lamps may be left unshielded or partially shielded, provided that such luminaire has an opaque top or is under an opaque structure. 
   ii. Freestanding luminaires with a maximum output of one thousand (1,000) lumens, regardless of number of lamps provided the lamp is 
partially shielded, the luminaire has an opaque top, or it is located under an opaque structure. 
   iii. Partially shielded, wall-mounted Luminaires located below an eave with a maximum output of two thousand (2,000) lumens. Examples of lamp types of two thousand (2000) lumens and less are: 
    (a) 100 Watt Standard Incandescent 
    (b) 15 Watt Cool White Fluorescent 
    (c) 15 Watt Compact Fluorescent 
    (d) 18 Watt Low Pressure Sodium 
   iv. An angled spot or floodlight, provided that the luminaire is not directed more than twenty-five degrees (25°) in any direction from a vertical line—drawn from the center of the lamp to the surface directly below it. 
   v. A partially shielded floodlight equipped with a timer that allows illumination only between dusk and 11:00 p.m. local time. 
   vi. A luminaire activated by a motion sensor where such luminaire: 
    (a) Emits light only for a maximum of five (5) minutes per activation when activated; 
    (b) Is not triggered by activity off the property upon which such luminaire is located. 
   vii. Lighting of communication and/or navigation towers required by law or regulation other than by their Code. 
  b. Every freestanding luminaire within single family and two (2) family Residential Zoning Districts of the City shall be placed at a height equal to or less than the sum of H=(D/3)+3, where D is the distance in feet to the side and rear property lines from the closest point of the lamp and not to exceed the maximum height requirements otherwise specified in this Chapter, with the following exceptions: 
   i. A freestanding luminaire for a parking lot associated with an institutional facility or any use other than a single or two (2) family residential and which is approved as part of a Conditional Use Permit, Special Use Permit, or Planned Unit Development and which is set back from the side and rear property lines a distance no less than the height of the luminaire. 
   ii. Municipal outdoor lighting, as otherwise regulated by this Chapter. 
   iii. Public parks, Recreation Facilities and athletic field outdoor lighting, as otherwise regulated by this Chapter. 
   iv. A freestanding luminaire installed to illuminate a driveway or alley at its intersection with a street may be placed up to the street right-of-way line, subject to the height limitations of Section (D)(2) herein. 
 4. Non-Residential Zoning District Outdoor Standards.   
  All outdoor lighting in Zoning Districts other than Residential within the City shall be full cut-off with the following exceptions:  
  a. Lighting of communication and/or navigation towers required by law or regulation other than by their Code. 
  b. Lighting of public spaces and public rights of way within the Central Business Zoning District on the University of Idaho campus in its historic district provided the outdoor lighting is partially shielded and does not trespass on residential properties. 
 5. Municipal Outdoor Lighting. 
  All outdoor lighting on property owned or managed by the City shall be full cut-off unless otherwise allowed herein. 
  a. All existing streetlights owned, operated, or leased by the City and not in compliance with this Section at the time of adoption of this Section shall be made to be compliant with this 
Section within twenty (20) years or subject to the City of Moscow Street Light Replacement and Retrofit Plan as approved by Council. 
  b. All newly installed streetlights owned, operated, or leased by the City within Residential Zoning Districts and along street frontage of those properties directly adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts shall not exceed thirty feet (30’) in height except as required for City street intersections with traffic signals. 
 6. Outdoor Sign Lighting: All outdoor sign lighting, placement, and use, shall be regulated by Section 4-6-13 of this Code.   
 7. Public Parks, Recreation Facilities, and Athletic Field Lighting. 
  a. All newly installed outdoor lighting in a public park, a recreation facility, or a ball field shall be full cut-off and not trespass on to adjoining property.  
  b. Repair, replacement, or other modification of an existing non-compliant public park, recreational facility, athletic field or similar outdoor lighting system which meets or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the system, as valued on the effective date of this Chapter, shall be repaired, replaced, or modified so as to be in conformance within the current standards established herein.  For purposes of this subsection, “system” shall mean the entirety of a coordinated grouping of luminaires necessary to provide outdoor lighting for the desired use(s) of a public park, recreational facility, and/or ball field.  If no such repair, replacement or other modification occurs to result in compliance with this Chapter within twenty (20) years from the effective date of this Chapter, any such non-compliant lighting shall be replaced or modified with compliant lighting within twenty (20) years from the effective date of this Chapter. 
E. Exemptions. The following outdoor lighting may be exempted from the provisions of this Chapter by the Zoning Administrator:   
 1. Temporary Use Exemptions 
  a. Outdoor lighting needed during construction projects, provided that reasonable mitigation measures are taken, such as partial shielding or placement of luminaires at an angle to minimize light trespass. 
  b. Search lights for the purpose of special event advertising, provided that such outdoor lighting shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days and for not more than five (5) such events per business per year. 
  c. Seasonal outdoor lighting decorations utilizing low-wattage or low-voltage incandescent lamps shall be permitted for public festivals, celebrations, and the observance of holidays except where such creates a nuisance. 
  d. All temporary emergency lighting needed by a governmental body, franchise, or agency to respond to an emergency. 
  e. Special event lighting on the University of Idaho campus. 
 2. Other Exemptions 
  a. Federal facilities and State and Federal highways. 
  b. Swimming Pool and Fountain Lighting. Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains is exempt from the lamp type and shielding standards provided herein, though it must conform to all other provisions of this Ordinance.  
  c. Flagpole uplighting for flags of government entities, provided that the lit flagpole is set back a minimum of twenty feet (20’) from any property line, does not cause light trespass, and the maximum lumen output does not exceed thirteen thousand (13,000) lumens in non-residential Zoning Districts and eight thousand (8,000) lumens in Residential Zoning Districts.   
  d. Lighting on or for tele-communications or antenna towers or antenna support structures or any related elements thereof which is required by the Federal Aviation Administration or any other State or Federal agency having such authority. 
 3. Variance 
  The Zoning Administrator may accept application to the Board of Adjustment for a Variance from the requirements of this Section, subject to the provisions of Section 8-3 of this Code. 
 (Ord. 2005-03, 01/18/2005; 2010-24, 01/15/2010; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 


Chapter 7 
 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) OPTION 
 
Sec. 7-1:  PUD Purpose 
Sec. 7-2:  PUD Review  - General Administration 
Sec. 7-3:  PUD Pre-application Meeting 
Sec. 7-4:  Preliminary PUD Review 
Sec. 7-5:  Final PUD Review 
Sec. 7-6:  Residential PUD Density 
Sec. 7-7:  Parkland Dedication 
Sec. 7-8:  Reasoned Statement in Writing 
Sec. 7-9:  PUD Required Findings 
Sec. 7-10:  Conditions of Approval and Failure to Comply 
Sec. 7-11:  Continuing Review, Vesting of Approval, and Time Extension 
Sec. 7-12:  No Precedent or Transfer 
Sec. 7-13:  Amendment Procedures 
Sec. 7-14:  Applicability of Other Regulations 
 
Sec. 7-1. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Purpose. 
 In selected instances, departures from the requirements and allowed uses of the zoning districts of this Zoning Code may be made based upon established criteria through the Planned Unit Development (PUD) option.  The purpose of the PUD option is to permit and encourage innovative, economical and attractive development which allocates appropriate areas for improvements, open space, and recreation; which includes land uses which harmonize with natural features and constraints; which promotes efficient, innovative, economical, attractive, environmentally sensitive and mixed use development; and which efficiently phases and locates public and private services and facilities. 
 The PUD option should be used for innovative subdivision of land, or for innovative development, redevelopment or reuse of one or more parcels of developed or undeveloped land under single ownership or control.  It shall not be used as a mechanism to alter or to sidestep use and density provisions of the underlying Zoning District without acceptable justification, and shall not be used as a mechanism to address development issues which are more appropriately addressed by securing a Variance, Conditional Use Permit, Special Use Permit, and/or the rezoning of the land.   
(Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
 
Sec. 7-2. PUD Review - General Administration. 
A. Eligibility.  Planned Unit Developments are only permitted within the AF, FR, SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RO, NB, MB, and GB Zoning Districts.  Since the purpose of the Neighborhood Business (NB) Zoning District is to provide commercial services which serve adjacent residential neighborhoods, and PUD proposed within the NB Zone shall incorporate at least one (1) commercial use located along the primary street frontage. 
B. Stages of PUD Review:  Review of a proposed Planned Unit Development or of major modifications to an approved PUD shall consist of three (3) steps:  an initial Pre-application Meeting, a Preliminary PUD Review, and Final PUD Review.  With the concurrence of the Zoning Administrator, an applicant may combine the PUD Review Hearing with the hearings required for associated subdivision applications or zoning district changes. 
C. Neighborhood Meeting:  Following the Pre-Application Meeting, every application submittal for a PUD shall be preceded by a neighborhood meeting, conducted in accordance with this Code, to provide the opportunity for neighboring land owners and residents to meet with the applicant to 
review and provide comments on the proposed PUD. 
D. Application and Fees:  An application for PUD on a form provided by the City, including five (5) copies of the required supplemental PUD application contents listed in this Chapter, shall be made to the City Zoning Administrator for any PUD application made pursuant to this Chapter.   
E. Public Hearings:  Public hearing provided for herein shall comply with the notice and hearing procedures contained in Idaho Code Section 67-6509, and Chapter 10 of this Zoning Code. 
F. PUD Application Types:  A PUD application which does not include nor require a concurrent subdivision plat application shall be processed and considered a Type 1 PUD application and shall be subject to the Type 1 Quasi-judicial hearing procedures of this Code and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the final approval authority upon the PUD application.  A PUD application which does include a concurrent subdivision plat application shall be processed and considered a Type 2 PUD application and shall be subject to the Type 2 Quasi-judicial hearing procedures of this Code and the City Council shall have the final approval authority upon the PUD application. 
 (Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008; 2018-11, 08/20/2018) 
 
Sec. 7-3. PUD Pre-application Meeting. 
A. Purpose:  The pre-application meeting is intended to provide the opportunity to identify and discuss:  (1) the appropriateness of the proposed concept for the subject land and how such may or may not fit with the intents and purposes of this Chapter, (2) strategies to improve the compatibility of the proposed PUD with the neighborhood, (3) variances from development standards, (4) mitigation of development impacts, (5) necessary or desired bonus provision elements; and/or (6) a tentative or potential application processing schedule prior to substantial planning and design investments.   
B. Required Pre-application Meeting Materials:  For the pre-application meeting, the applicant shall supply concept plans which show existing zoning of the parcel and adjacent parcels; approximate acreage of the parcel; proposed land uses including number and floor area of proposed housing units and commercial structures; and a concept statement describing how the proposed PUD departs from the underlying zoning requirements of the property, and stating how special features of the property or the proposed PUD make the development both desirable and compatible with other uses in the area. 
C. Conclusion of Pre-application Meeting:  Upon the conclusion of the Pre-application Meeting, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a list of comments and suggestions for any recommended amendments and/or modifications to the PUD concept and shall provide such list to the applicant for their use in further development of the application. 
 (Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
 
Sec. 7-4. Preliminary PUD Review. 
A. Preliminary Review of PUD:  An application for PUD, on a form provided by the City, including five (5) copies of the required supplemental PUD application contents listed in this Chapter, shall be submitted to the City for any PUD application made pursuant to this chapter.  Additionally, no PUD application shall be accepted without payment of the related fee, established from time to time by Resolution of the 
Council.  Copies of the PUD application shall be forwarded for review, comment and recommendation to the Public Works Director, Fire Chief, Building Official, Parks Director and other City staff, as deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.  If a PUD proposal requires or includes an application for subdivision, lot division, or lot line adjustment, the PUD application shall not be considered prior to or separately from such application for subdivision, lot division, or lot line adjustment.  Where a PUD application involves a proposal which is subject to the requirements of the Subdivision Code and where there may exist inconsistencies between application submittal requirements of this PUD Code and the Subdivision Code, the more restrictive provision of the two (2) codes shall apply. 
B. Preliminary Review Application Materials:  Required PUD application contents shall include plan drawings and related notations and detail drawings including the following: 
1. PUD site plan; 
2. Existing grade plan showing the existing grade of the site in two foot (2) maximum contour intervals of the PUD site and extending a minimum of twenty feet (20) outside the PUD site; 
3. Proposed finished grading plan showing proposed finished grade at two foot (2)  contour intervals within the site and extending a minimum of twenty feet(20)  outside the PUD site, including slope and roadway profiles and any required or proposed retaining wall details; 
4. The location of all planned and existing thoroughfares and walks, their widths and nature of their improvements, and whether they are to be public or private; 
5. The location, layout, and surfacing of all off-street parking areas; 
6. Property boundary lines. 
7. The individual lot lines of each parcel which is to be created for separate ownership; 
8. The location of easements for water lines, fire hydrants, sewer and storm sewer lines, and other utilities; 
9. Landscaping and tree planting plans with the location of existing trees and shrubs which are to be retained; 
10. Common open spaces, and the particular uses intended for them; 
11. Areas to be conveyed, dedicated, reserved or used for parks, playgrounds or any other public use; 
12. The location, intended use, and number of dwelling units in each existing or proposed building or structure; 
13. Elevation drawings of all typical proposed structures except single-family, detached housing which meet the yard requirements of the underlying zoning district.  Such drawings shall be to scale and include all attached exterior hardware for heating and cooling; 
14. A selection of the exterior materials for all buildings; 
15. Development time schedule, including proposed phasing if applicable; 
16. If individual lots are to be sold, a copy of an approved or proposed subdivision plat; 
17. Lighting and signage proposals; and 
18. The location(s), area dimensions and screening of garbage dumpster areas. 
All submitted plans shall be drawn to a standard engineer’s or architect’s scale and may contain multiple categories of the above-listed information on any one plan drawing, provided that such plan drawing represents all information in an accurate and readily identifiable manner.  Such plans shall contain 
information and detail as necessary to determine compliance with applicable codes, and to determine justification for bonus allowances requested pursuant to this Chapter.  Any such plans depicting information related to such bonus allowances shall be consistent with the related bonus allowances text of the PUD application form.  As part of the written application submittal, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to articulate how special features of the site or proposed development, justify departures from the specific provisions of the Zoning Code or Subdivision Code.   
C. Commission Action:   
1. Type 1 PUD Applications:  Before taking action upon any Type 1 PUD application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct at least (1) one public hearing.  Following the hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission may give approval of Type 1 PUD application, approval subject to required modifications or conditions, or may deny the application. 
2. Type 2 PUD Applications:  Before taking action upon any Type 2 PUD application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct at least (1) one public hearing.  Following the hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend to the City Council: approval of the Type 2 PUD application; approval subject to required modifications or conditions; or denial of the application. 
 3. The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission on a Type 1 PUD application may be appealed to the Council by the applicant or by any affected person as defined by this Code within fourteen (14) days of adoption of the Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards.  Other than the time period for filing appeals, Section 4-8-6 of this Code shall apply to appeals to the Council of decisions by the Planning and Zoning Commission on any Type 1 PUD applications.  Determinations by the Commission upon Type 2 PUD applications shall not constitute a final decision and cannot be appealed to the City Council. 
D. Action by the Council:  Before taking action upon any Type 2 PUD application, the Council shall conduct at least (1) one public hearing.  Following such hearing the Council may:  approve the Type 2 PUD application; approve the application subject to required modifications or conditions; or deny the application. 
E. Duration of Validity of Preliminary PUD Approval:  Approval of a preliminary PUD proposal shall expire automatically eighteen (18) months after the date of approval unless final PUD approval has been obtained prior to such time.  PUD applications for which approval has expired may be resubmitted for consideration and action by the Planning and Zoning Commission by following the same PUD procedures as for an original submission. 
 (Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
 
Sec. 7-5. Final PUD Review. 
 The final process is intended to give the Zoning Administrator, Planning and Zoning Commission, or the Council (in the case of Type 2 PUD application), an opportunity to determine whether the proposed development conforms to the intent of the preliminary approvals.  The applicant is required to detail any proposed development agreements, condominium agreements, deed restrictions, or other commitments needed to assure adherence to the proposed development plan, and to provide final plans indicating how conditions or modifications imposed at preliminary approval will be met. 
 If the final proposal is substantially unchanged from the application provided preliminary approval earlier, and if it adequately incorporates all required conditions or modifications, it may be acted on by majority vote as a regular agenda item at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Council (in the case of a Type 2 PUD application).  The Planning and Zoning Commission, Or City Council, may grant final approval, may grant final approval with minor modifications or conditions, or may deny the application. 
 If the proposal before the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the City Council in the case of a Type 2 PUD Application, differs significantly from the proposal discussed at earlier public hearings beyond those changes required as conditions of the preliminary approval, or if conditions or modifications are contemplated which differ significantly from those presented at earlier hearings, then a new public hearing must be conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the Council (in the case of a Type 2 PUD application), prior to project approval. 
 Prior to final approval the applicant must submit any material listed in Code Section 4-7-5(A) above, which has not been previously submitted, plus: 
A. Evidence of clear title to any lands to be conveyed or reserved for parks, scenic ways, playgrounds, schools, public buildings, or other public purposes. 
B. Final plans for location of water, sewer, drainage and all other utilities, and plans for street improvements and grading.  
C. A final phasing plan. 
 Appeal to the Council:  The actions of the Planning and Zoning Commission upon a Type 1 PUD application may be appealed to the Council within fourteen (14) days by the developer, by an affected person, or by a member of the Council.  As a regular agenda item at a regularly scheduled meeting the Council may uphold or reverse the actions of the Planning and Zoning Commission, may approve the application with minor modifications or conditions, or may refer the application back to the Planning and Zoning Commission with instructions for further action.  Actions of the City Council may be appealed in accordance with Idaho Code.   
(Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
 
Sec. 7-6. Residential PUD Density. 
 The residential density of a PUD shall not exceed the density established by this Section.  The permitted number of dwelling units shall be the sum of the base density and any bonus density multiplied by the total acreage of the PUD. 
 The total acreage of the PUD shall include any area dedicated to the public or preserved as public open space or public easement within the PUD.  In calculating any PUD residential density, any fraction of a whole number shall not be permitted as a dwelling unit. 
A. Base Density.  The base density for Zoning Districts shall be as follows:  
 
Base Density By Zoning District. 
 AF  0.10 dwelling units/acre 
 FR  0.29 dwelling units/acre 
 SR   0.9 dwelling units/acre 
 R-1  3.5 dwelling units/acre 
 R-2  4.8 dwelling units/acre 
 R-3  9.5 dwelling units/acre 
 R-4  24.0 dwelling units/acre 
 R-O  24.0 dwelling units/acre 
 NB  24.0 dwelling units/acre 
 MB  24.0 dwelling units/acre 
 GB  24.0 dwelling units/acre 
 
Any lot upon which a detached single family dwelling is proposed shall not have a lot size limitation, except as required for purposes of the adopted City Building Code or as limited by the overall density permitted by the underlying Zoning District in addition to bonuses achieved through the PUD process regulations for the underlying 
zoning district, or as imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a condition of PUD approval. 
(Ord. 2006-10, 07/18/06) 
B. Required Building Setbacks.  Building setbacks from property lines required by an underlying Zoning District shall not be applicable for PUD developments, except to/from the property line(s) serving as the outer boundary of the PUD, unless imposed and justified as part of the PUD approval or where such is required by the City Building Code.  Front and rear yard setbacks to/from property lines serving as the outer boundary of the PUD may be modified or waived as part of the PUD approval. 
C. Bonus Allowances.  The permitted residential density for a PUD shall be the base density plus any bonus percentage of the base density as granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Council.  For all Zoning Districts, the maximum bonus percentage for any proposed PUD shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the respective base density.  The allowance of a use or housing type not allowed as a permitted use in the underlying Zoning District may be granted as a PUD bonus, provided that such use is justified through the bonus categories of this Chapter and because of the nature and location of the proposed PUD.  Where there is a  conflict between maximum allowable bonus percentages, the most restrictive shall apply.  The applicant shall provide sufficient plan detail and/or other written supporting information to justify any requested bonus density or request to allow any land use or housing type not otherwise permitted by the underlying Zoning District.   
 Bonuses may be awarded to a proposed PUD where they are found to conform to one (1) or more of the following categories: 
1. Provision of Common Open Space. 
 Bonuses may be awarded for providing functional, common open space, which may be in the form of natural areas, floodplains, wetlands, stands of trees or other natural vegetation or riparian areas, playgrounds, active or passive recreational areas, internal pedestrian and/or bike paths and similar areas.  Up to a ten percent (10%) maximum bonus may be awarded if at least twenty percent (20%) of the proposed PUD area is devoted for functional common open space, in excess of any open space required elsewhere in this Code. 
2. Provision of Mixed Housing Types and/or Land Uses.  
 Up to a maximum ten percent (10%) bonus may be awarded for providing a mix of housing types and/or uses.  Any combination of single family, duplex, multiple family residences, and/or commercial, institutional or civic uses may qualify.  Zero lot line, townhouse, or row house housing consisting of one (1) or two (2) story horizontally attached dwelling units, each having its own entrance and its own front and rear yard and intended for individual ownership, may also be included in this category of bonus allowances. 
 Housing types not explicitly permitted by the underlying Zoning District shall be limited to a maximum of thirty-three percent (33%) of the total number of dwelling units in the PUD development.  The percentage of said housing types permitted in the PUD development may be increased to a maximum of fifty percent (50%) where the PUD proposal successfully incorporates at least three (3) other bonus categories. 
 Land Uses not permitted in the underlying Zoning District shall be limited to twenty percent (20%) 
maximum of the total Gross Floor Area (GFA) of the PUD development.  However, the percentage of said GFA may be increased to a maximum of thirty-three percent (33%) where the proposal successfully incorporates at least three (3) other bonus categories. 
3. Maintenance of Existing Land Contours, Vegetation, or other Special Site Features. 
 Bonuses may be awarded for proposals which are considerate of and sensitive to the existence of significant amounts of slopes in excess of twenty percent (20%), wetlands, drainages, ponds.  Consideration shall be given to the minimization of excavations, fills, retaining walls, and removal of natural vegetative cover and other physical alterations to the site.   
 Lands which already have been significantly graded or where natural vegetation has been removed within five (5) years previous to the date of the PUD application are not eligible for this bonus.  Bonuses will be awarded based on the amount of site disturbance including whether there is minimal or slight disturbance; whether there is excavation other than for structural foundations; whether streets follow contours of the land; amount of grading; and whether there is removal of natural vegetation.  Up to a ten percent (10%) bonus may be awarded under this category. 
4. Provision of Major Recreational Facilities and/or Neighborhood Gathering Spaces. 
 Bonuses may be awarded for the provision of major recreational facilities and/or neighborhood gathering spaces, either public or private, such as ball courts, swimming pools, playgrounds, exercise rooms, or similar facilities.  For each one percent (1%) of total project cost devoted to recreational facilities, a two percent (2%) bonus may be awarded, up to a maximum of six percent (6%). 
5. Sustainable Development. 
 Projects which utilize building and/or development techniques which promote the health and preservation of the environment, as specified herein, and are developed under the Moscow Green Building Program, may receive a bonus of up to a maximum bonus of fifteen percent (15%) of the base density allowed for the PUD project. 
 a. Energy Conservation:  Up to a six percent (6%) bonus may be awarded for PUD developments which reduce or conserve energy usage.  Provision of building design, orientation, methods and equipment which are energy efficient, including solar access consideration, may earn bonuses for the PUD project.  Application of such methods may receive a two percent (2%) bonus and include provision of insulation in outside walls which exceed the Code’s R-value requirements, installation of Energy Star windows and Energy Star rated HVAC systems.  Energy efficient equipment shall include fixtures, controls and appliances that have an Energy Star approval.  Use of such equipment may also earn a two percent (2%) bonus.  A project can also earn an additional two percent (2%) bonus for using a renewable electricity generation system such as solar panels or wind generated power. 
 b. Materials and Resources:  Projects which minimize material use and waste, and which use products that are environmentally friendly may receive up to a six percent (6%) bonus.  Construction of smaller homes (as defined by LEED or its equivalent) and which utilize material efficient framing methods may earn a two percent (2%) bonus.  Use of local materials and/or environmentally preferred products may earn a bonus of up to two percent (2%), dependent on a product or manufacturer’s label that indicates the place of manufacture is within five hundred (500) miles of the City of Moscow, or is approved as environmentally friendly.  Projects which minimize construction waste through material efficient methods and/or by using on-site recycling receptacles for construction materials may receive a two percent (2%) bonus. 
 c. Indoor Environmental Quality:  Bonuses may be awarded up to eight percent (8%) of the base density for PUD projects which make an extended effort to improve the on-going indoor environment.  Provision of outside air ventilation, exhaust vents, air distribution systems and HVAC air filters that exceed requirements of any applicable Code are eligible for a two percent (2%) bonus.  Installation of permanent walk-off mats and central vacuums help to mitigate dirt and dust and may be awarded a two percent (2%) bonus.  Homes should be protected from car emissions by tightly sealing walls between the garage and the home, providing an exhaust fan linked to the overhead door, and not locating air handling equipment in the garage; such provisions may be awarded a bonus of two percent (2%).  Not providing a garage may satisfy any bonus given for mitigating car exhaust in a garage.  The use of finishing products, such as paint or carpeting, which minimize or eliminate toxic fumes that are common in standard products, may be awarded up to an additional two percent (2%) bonus. 
 d. Provision of Alternative Mode Transportation Features:  Features which accommodate alternative mode transportation or promote decrease in automobile usage or traffic, such as bus shelters, turnouts, alternative fuel vehicle support facilities, car pool lots, pedestrian paths, bike racks, etc. may be awarded up to a two (2%) percent bonus. 
 e. Water Saving Features:  A bonus may be awarded for inclusion of a storm water reuse system, xeriscaping or other water saving development features which are not otherwise required by the Code.  Such other water saving features may include those which are sensitive to or which promote aquifer recharge.  A total bonus of up to ten percent (10%) may only be awarded if both storm water reuse (five percent [5%] maximum bonus) and xeriscaping (five percent [5%] maximum bonus) are incorporated into the development.  A detailed written statement and/or plan shall be provided by the applicant to justify a bonus under this category. 
6. Provision of Street, Pedestrian and Bicycle Path Connectivity. 
 Bonuses may be awarded for increasing pedestrian, bicycle and/or vehicular connectivity between the proposed development and existing and/or future neighborhoods.  To be awarded the bonus, such connectivity shall be in excess of adopted City policy and standards.  
 Connectivity shall promote neighborhood connectivity without overwhelming any particular street, bicycle or pedestrian path, or neighborhood.  Examples of such connectivity include reduced block length, provision of alleys, extremely limited cul-de-sac utilization, provision of pedestrian and or bicycle paths, and provision of traditional “grid pattern” street system.  A maximum ten percent (10%) bonus may be awarded under this category. 
7. Landscaping Plan. 
 A five percent (5%) maximum bonus may be awarded if the applicant provides a landscaping plan that is significantly in excess of the minimum landscaping otherwise required by the Zoning Code and that it would provide significantly greater benefit to the PUD site or the neighborhood.
8. Provision of Low and/or Moderate Income Housing. 
 Up to a maximum fifteen percent (15%) bonus may be awarded for providing low income, moderate income, and/or fair market rate housing units which make up a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total number of housing units in the PUD.  For purposes of this Chapter, low and moderate income and fair market rate housing shall generally mean that which meets the quality and pricing requirements set by HUD and the Idaho Housing and Finance Association. 
9. Other Functional or Aesthetic Development Features. 
 Other qualifying development features which are designed to visually complement or visually preserve the natural environment, especially scenic views, through use of appropriate materials may include, but are not limited to, architectural variety, building mass and height softening features, building location with regard to lot lines (staggered setbacks), the provision of alley access and scenic view corridor preservation for the benefit of others, recessed, side or rear loading garages, and the arrangement of parking such that it is not located within the required front nor street side yard or such that it is located behind or underneath the building(s) and not readily visible from the street.  Locating the parking behind or below structures shall warrant a higher bonus than locating the parking outside of the required front and street side yard, where it is visible from the street.  The maximum bonus under this category will be up to ten percent (10%). 
(Ord. 2006-10, 07/18/06; (Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008; 2018-11, 08/20/2018) 
 
Sec. 7-7. Parkland Dedication   
  Any PUD application involving land for which public parkland dedication has not previously occurred subject to the public parkland dedication requirements of the Subdivision Code shall be subject to public parkland dedication requirements of the City Code, as recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and as determined by the Council.  Such requirement shall apply regardless of an absence of any lot division or subdivision application accompanying the PUD application.  Such public parkland dedication determination shall be based upon the anticipated impact of the PUD development proposal on the public park system and any mitigating public recreation or open space opportunities provided as part of the proposed PUD. 
(Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
Sec. 7-8. Reasoned Statement in Writing 
 Approval or denial of Planned Unit Development Permit application shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or Council, the relevant facts relied upon, and which explains the rationale for the decision based upon the Comprehensive Plan, the Idaho Code, this Code, the U.S. Constitution and the facts in the record.   
 The Reasoned Statement required herein may be in the form of meeting minutes or a separate written document, either of which is to be adopted by the applicable decision making body and signed by the Chair thereof. 
(Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
 
Sec. 7-9. PUD Required Findings. 
 Prior to approval or recommendation of approval of any PUD, the Planning and Zoning Commission or Council must find: 
A. The proposed PUD is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.  
B. The proposed PUD is consistent with the intents and purposes of this Chapter. 
C. The proposed PUD is compatible with the character and uses in the surrounding area. 
D. Public Services and utilities are available or can be made available and are adequate to accommodate the proposed PUD. 
E. The proposed PUD will not endanger the public health or safety. 
F. The residential densities, proposed land uses, and design proposed within the PUD, promote the innovative, efficient, economic, and attractive development of the subject property. 
 (Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008; 2016-04, 04/04/2016) 
 
Sec. 7-10. Conditions of Approval and Failure to Comply 
 The applicable decision making body may impose conditions on the PUD development including, but not limited to:  (1) minimizing adverse impact on other development; (2) controlling the sequence and timing of development; (3) controlling the duration of development; (4) assuring that development is maintained properly; (5) designating the exact location and nature of development; (6) requiring the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities or services; (7) requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required in an ordinance; and/or (8) requiring mitigation of effects of the proposed PUD upon delivery of services by any political subdivision which provides service(s) within the planning jurisdiction.  In the event of failure to comply with the approved PUD plans or with any of the conditions imposed upon the PUD project, such permit shall be immediately revoked and shall be automatically null and void. 
(Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
 
Sec. 7-11. Continuing Review, Vesting of Approval, and Time Extension 
A. No permits shall be issued for the PUD property except for buildings or structures which conform to approved PUD plans. 
B. If building permits pertaining to an approved PUD, consistent with any proposed phasing, are not obtained within eighteen (18) months of the PUD approval, such PUD approval shall be immediately revoked and shall be automatically null and void.  Phased building permits and construction are to be approved with phasing plans through the initial PUD approval process.  Where an approved PUD includes a concurrent subdivision plat approval, the duration of the PUD approval shall run concurrently with the duration of the subdivision plat approval, as provided in the Subdivision Code. 
C. The applicant may request a one (1) time extension of a PUD approval not to exceed one (1) year.  Such request shall be in writing and shall be approved by the applicable decision making body prior to expiration of the original PUD approval or such approval shall not be granted.  Such request shall be reviewed based upon whether there have been, or are expected to be significant changes to the circumstances of the neighborhood, community or to City plans which raise doubt about whether they would have resulted in a denial of or the placement of additional mitigating conditions upon the original PUD approval and therefore warrant a new public hearing on the proposal. 
 (Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
 
Sec. 7-12. No Precedent or Transfer 
 A PUD permit shall run with the land, shall be binding on all future owners, and shall not be establish a precedent to grant other PUD approvals.  A PUD permit shall not be transferable from one parcel of land to another. 
(Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
 
Sec. 7-13. Amendment Procedures 
A. PUD Amendment Procedure, Minor.  Upon written request, minor changes to a PUD plan that do not meet the criteria for a Major PUD amendment, may be approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator.  Such request shall set forth the exact nature and circumstances of the requested amendment and the reasons therefore and shall be submitted with plans and drawings necessary to support approval of the request.  Consideration shall be given to the public hearing record of the original PUD application, the intents and purposes of this Chapter, and the standards of the Zoning and/or Subdivision Code. 
 If the Zoning Administrator determines that the change may have significant impact on the approved project, the Administrator may decline to administratively approve such change and shall process the request as a Major PUD Amendment. 
B. PUD Amendment Procedure, Major.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Major PUD Amendment request for a Type 1 PUD following one (1) public hearing.  For a Major PUD Amendment of a Type 2 PUD, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct one (1) public hearing and forward a recommendation to City Council who shall conduct one (1) public hearing and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the amendment request.  Proposed changes to a PUD that meet any of the criteria below shall constitute a Major PUD Amendment: 
1. Increase the proposed enclosed floor area of any approved principal use (residential, commercial, etc.) by more than five percent (5%); 
2. Exceed the residential density of the original PUD approval;  
 3. Alter the ratio of the number of dwelling units of differing housing types (single-family detached, twinhome, townhouse, multi-family, etc.) by more than ten percent (10%); 
 4. Substantially change the bulk or clustering of buildings, visual impact, theme of the development, location of uses, or the layout of lots, streets, trails, or pathways, except for minor adjustments within areas approved for development or within anticipated rights-of-way;  
 5. Substantially change the environmental impact of the development;  
 6. Substantially alter the phasing or timing of the development;  
 7. Reduce or eliminate the factors used to justify any density bonuses or Code standard waivers granted, substantially alter conditions of approval of the original PUD, or negate any justification of any of the Relevant Criteria and Standards in the Reasoned Statement supporting the original PUD approval. 
 (Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008; 2016-14, 10/03/2016) 
 
Sec. 7-14: Applicability of Other Regulations. 
 Unless otherwise finally approved under this PUD process, a PUD shall conform to all requirements set forth elsewhere in this Zoning Code, expressly including, but not limited to, building height limitations, yard requirements on the perimeter of the PUD, parking requirements, and signage limitations.  Unless a variation is specifically approved through this PUD process, a PUD shall comply with all provisions of any applicable subdivision regulation and all other applicable regulations and standards. 
(Ord. 2008-09, 05/19/2008) 
 


Chapter 8 
APPEALS, VARIANCES, CONDITIONAL AND SPECIAL USES 
Sec. 8-1:  Duties of the Board of 
   Adjustment 
Sec. 8-2:  Appeals 
Sec. 8-3:  Variances 
Sec. 8-4:  Conditional Uses 
Sec. 8-5:  Special Uses 
Sec. 8-6: Ability of Use Permits to Assume Variance Functions 
 
 
Sec. 8-1: Duties of the Board of 
 Adjustment. 
 The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to grant, in particular cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, conditional use permits and variances as authorized by this Zoning Code.  The Board of Adjustment shall also have the authority to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in enforcement of this Zoning Code. 
Sec. 8-2.  Appeals. 
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment concerning interpretation or administration of this Zoning Code by the Zoning Administrator may be made by any applicant, City representative or affected person thereby.  Such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date the appellant first knew of or, with reasonable diligence, could have known of such interpretation or administration of the Zoning Code by the Zoning Administrator.  An appeal shall be made by filing with the Zoning Administrator a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and paying an appeal fee established from time to time by Resolution of the Council.  Upon the filing of an appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall forthwith submit to the Board of Adjustment all materials constituting the record upon which the appeal is made. 
B. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the consideration of the appeal within thirty (30) days of the receipt of notice of appeal by the Zoning Administrator.  Consideration of the appeal shall be pursuant to Section 4-10-8 of this Code.  At the consideration on the appeal, the appellant and any affected person may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
C. Stay of Proceedings:  The filing of an appeal shall stay all interpretations, proceedings and/or activities and furtherance of the action appealed from, including the issuance of building and/or other permits related to the subject property.  A stay may be lifted, in whole or in part, only where the Zoning Administrator files a written affidavit with the City Clerk certifying that a stay would, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, not serve the purposes for which relevant Code provisions were intended or would cause endangerment to life and/or property.  The Zoning Administrator should lift the stay, in whole or in part, only to the extent necessary to further the intent of relevant Code provisions.  Where the Zoning Administrator files such an affidavit, interpretations, proceedings and/or activities shall not be stayed other than by the Board, Commission or Council before whom the matter is pending or by a Court of Record.  A request for review of the Zoning Administrator’s affidavit regarding the stay shall be heard with the consideration of the related appeal, if requested by an affected person not less than ten (10) days prior to such consideration. 
 (Ord. 2007-10, 09/17/2007) 
Sec. 8-3.  Variances. 
A. Procedures. 
1. A written application for a variance indicating the section(s) of this Zoning Code for which a variance is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least sixteen (16) days before the hearing at which the matter will be considered by the Board of Adjustment or the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2. The Board of Adjustment or the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a hearing on the application not less than sixteen (16) days and not more than sixty (60) days from receipt of application by the Zoning Administrator and shall provide notice to adjoining property owners and an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the Idaho Code and this Code. 
3. The hearing shall be a Type 1 Quasi-Judicial Hearing pursuant to Section 4-10-4 of this Code. 
B. Relevant Criteria and Standards.  Approval or denial of a variance application shall be based upon the following criteria:  
1. The applicant has demonstrated that special conditions and/or circumstances exist which are peculiar to the property (such as size, shape, topography or location) which are not applicable to other property similarly situated in the same zoning district.   
2. The applicant has demonstrated that, because of the aforementioned special conditions of the property, application of the provisions of this Zoning Code would impose undue hardship and would deprive the property owner of rights commonly enjoyed by owners of other property similarly situated in the same zoning district under the terms of this Zoning Code. 
3. Granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the public interest or injurious to property or persons in the vicinity of the subject property.  
C. Reasoned Statement in Writing.  Approval or denial of variance application shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a reasoned statement that explains the criteria and standards considered by the Board of Adjustment or by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be relevant, the relevant contested facts relied upon, and explains the rationale for the decision based upon the Comprehensive Plan, the Idaho Code, this Code, the U.S. Constitution and the facts in the record.  The reasoned statement herein may be in the form of minutes when such minutes are adopted by the Board of Adjustment or by the Planning and Zoning Commission or may be in the form of a separate written document formally adopted by the Board of Adjustment or by the Planning and Zoning Commission.  In every case, a reasoned statement shall be adopted by the Board or by the Commission not more than twenty-one (21) days following the date of approval or denial of the variance application.  
D. Conditions of Approval.  In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment or the Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards that enable the Board or the Commission to approve the variance application and ensure the variance is consistent with the purposes, and intents of this Zoning Code.   
E. Use Variances.  With respect to uses of land, buildings and other structures, this Zoning Code is declared to be a definition of the public interest by the Council, and the spirit of this Zoning Code will not be observed by any variance which permits a use not permitted in the zoning district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited, by the terms of 
this Zoning Code in said zoning district.  Therefore, under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment or the Planning and Zoning Commission grant a variance to permit a use not permitted in the zoning district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited, by the terms of this Zoning Code, in said zoning district. 
F. Final Decision.  A decision of the Board of Adjustment or of the Planning and Zoning Commission, granting or denying a variance, shall become final upon the date of adoption of a written reasoned statement in the official records of the Board of Adjustment or of the Planning and Zoning Commission or when the Board or the Commission shall find that making the decision effective immediately is necessary for the preservation of property and/or personal rights and shall so certify on the record, whichever comes first in time.  A decision of the Board of Adjustment or of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final, subject to appeal of the decision to the Council pursuant to this Code. 
G. Compliance. 
1. In the event of failure to comply with the plans approved by the Board of Adjustment or by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or with any conditions imposed upon the variance, such permit shall thereupon be immediately revoked and shall automatically be null and void. 
2. Where plans are submitted as part of the application for a variance, modifications of the original plans may be required by the Board of Adjustment or by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a condition of approval. 
3. Where plans approved by the Board of Adjustment or by the Planning and Zoning Commission are modified following such approval, such plan modifications must be determined by City staff to be in substantial conformance with the plans approved by the Board or the Commission.  If plan modifications are not in substantial conformance, the plan modifications must be resubmitted to the Board or to the Commission for an additional public hearing as an amendment to the variance application. 
H. Term of Approval.  The term of approval of a variance shall not exceed two (2) years from the date of the final decision, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Adjustment.  The approval shall expire if the holder of the permit has not completed one (1) or more of the following actions prior to the expiration date: 
1. Acquired construction permits and commenced placement of permanent footings and infrastructure; or 
2. Commenced the use. 
I. Extension of Approval Term.  The Zoning Administrator may grant one (1) two (2) year extension to an unexpired variance, upon written request of the applicant.  Extensions of variances shall also extend any associated zoning approvals such as variances.  
 (Ord. 2007-10, 09/17/2007; 2016-04, 04/04/2016; 2018-11, 08/20/2018) 
 
Sec. 8-4.  Conditional Uses. 
A. Procedures. 
1. A written application for a Conditional Use Permit indicating the section of this Zoning Code under which the permit is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested shall be submitted at least twenty-one (21) days before the hearing at which the request is to be considered by the Board of Adjustment. 
2. The Zoning Administrator shall hold a hearing on the conditional use permit application not less than twenty-one (21) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the receipt of the 
application by the Zoning Administrator, giving notice in accordance with Idaho Code Section 67-6512. 
3. The public hearing shall be a Type 1 Quasi-Judicial Hearing pursuant to Section 4-10-4 of this Code. 
4. Prior to granting a Conditional Use Permit, studies may be required of the social, economic, fiscal, and environmental effects of the proposed conditional use. 
B. Relevant Criteria and Standards.  Approval or denial of a Conditional Use Permit application shall be based upon the following criteria: 
1. The proposed use is a conditionally permitted use within the Zoning District. 
2. The character of the proposed use will be in harmony with the neighborhood and surrounding land uses. 
3. The proposed use as approved, or as approved with conditions, will not generate nuisances that would be injurious or detrimental to adjoining properties or the neighborhood (including, but not limited to, noise, dust, glare, vibrations, odors, and the like). 
4. The location, design, and size of the proposed use will be adequately served by existing streets, public facilities and services. 
5. The proposed use will not endanger the public health or safety if located where proposed. 
6. The proposed use meets all applicable development standards of the Zoning Code. 
7. The proposed use will not be in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan. 
C. Reasoned Statement in Writing.  Approval or denial of a Conditional Use Permit application shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a reasoned statement that explains the criteria and standards considered by the Board of Adjustment to be relevant, the relevant contested facts relied upon, and explains the rationale for the decision based upon the Comprehensive Plan, the Idaho Code, this Code, the U.S. Constitution and the facts in the record.  The reasoned statement herein may be in the form of minutes when such minutes are adopted by the Board of Adjustment or may be in the form of a separate written document formally adopted by the Board of Adjustment.  In every case, a reasoned statement shall be adopted by the Board not more than twenty-one (21) days following the date of approval or denial of the Conditional Use Permit application. 
D. Conditions of Approval.  The Board of Adjustment may impose conditions including, but not limited to, those (1) minimizing adverse impact on other development; (2) controlling the sequence and timing of development; (3) controlling the duration of development; (4) assuring that development is maintained properly; (5) designating the exact location and nature of development; (6) requiring the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities or services; (7) requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required in an ordinance; and/or (8) requiring mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon service delivery by any political subdivision, including school districts, providing services within the planning jurisdiction.   
E. No Precedent or Transfer.  A Conditional Use Permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other Conditional Use Permits.  A Conditional Use Permit is not transferable from one (1) parcel of land to another. 
F. Final Decision.  A decision of the Board of Adjustment, granting or
denying a Conditional Use Permit shall become final upon the date of adoption of a written reasoned statement in the official records of the Board of Adjustment or when the Board of Adjustment shall find that making the decision effective immediately is necessary for the preservation of property and/or personal rights and shall so certify on the record, whichever comes first in time.  A decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be final, subject to appeal of decision to the Council pursuant to this Code. 
G. Compliance. 
1. In the event of failure to comply with the plans approved by the Board of Adjustment, or with any conditions imposed upon the Conditional Use Permit, such permit shall thereupon be immediately revoked and shall automatically be null and void. 
2. Where plans are submitted as part of the application for a Conditional Use Permit, modifications of the original plans may be required by the Board of Adjustment as a condition of approval. 
3. Where plans approved by the Board of Adjustment are modified following such approval, such plan modifications must be determined by City Staff to be in substantial conformance with the plans approved by the Board.  If plan modifications are not in substantial conformance, the plan modifications must be resubmitted to the Board for an additional public hearing as an amendment to the Conditional Use Permit application. 
H. Term of Approval.  The term of approval of a variance shall not exceed two (2) years from the date of the final decision, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Adjustment.  The approval shall expire if the holder of the permit has not completed one (1) or more of the following actions prior to the expiration date: 
1. Acquired construction permits and commenced placement of permanent footings and infrastructure; or 
2. Commenced the use. 
I. Extension of Approval Term.  The Zoning Administrator may grant one (1) two (2) year extension to an unexpired variance, upon written request of the applicant.  Extensions of variances shall also extend any associated zoning approvals such as variances. 
J. Revocations.  If the use and/or occupancy for which the conditional use permit is approved ceases for a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months, unless otherwise provided for in the Conditional Use Permit, the Conditional Use Permit shall be immediately revoked and shall be automatically null and void. 
 (Ord. 97-33, 11/3/97; 2007-10, 09/17/2007; 2016-04, 04/04/2016; 2018-11, 08/20/2018) 
 
Sec. 8-5.  Appeals to City Council. 
A. Appellant.  Any applicant, City representative or affected person, may appeal a final decision of the Board of Adjustment or of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the Council within ten (10) calendar days following a final decision of such Board or Commission regarding an interpretation of or administration of the Zoning Code by the Zoning Administrator; a variance application; conditional use permit; special use permit; or PUD, by filing written notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor with the City Clerk.   
B. The Council shall review the appeal on the written record generated and/or preserved by the Board or Commission.  It is the intent of the Council that decisions made regarding appeals herein should be founded upon sound reason and practical application of recognized principles of law.  The Council shall not act on an appeal, 
which, in the judgment of the Council, differs materially from that which was considered by the Board or Commission.  When considering the merits of an appeal, no additional public testimony or information shall be taken or considered by the Council.   After considering the record and the reasons for the appeal, the Council shall take one or more of the following actions: 
1. Sustain the Decision.  Sustain the decision of the Board or Commission in whole or in part. 
2. Reverse the Decision.  Reverse the decision of the Board or Commission in whole or in part. 
3. Remand the Decision.   
 a. Remand the matter in whole or in part to the Board or Commission with comments and/or instructions for further consideration by the Board or Commission.  The Council shall remand an appeal in whole or in part for gathering of additional material information, and a decision and an accompanying reasoned statement based upon the original and the additional presented evidence where the appellant shows the Council, by a preponderance of the evidence, that there is: 
 i. New material information which was not available or readily discoverable at the time of the final decision, and 
 ii. It is in the public interest to develop such additional material information on the matter.  
 b. Any public hearing on remand, at which additional testimony or evidence is to be admitted, shall observe notice and hearing requirements applicable to the original public hearing. 
C. The appellant shall submit an appeal fee established from time to time by the Council by resolution. 
D. Procedures and guidelines for an appeal in addition to that contained herein shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Council. 
 (Ord. 2007-10, 09/17/2007) 
 
Sec. 8-6. Ability of Use Permits to Assume Variance Functions. 
 When an application for a Variance is submitted concurrently with an application for a Conditional Use Permit or a Special Use Permit, and when said Variance would be incidental to said use permit, the applications shall be under the authority of the body hearing the use permit and may be decided upon in the same public hearing as the use permit, provided that the decision regarding the variance is based upon relevant criteria and standards in Section 4-8-3(B) of this Code.   
(Ord. 96-20, 9/9/96; Ord. 2000-18, 09/05/2000) 


Chapter 9 
 
AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 9-1:  Purpose 
Sec. 9-2:  Text Amendments 
Sec. 9-3:  Amendments to Zoning 
   District Boundaries 
 
Sec. 9-1.  Purpose. 
 From time to time a change in circumstances or conditions or the need to correct an error may warrant a change in the zoning text or Moscow Zoning Map created by this Zoning Code.  The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedures to amend the zoning text and/or Moscow Zoning Map when the proposed change would be consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and the intent of this Zoning Code. 
 
Sec. 9-2.  Text Amendments. 
A. Initiation:  An amendment to the text, standards, procedures or other provisions of this Zoning Code may be initiated by action of the Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
B. Procedure:  Text amendments shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for the conduct of legislative hearings as provided in Code Section 4-10-6 of this Zoning Code. 
 
Sec. 9-3. Amendments to Zoning District Boundaries. 
A. Initiation:  Amendments to zoning district boundaries (rezoning) may be initiated by the Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or by a property owner. 
B. Procedure: 
1. Application by a property owner shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be set by the Council from time to time by resolution.  The Zoning Administrator is empowered to expand the area to be considered for rezoning when it deems such expansion to be in the public interest. 
2. All applications for rezoning of property which are found to be in order by the Zoning Administrator shall automatically be noticed for hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission with notice as provided by the Idaho Code at its next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which time is available. 
3. If the requested zoning does not conform to the Comprehensive Plan, a hearing on an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan shall be scheduled with the hearing for the zoning change.  Any change required in the Comprehensive Plan shall be achieved prior to or concurrent with an amendment of the Zoning District boundaries.  Any amendments to the Comprehensive Plan shall be based upon the following criteria: 
 a. The proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment is consistent with Comprehensive Plan goals, objectives, and implementation actions. 
 b. The proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment would provide for the logical and orderly location of land uses, community services and facilities. 
 c. The uses expected to occur as a result of the Comprehensive Plan amendment will be compatible with the surrounding area. 
 d. The size, type, and density of development expected to occur as a result of the Comprehensive Plan amendment will not place an undue burden upon delivery of services provided by any political subdivision within the planning jurisdiction. 
 e. The proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment is deemed to be appropriate in consideration of changing conditions within the community that are not reflected within the current 
Comprehensive Plan (such as new development or re-development, land use patterns and/or trends, traffic patterns and/or volume, market demands, community vision and/or needs, capital improvements, or new or revised City plans). 
4. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct its public hearing in accordance with the Idaho Code and with Code Section 4-10-5 of this Zoning Code providing procedures for the conduct of Type 2 Administrative Hearings.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval of the request of rezone, may recommend denial of the requested rezone, or may recommend rezoning to any zone less intensive than the zone requested.  Approval or denial of any rezone shall be based upon the following criteria: 
 a. The proposed rezone is consistent with Comprehensive Plan goals, objectives, and implementation actions. 
 b. The proposed rezone would provide for the logical and orderly location of land uses and community services and facilities. 
 c. The uses expected to occur as a result of the rezone will be compatible with the surrounding area. 
 d. The size, type, and density of development expected to occur as a result of the rezone will not place an undue burden upon delivery of services provided by any political subdivision within the planning jurisdiction. 
 e. The size, type, and density of development expected to occur as a result of the rezone can be adequately served by the existing transportation network, public facilities and services. 
5. If approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a hearing on the proposed rezoning shall be set before the Council at its earliest regular public meeting which has hearing time available.  If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial, the applicant may request that the Council set the matter for hearing but it will not automatically be set. 
6. The Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application to rezone in accordance with the Idaho Code and Code Section 4-10-5 of this Zoning Code providing procedures for the conduct of Type 2 Administrative Hearings. 
7. After hearing and reaching findings of fact and conclusions, the Council may enact an ordinance rezoning the subject property to the requested Zoning District or to any less intensive Zoning District. 
C. Development Agreements: 
1. Use and development conditions and limitations:  Conditions and limitations on use and development may be imposed on properties requested for rezoning.  Conditions may limit uses to fewer than those normally permitted under the proposed zone.  Conditions and limitations shall be a written commitment by the owner or developer. 
2. Filing of conditions and limitations:  The City may require that conditions and limitations which are to be imposed on the use and development on the rezone property be permanent and shall run with the use of the newly zoned property by the owners, their heirs, assignees and devices.  Such conditions and limitations may be enforced by the City or the affected property owners.  The City shall require the applicant to have the conditions and limitations filed and recorded with the Latah County Recorder. 
3. Permits.  Nothing contained in the conditions or provisions required of the land owner shall be deemed a waiver of any ordinance or requirement of the City relating to construction or development and the applicant shall obtain all necessary construction and occupancy permits as may be required by the City. 
(Ord. 97-33, 11/3/97; 2016-04, 04/04/2016) 


CHAPTER 10 
 
PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES 
Sec. 10-1: Purpose 
Sec. 10-2: Organization 
Sec. 10-3: Types of Hearings 
Sec. 10-4: Procedures for Type 1 Quasi-Judicial Hearings 
Sec. 10-5: Procedures for Type 2 Quasi-Judicial Hearings 
Sec. 10-6: Procedures for Legislative Hearings 
Sec. 10-7: The Neighborhood Meeting 
Sec. 10-8: Procedures for Appeals of Interpretation or Administration 
 
Sec. 10- 1.  Purpose. 
 To provide consistency in the conduct of public hearings held in conjunction with the process of regulating the use and development of land within the jurisdiction of the City; to protect the public interest and the private rights of all participants in the public hearing process; and to comply with the requirements of Idaho Code 67-6534.   
For purposes of this Chapter, the term “decision-making board” shall mean the Board of Adjustment, Planning and Zoning Commission, Council, hearing examiner or advisory board and any other person or persons duly authorized to make a determination regarding zoning or land use planning pursuant to Idaho Code or this Code, excluding City staff. 
 
Sec. 10-2.  Organization. 
 This Chapter shall be organized into three distinct types of hearing procedures which are required by various portions of this Code and by the Idaho Code.  Basic rights and responsibilities are spelled out for the participants in these different hearing procedures toward the goal of making the hearing process predictable and understandable. 
 
Sec. 10-3.  Types of Hearings. 
 Three primary types of public hearings shall be included in the scope of this Chapter. 
A. Quasi-Judicial Hearings - Type 1.  Type 1 Quasi-Judicial hearings shall be required when a permit or discretionary administrative ruling is sought from a decision-making board such as the Board of Adjustment, Planning and Zoning Commission, or Council and only one public hearing is required by this Code or the Idaho Code before final action can be taken on the request.  Because such a hearing may influence the individual rights of applicants, this administrative procedure shall be more strictly controlled to protect individual rights.  Decisions following Type 1 Quasi-Judicial hearings shall be final subject to appeal to a higher decision making authority as provided by this Code or the Idaho Code.  Permits to which this procedure shall apply are the variance, Conditional Use Permit, Special Use Permit, vacation of a portion of a subdivision plat, or an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator. 
B. Quasi-Judicial Hearings - Type 2.  Type 2 Quasi-Judicial hearings shall be required when the permit or regulatory change sought requires a sequence of two (2) or more public hearings before final action may be taken on the request.  The initial public hearing shall be conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission whose task is to prepare a recommendation for submittal to the Council.  Following receipt of the recommendation from the advisory board, a second public hearing must be scheduled before the Council before a decision on the request may be rendered.  Like those hearings classified as Type 1 Quasi-Judicial hearings the rights of individuals are at stake and the protection of those rights is a prime purpose of the required procedure.  Like a Type 1 
 procedure the resulting decision from a Type 2 procedure is final unless appealed to a subsequent decision-making tribunal.  Unlike the Type 1 procedure, care must be taken in the steps between the initial and second hearing to protect the interests of all parties involved.  Type 2 Quasi-Judicial hearings are used in request for changes in zoning district boundaries, changes to the Comprehensive Plan when sought in conjunction with a request for a change in zoning district boundaries, Planned Unit Developments and subdivision plats. 
C. Legislative Hearings.  Legislative hearings shall be required when amendments are contemplated to the substantive or procedural terms of Title 3, Chapters 1 and 2, all of Title 4, and Title 5, Chapters 1 and 2 of this Code.  Legislative hearings are characterized by their general applicability to the community as a whole.  Legislative hearings may only be initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by the direction of the Council. Included in this category are public hearings leading up to changes in the zoning ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, and the comprehensive plan of the City. 
 (Ord. 2007-10, 09/17/2007) 
 
Sec. 10-4.  Procedures for Type 1 Quasi-Judicial Hearings. 
A. Pre-Hearing Procedures. 
 1. General Requirements and Responsibilities. 
  a. Prior to the conduct of the hearing no person shall attempt to discuss the subject of the hearing with a member of the decision-making board destined to decide the issue.  Any such attempt shall be reported by the decision-making board member so approached to legal counsel for the decision-making board who shall advise the decision-making board in that regard. 
  b. Notices of public hearing shall provide adequate information to allow notice recipients to participate in the hearing process. 
 2. Applicant's Responsibilities.  
  a. The applicant for a permit shall submit a completed application on a form provided by the City to the appropriate City official. 
  b. The applicant shall, in a timely manner, provide the names and addresses, on mailing labels provided by the City, of all persons entitled to notice under the provisions of this Chapter.  In the alternative the applicant may contract with the City for research and preparation of the list of landowners and residents who require notice.  The City shall have the option of billing for this service based on its out-of-pocket costs plus administrative expenses or the City may charge a fixed charge per notice, with said charge established by the Council from time to time by resolution. 
  c. The applicant should submit such additional written material as the applicant may desire to tender to the decision-making board at the public hearing at the time of application filing.  Such written submittals should be made at this time so they may be reviewed by the interested public prior to the hearing. Petitions may be submitted by the applicant after the filing deadline.  Materials provided tardy may be admitted subject to the discretion of the decision-making board. 
 3. Public Participant's Responsibilities. 
  a. Public participants in the hearing process shall have the opportunity to examine written materials submitted by the applicant prior to the hearing. 
  b. Public participants desiring to submit textual materials (excluding petitions) to the decision-making board shall make that submission at least five (5) calendar working days in advance of the scheduled meeting.  Material provided tardy may be admitted subject to the discretion of the decision-making Board. 
 4. City's Responsibilities. 
  a. The responsible City administrative personnel shall provide appropriate application forms and related materials to applicants. 
  b. Where required, the City shall publish notice of the public hearing in accordance with the requirements of this Code and the appropriate Idaho Code sections. 
  c. Where required, the City shall provide proper notice to the residents and/or land owners entitled to notice within the terms of this code or applicable sections of the Idaho Code. 
  d. The City shall maintain a file of materials relating to the application available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
B. Hearing Procedures. 
 1. General Requirements. 
  a. Public hearings shall be conducted according to orderly procedures as specified by the chairperson of the meeting, subject to the will of the decision-making board. 
  b. All procedures shall be directed to providing the participants in the hearing a fair chance to be heard by an impartial decision-making board. 
  c. Decision-making board members having a conflict of interest involving the subject matter of a hearing shall not participate in the deliberations related to the item in which they possess an interest.  Said abstention shall be governed by the applicable provisions of this Code, the Idaho Code, and the member's personal perception of the situation.  The decision to abstain from participation shall be the personal decision of the individual decision-making board member. 
  d. The chairperson of the decision-making board shall have sole authority to recognize participants in the hearing process and to maintain order in its conduct. 
  e. Subject to decision-making board objection, the chairperson may establish time limits on presentations in the interest of fairness and to provide more people with a chance to participate.  Said limitations may be established at the beginning of the hearing or may be invoked during the hearing when conditions warrant. 
  f. Formal rules of evidence will not apply during the hearing, but the chairperson may rule that certain testimony may be excluded or shortened because of its relevance to the subject of the hearing. 
  g. Hearings conducted in accord with this section shall generally be conducted in the following order: 
   (1) Opening of hearing and call to order. 
   (2) Introduction of hearing item and explanation of request. 
   (3) Presentation by applicant. 
   (4) Public testimony in support of the application. 
   (5) Public testimony in opposition to the application. 
   (6) Other public testimony. 
   (7) Response of applicant to public testimony. 
   (8) Closure of the public hearing. 
   (9) Board deliberations without further unsolicited comment. 
  h. All inquiries regarding the presentation of any party shall be directed to the chairperson who shall decide the need for a response and seek one where necessary or appropriate. 
  i. At the close of the initial public hearing the decision-making board may take any of the following actions concerning the application before it: 
   (1) Approve the application as presented. 
   (2) Reject the application as presented. 
   (3) Approve the application subject to specific conditions as permitted by the applicable substantive Zoning Code sections. 
 
 
   (4) Table the application to allow fact finding by the City staff, to receive answers to specific factual questions from the applicant or the interested public, or to defer the decision for further reflection.  When a request is tabled, the final decision shall be made at a succeeding regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting for which proper notice has been given. 
   (5) Schedule a continuation of the public hearing at a specific time and place.  This provision shall apply to any visit to the site in question by the decision-making board. 
  j. Each person who testifies shall provide the recording secretary with his or her name and a true and accurate mailing address. 
  k. All information upon which a decision rests, including information held by decision-making board members from their own experience, shall be placed upon the record before the public hearing is closed. 
  l. Members of the decision-making board may question any participant in the hearing process concerning any representations made or questions raised in the course of the hearing or in written materials submitted prior to the hearing. 
  m. The chairperson of the decision-making board conducting the hearing may solicit a response to a question seeking a specific objective fact from any participant without reopening the hearing for general testimony. 
  n. Any person may testify through a designated representative.  The decision-making board may request proof of authorization from anyone purporting to speak for another. All writings submitted as testimony shall contain the name and address of the testifying party in legible form and shall include that person's signature. 
  o. All votes on final decisions or adoption of findings of fact shall be  
 recorded in the official minutes of the meeting. 
 2. Applicant's Responsibilities. 
  a. The applicant or a duly authorized representative shall be present at the public hearing to present the application to the decision-making board unless excused by the decision-making board. 
  b. The applicant shall describe the application with reasonable detail to inform the decision-making board and those in attendance of the character of the application, the permission being sought, and the efforts undertaken to make the permission, if granted, acceptable to the community. The applicant's presentation shall address the criteria detailed in this Code or the Idaho Code for the type of permission sought. 
 3. Public Participant's Responsibilities. 
  a. Public participants in the hearing process shall address the facts of the issue at hand and may state opinions as they relate to the criteria of the applicable Code sections governing the request for permission made by the applicant. 
  b. Questions from public participants to the applicant, City staff, members of the decision-making board, or other public participants shall be directed to the chairperson of the decision-making board during the hearing. 
 4. City Responsibilities. 
  a. The City shall provide meeting facilities adequate to accommodate all who wish to participate in the hearing process. 
  b. The City shall provide a person who shall produce minutes of the proceeding as required by this Code or the Idaho Code. 
  c. The City shall maintain a transcribable verbatim record of all hearing proceedings for six (6) months following the date of a final decision in a
  
 
 matter for which a public hearing of this type is conducted. 
C. Post-Hearing Procedures. 
 1. General Requirements. 
  a. After the close of a public hearing, the only public communication with the decision-making board concerning the application before them shall be specific factual answers to questions raised at the hearing or during deliberations and requiring a subsequent reply.  The decision-making board may communicate freely with City staff and its own legal counsel following the closure of the public hearing. 
  b. Following each public hearing the decision-making board shall reach a decision regarding the permission sought in the subject application.  The deliberations and final decision shall be conducted in an open meeting subject to the public scrutiny, and shall be made in a timely manner. 
  c. Decisions in such applications shall be accompanied by a written Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards which shall set forth the reasons for the decision-making board's decision pursuant to Idaho Code Section 67-6535.  Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards shall be adopted by specific motion of the decision-making board. 
  d. The decision-making board may reach a decision in each application in any of the following ways: 
   (1) A final decision may be reached on the day of the hearing subject to adoption of Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards at a later date. 
   (2) A final decision may be reached on the day of the hearing immediately followed by adoption of Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards at the same meeting. 
   (3) A tentative decision may be reached on the day of the hearing  
 subject to development of suitable Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards at a later date. 
   (4) A decision may be deferred to a late date at either the next regularly scheduled meeting of the decision-making board or at a subsequent regular meeting or a properly scheduled special meeting identified at the public hearing. 
  e. Draft Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards may be developed by motion of the decision-making board immediately following the hearing in question; by a subcommittee of the decision-making board, numbering less than necessary to constitute a quorum, to be brought to the entire board for final action; or by delegation to City staff or legal counsel to be brought to the entire decision-making board for final action. 
  f. Adoption of Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards shall constitute a final decision for purposes of appeal. 
 (Ord. 2004-35, 09/07/2004) 
 
Sec. 10-5. Procedures for Type 2 Quasi-Judicial Hearings. 
A. Comparison to Type 1 Quasi-Judicial Hearings. 
 1. The Type 2 Quasi-Judicial hearings are to be conducted according to the same format as the Type 1 Quasi-Judicial hearings in the preceding section.  The Type 2 procedure differs only in that two (2) successive hearings on the same matter (not on appeal) are required to complete the process.  Both hearings are de novo hearings which allow presentation of any pertinent information regardless of prior participation and/or deliberation in the process. 
 2. The first hearing shall be conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be held for the purpose of formulating a recommendation to be
 
forwarded to the Council.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be responsible for considering all information submitted to it by participants in the hearing process and for developing a proposed Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards for the Council.  The entire product of the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing and deliberation process shall be made available to the Council before the close of the second hearing.  Dissenting members of the Planning and Zoning Commission may submit written statements explaining their disagreement with the proposed Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards.  Such statements shall be made available to the Council before the close of the second hearing.   
 3. The second hearing shall be conducted by the Council according to the same guidelines and requirements which are applied to a Type 1 Quasi-Judicial hearing.  Any member of the Planning and Zoning Commission who participates in the second hearing, in person or by written submission, shall do so only for themselves and not as a representative of the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a body.  Evidence received by the Planning and Zoning Commission at the first hearing shall have the weight at the second hearing that each Council member assigns to such evidence. 
B. At the conclusion of the public hearing held by the Council, the Council may take any of the following actions. 
 1. Approve the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and adopt the Planning and Zoning Commission’s Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards. 
 2. Approve the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, subject to modifications to the Planning and Zoning Commission’s Reasoned  
 Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards.  
 3. Render a decision different from the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and adopt a new Reasoned Statement of Relevant Criteria and Standards. 
 4. Defer decision on the request to a later meeting date.  
 5. Remand the recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for clarification or further documentation of the recommendation prior to reaching a decision. 
C. A decision shall be deemed final when a proposal has been either approved or disapproved by the Council. 
 (Ord. 2004-07, 02/17/2004; Ord. 2004-35, 09/07/2004) 
 
Sec. 10-6. Procedures for Legislative Hearings. 
A. General Requirements and Conditions. 
 1. Legislative hearings are required when changes are proposed to the land use regulations of the City which are subject to the requirements of Title 67, Chapter 65 of the Idaho Code. 
 2. Legislative hearings are required in tandem as are Type 2 Quasi-Judicial hearings, but legislative hearings are not subject to the same procedural restrictions as are Quasi-Judicial hearings. 
 3. Ex-parte contacts are not forbidden in conjunction with the legislative hearing process. 
B. Pre-Hearing Procedures. 
 1. A legislative hearing may be scheduled by order of the chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Mayor or by a motion passed by a majority of the membership of the respective board involved. 
 2. Upon said order the City staff shall cause to be published a public notice containing the nature of the proposed change contemplated to the land use 
regulations of the City and the time and place of the hearing. 
 3. A copy of the proposed change shall be made available to the public for inspection from the time notice is published to the time of the hearing. 
 4. Written comments may be forwarded for consideration any time prior to the close of comments as determined by the board hearing the matter. 
C. Hearing Procedures. 
 1. Testimony may be submitted in any form by any person interested in the legislative proposition, subject to rulings by the chairperson concerning form, length, or relevance. 
 2. Hearings conducted in accordance with this section shall generally be conducted in the following order: 
  a. Opening of the hearing and call to order. 
  b. Introduction of hearing item and explanation of proposal. 
  c. Public testimony in support of the proposal. 
  d. Public testimony in opposition to the proposal. 
  e. Other testimony on the proposal. 
  f.  Closure of the public hearing. 
  g. Board deliberations without further unsolicited commitment. 
 3. The chairperson shall be free to vary the order of hearing procedures as necessary or desirable. 
 4. Minutes shall be kept of all legislative hearings and said minutes shall be available for public inspection during regular business tours. 
 5. All deliberations on matters which are the subject of legislative hearings shall be conducted in a properly called open meeting of the board considering the proposal. 
 6. All persons testifying at a legislative hearing shall state their name and address prior to addressing the hearing board. 
D. Post-Hearing Procedures. 
 1. At the close of the initial hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall prepare a recommendation to the Council concerning the proposal before them.  This recommendation may take any of the following forms: 
  a. Approval of the proposal as presented. 
  b. Rejection of the proposal as presented. 
  c. Approval of the proposal subject to modifications as included in the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation. 
 2. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the Council within forty-five (45) days of the close of the initial public hearing.  The recommendation shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation.  Dissenting members may submit written comments stating their reasons for disagreement with the majority position on the proposal. 
 3. Upon receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommen-dation, the Council shall determine whether to hold a second public hearing on the subject of the initial legislative hearing.  Upon an affirmative finding the City shall publish notice of a legislative public hearing before the Council stating the nature of the proposal and the time, place, and date of the hearing. 
E. Second Hearing Procedures. 
 1. Procedures for the second hearing, conducted this time before the Council, shall be the same as for the initial hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
 2. At the conclusion of the second hearing the Council may take any of the following actions: 
  a. Adopt the proposal in ordinance form as originally proposed or as recommended or modified by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
  b. Reject the change as proposed. 
  c. Propose substantial modifi-cations to the proposal originally made or 
 to the proposal recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and return the substantially modified proposal to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a new initial hearing. 
 
Sec. 10-7: The Neighborhood Meeting. 
A. Purpose. 
 The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is to allow the developer to present the proposal to neighbors and other members of the public prior to the formal public hearing so that the parties can discuss and consider neighborhood impacts, mitigation, design and construction elements, and the like.  A further purpose is to allow developers to have related applications considered concurrently by the hearing bodies. 
B. When required. 
 1. A neighborhood meeting shall be required for each of the land use matters below.  Where the applicant desires to file more than one (1) application involving the same project and/or property and desires all related applications to be considered within the same hearing, one (1) neighborhood meeting shall be necessary. 
 2. A neighborhood meeting shall be required as a prerequisite to filing of an application with the City for the following land use matters: 
  a. Annexation;  
  b. Request to amend Comprehensive Plan Map land use designation; 
  c. Request to amend Zoning District; 
  d. Preliminary Plat; 
  e. Planned Unit Development; or 
  f. Any combination of the foregoing. 
C. Notice of meeting. 
 1. Notice of the neighborhood meeting shall be given to all property owners of record within six hundred feet (600’) of the subject property.  Such notice shall be provided at least fourteen (14) days before the first neighborhood meeting regarding the subject property.  Notice of the neighborhood meeting shall be made by mail to the current or last known address of the property owners of record.  Property owners of record shall be determined by review of records in the possession of Latah County.  Alternatively, the City may provide a list of property owners to the applicant upon receipt by City of the proper request form and the appropriate fee. 
 2. Notice shall include a vicinity map, the general nature of the proposal, the size of the land, the number of lots/dwelling units, the date, time and location of the meeting, and the name, address, telephone number and email address of a contact person. 
 The neighborhood meeting shall be set at a date, time, and place reasonably calculated to facilitate the attendance of the property owners required to receive notice.  Evening meetings during the work week are encouraged. 
D. Format. 
 1. General. 
  The applicant or applicant’s representative shall chair and conduct the meeting according to orderly procedures.  The Chair should provide the participants in the neighborhood meeting a fair chance to be heard.  The Chair will have the authority to recognize participants in the meeting and to maintain order in the conduct of the neighborhood meeting.  Formal rules of evidence will not apply during the neighborhood meeting but the Chair may limit the duration of comments or presentation where necessary to give the broadest number of participants the opportunity to express their views.   
 2. Order. 
  The neighborhood meeting shall generally be conducted in the following order; however, the meeting should not be so formal that it precludes or unduly limits participation by those in 
 attendance nor should it be so unruly that information gathering and exchange cannot occur:   
  a. Opening of the meeting and a call to order; 
  b. Introduction of the proposal/project by the applicant and/or the applicant’s representatives; 
  c. Public comments in support of the application; 
  d. Public comments in opposition of the application; 
  e. Questions and/or other public testimony; 
  f. A response of the applicant (if desired by applicant); 
  g. Any related business; and 
  h. Close of the neighborhood meeting. 
 3. Other. 
  Conduct by all participating in the neighborhood meeting should be respectful, should avoid personal attack, and should be directed toward gathering and exchanging information regarding the proposal(s).   
E. Scope. 
 Each neighborhood meeting shall be conducted so that those in attendance can discuss the project/proposal which is the subject of the application(s) to be filed.  Where more than one (1) application is to be considered in the same public hearing, the meeting shall include discussion of all related matters.  For example, where there is to be a submittal for a rezoning along with a preliminary plat, both shall be thoroughly discussed in the neighborhood meeting. 
F. Submission of neighborhood meeting materials to City. 
 1. Time to submit materials. 
  Neighborhood meeting materials required to be submitted pursuant to this Chapter shall be submitted with the application(s) and relevant fee(s). 
 2. Materials to be submitted. 
  The following shall be submitted to the City with the original filing of the land use application(s) and shall constitute part of such land use application(s):   
  a. Time, date and location of the neighborhood meeting; 
  b. Names and addresses of property owners to whom notice was sent; 
  c. Names and addresses of all attendees; 
  d. Summary of comments, suggestions and discussion; 
  e. Applicant’s response to comments, suggestions and discussion, including any modifications made or intended to be made to the project proposal/application as a result of the neighborhood meeting comments; and 
  f. Materials utilized or submitted (including plans, proposals, designs, power point presentations, maps, handouts, petitions, letters, studies, etc.) shall be submitted with the application for the related project(s). 
  A verbatim transcript is not required nor is a video and/or audio tape (unless the applicant wishes to submit it).  The summary of comments, suggestions and discussion should be extensive enough to allow the reader to understand what occurred. 
G. Notice of hearing. 
 Following receipt by City staff of the required submittals, notice of a public hearing on the related application(s) shall be scheduled before the Planning and Zoning Commission.  Notice of such public hearing shall take place not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the required public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to this Code and City policy. 
 (Ord. 2007-03, 05/07/2007; 2018-11, 08/20/2018) 
 
Sec. 10-8. Procedures for Appeals of Interpretation or Administration. 
A. The Council shall review the appeal on the written record generated and/or preserved by the Board.  Decisions made regarding appeals herein should be founded upon sound reason and practical 
 application of recognized principles of law.  When considering the merits of an appeal, no additional public testimony or information shall be taken or considered by the Council.  After considering the record and the reasons for the appeal, the Council shall take one or more of the following actions: 
 1. Sustain the Decision.  Sustain the decision of the Board in whole or in part. 
 2. Reverse the Decision.  Reverse the decision of the Board in whole or in part. 
 3. Remand the Decision. 
  a. Remand the matter in whole or in part to the Board with comments and/or instructions for further consideration by the Board or for remand by the Board to the Zoning Administrator in order to gather more information on the matter.  The Council shall remand the appeal in whole or in part for gathering of additional material information and a subsequent decision only where it is shown by a preponderance of the evidence that there is: 
   (1) New material information not available or readily discoverable at the time of the Zoning Administrator’s decision; and 
   (2) It is in the public interest to develop such additional material information on the matter. 
B. Procedures and guidelines for an appeal in addition to that contained herein may be established from time to time by resolution of the Council. 
 (Ord. 2007-10, 09/17/2007) 
 


 
Chapter 11 
 
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 11-1:  Zoning Administrator  
  Responsibilities 
Sec. 11-2:  Zoning Certificates 
Sec. 11-3:  Interpretation 
Sec. 11-4:  Provisions of Title 
  Declared to be Minimum 
  Requirements 
Sec. 11-5:  Complaints Regarding 
  Violations 
Sec. 11-6:  Penalties for Violations 
 
Sec. 11-1. Zoning Administrator Responsibilities. 
A. A Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce this Zoning Code.  The Zoning Administrator is authorized to use any and all lawful means available to fairly administer and enforce this Zoning Code.  The Zoning Administrator may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as is necessary to administer and enforce this Zoning Code. 
B. If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this Zoning Code are being violated, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.  The Zoning Administrator or designee shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall take other action authorized by this Zoning Code to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
 
 
Sec. 11-2. Zoning Certificates. 
A. Zoning Certificates Required: 
 1. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or changed in its use or structure until a zoning certificate has been issued therefor by the Zoning Administrator stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this Zoning Code. 
 2. A temporary Zoning Certificate may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a period not to exceed one (1) year during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
B. Expiration of Zoning Certificates:   
 1. If the work described in any zoning certificate has not begun within one (1) year from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall automatically expire. 
 2. If the work described in any zoning certificate requires a building permit, and the building permit expires, then the zoning certificate shall automatically expire.  If the work described in any zoning certificate that does not require a building permit has not been substantially completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance thereof, said certificate shall automatically expire.  Six (6) month extensions may be granted by the Board of Adjustment at its discretion. 
(Ord. 97-33, 11/3/97) 
 
Sec. 11-3. Interpretation. 
A. It is not the intention of this Zoning Code to interfere with any more strict requirements which may be imposed
by a covenant, deed restriction, City, County, State or Federal Health Officer, that has jurisdiction in the City. 
B. Where this Zoning Code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings, the provisions of this Zoning Code shall govern. 
C. None of the provisions of this Zoning Code is intended to provide the basis for a claim or create a cause of action against the City, or its officials or employees, for the performance or failure to perform any duty or obligation running to a specific individual.  Any duty or obligation created by this Zoning Code is intended to be a general duty or obligation running in favor of the general public. 
D. It is the intent of this Zoning Code that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented to the Zoning Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator, as set forth in Code Section 4-8-2. 
 (Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 11-4. Provisions of Title 
   Declared to be Minimum 
   Requirements. 
 In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.  Whenever the requirements of this Zoning Code are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, resolutions, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
 
Sec. 11-5. Complaints Regarding 
   Violations. 
 Whenever  a violation of this Zoning Code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint.  Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, who shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
Sec. 11-6. Penalties for Violations. 
A. Any person or corporation, whether owner, lessee, principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this Zoning Code, or permits any such violation or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters, enlarges, converts, moves or uses any building or uses any land in violation of any detailed statement or plans submitted by him or her and approved under the provisions of this Title, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction shall be punished pursuant to this Code and the Idaho Code.  Each seven (7) consecutive days’ continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation of this Code. 
B. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this Zoning Code, the proper legal authorities of the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such building, structure or land; and upon the failure or refusal of the proper local officer, board or body of the City to institute any such appropriate action or proceeding, any person aggrieved by such violation 
may institute such appropriate action or proceeding in like manner as such local officer, board or body of the City is authorized to do. 
 (Ord. 98-16, 4/20/98; 2018-07, 05/21/2018) 
 
§ 1-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-4
Chapter 1
SUBDIVISIONS
Sec. 1-1: Definitions
Sec. 1-2: Approval of Plat
Sec. 1-3: Appeals
Sec. 1-4: Authority and Permits
Sec. 1-5: General Requirements
Sec. 1-6: Acreage Subdivision
Sec. 1-7: Property Within One Mile
of the City
Sec. 1-8: Preliminary Plats
Sec. 1-9: Final Plat
Sec. 1-10: Subdivision Improvements;
Agreement and Security
Sec. 1-11: Subdivision Development
Fee Schedule
Sec. 1-1. Definitions.
A. Subdivider includes developer, and
may be an individual, corporation,
association, firm or group who
undertakes the subdividing of a lot,
tract, or parcel of land for the purpose
of transfer of ownership or the
development of lots for residential
purposes or for the purpose of
commercial development.
B. Subdivision. The division or
development of a developed or
undeveloped lot, tract, or parcel of
land, platted or unplatted and laid out
or to be laid out in building lots, for
homes or commercial developments
which may or may not include streets,
highways, alleys, or other portions of
the same intended to be dedicated to
public use.
C. Zoning Code. The Zoning Code means
Title 4 of this Code.
Sec. 1-2. Approval of Plat.
No plat shall be recorded, or offered
for record, nor shall any land be offered for
sale with reference to such plat, until the
said plat has been approved in writing by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Council, which shall ascertain, before
approving it, that the said plat has satisfied
all of the requirements of this Chapter and
the Zoning Code.
Sec. 1-3. Appeals.
Any aggrieved person whose plat or
parcel of land has been rejected or
disapproved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission may petition the Council for a
hearing.
Sec. 1-4. Authority and Permits.
A. 1. Requirements of this Chapter are
authorized by Article XII, Section 2 of
the Idaho Constitution; Title 50,
Chapter 13 of the Idaho Code; Title 67,
Chapter 65 of the Idaho Code and by
any and all other delegation of State
authority relevant to this Chapter, as
amended or subsequently codified.
2. Standards for subdivisions required
by this Chapter are imposed pursuant to
authority in Idaho Code Section
67-6518, as amended or subsequently
codified.
3. No public improvement(s) required
by this Chapter pursuant to Idaho Code
Section 67-6513 (including, but not
limited to, such subsections 5-1-5(D)
and 5-1-5(E) herein) shall be greater
than necessary to mitigate the effects of
such subdivision development on the
ability of the City to deliver services
without compromising quality of
service delivery or imposing substantial
additional costs upon City residents to
accommodate the proposed
subdivision, as of the time of the
application for subdivision
development.
B. No permits shall be issued by the City
for the construction of any building or
other improvement requiring a permit,
upon any land for which a plat is
required by this Chapter unless and
until the requirements hereof shall have
been fully complied with.
(Res. 99-01, 2/16/99; Ord. 99-09, 3/1/99)
§ 1-5 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-5
Sec. 1-5. General Requirements.
The following shall be considered
minimum requirements and shall apply
except when specifically permitted to
deviate by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
A. Property Lines: Blocks shall not be
longer than six hundred sixty feet
(660') between street intersections,
unless, because of some peculiar
conditions, a longer block shall be
approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Side lines of lots shall be
at right angles or radial to the street
lines, unless a variation from the rule
will give a better street and lot plan.
Such variation must be approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
Lots with double frontage shall be
avoided where practicable. Building
setback lines, if shown, shall show a
building setback not less than that
required by the zoning provisions of
the City. Monuments at lot corners,
block corners, points of street
intersections, and such other points as
may be necessary to make the retracing
of the lines as shown on the final plat
reasonably convenient; shall be in
conformity with the Idaho Code and
the standards of the City.
B. Streets and Alleys: All subdivision
streets shall conform to the highway
plan for the City, both as to location
and width. The minimum width of
right of way for streets shall be fifty
feet (50'). The arrangement of streets
in new subdivisions shall make
reasonable provision for the
continuation of the principal existing
streets in adjoining subdivisions, or
their proper projections when adjoining
property is not subdivided. Insofar as
they may be made for new streets of a
width deemed advisable by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. In
general, such streets shall be at least as
wide as the existing streets, except that
in no case shall the width of the right of
way be less than the minimum
specified herein. The street and alley
arrangement must also be such as to
cause no hardship to owners of
adjoining property when they plat their
land and seek to provide for convenient
access thereto. This arrangement must
also provide for continuing a
reasonable number of through utility
lines. Dead-end streets shall have a
turnaround at the end with a minimum
radius of forty feet (40') right-of-way
unless the street is intended for access,
in the future, to adjoining property.
Reserve strips on outer boundaries of a
subdivision may be established to
control access to a partial width street,
upon approval of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and provided that
such subdivision be accompanied by
agreement to dedicate such strip or
strips when sufficient ground is made
available for public use to permit
widening of said strip to its normal
width. No other reserve strips
controlling access to public ways shall
be permitted, except when the control
and disposition of land comprising
such strips are placed within the
jurisdiction of the City under
conditions specified by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and attached
to the plat. Streets shall intersect each
other as near as practicable to right
angles. Street names shall be approved
by the Planning and Zoning
Commission to conform with the
uniform plan for street names
heretofore or hereafter adopted by the
City. All streets and alleys shall be
completed to the grades which have
been officially approved or determined,
or shown upon approved plans and
profiles. The minimum width of any
dedicated alley shall be twenty feet
(20'). Alleys may be required in all
blocks where the lots are less than fifty
feet (50') in width, along the rear line
of business property, and in the rear of
all lots fronting major thoroughfares.
Where alleys are not provided,
§ 1-5 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-5
easements of not less than ten feet (10')
in width shall be provided on each side
of all rear lot lines and side lines where
necessary, for poles, wires, conduits,
storm or sanitary sewers, gas and water
lines. Easements of greater width may
be required along lines across lots or
along boundaries where necessary for
surface overflow or for the extension of
main sewers or other utilities. No
irrigation ditches shall be permitted on
public roads except where acquired by
vested rights or where crossing public
roads.
C. Land Required for Other Public
Purposes: Land required for public
purposes other than for streets, alleys,
or utilities may be dedicated to the City
if approved and accepted by the
Council.
D. Utilities: All water mains, valves,
hydrants and connections to the City
water distribution system, all sewer
mains, manholes, appurtenances and
connections to the City sewer system,
including all storm sewers, inlets,
appurtenances, and connections, if
necessary, shall be provided and
installed by the subdivider. These
installations shall all be in accordance
with the standards and specifications of
the City.
E. Streets and Alleys:
1. All streets shall be constructed in
accordance with the Standard
Construction Specifications and
Drawings adopted by the Council from
time to time. When requested by a
developer, the City Engineer shall
make specific findings that application
to an individual subdivision of the City
Standard Construction Specifications
and Drawings, in whole or in part, is
necessary to mitigate the effects of
subdivision development on the ability
of the City to deliver services without
compromising quality of service
delivery or imposing substantial
additional costs upon City residents to
accommodate the proposed subdivision
development. Such specific findings
by City Engineer shall be made prior to
approval of any improvements required
by Sections 5-1-5(E) and/or (D) of this
Code and within forty-five (45) days
following the receipt by the City of
developer's completed application for
the building permit. If the developer
fails to request such specific findings
before the completion of the
application for building permit, such
failure to so request shall act as
acceptance by the developer of the
improvements required by the Standard
Construction Specifications and
Drawings and shall waive developer's
right to object to the required public
improvements. Any aggrieved person
may appeal such findings of the City
Engineer to the Council.
2. All costs of the improvements
required by this subsection E. shall be
borne by the owners or subdividers.
3. No building permit shall be issued
for a principal structure unless
improvements required by Section
5-1-5, subsections D. and E., have been
shown on plans submitted to and
approved by the City Engineer and
constructed, bonded for, or specifically
waived by the Council. These
improvements shall be required for all
streets adjacent to the lot on which the
structure is to be constructed.
F. Dedication of Parkland:
1. With any subdivision, resubdivision
or lot division filed or
applied for after December 15, 1985,
lands shall be dedicated, or payment in
lieu of dedication shall be paid, to the
City in order that adequate sites for
public parks may be properly located
and preserved as the City develops, and
in order that the cost of providing
additional public parkland may be most
equitably apportioned on the basis of
the additional need created by
individual development. This
provision shall not apply to any resubdivision
or lot division that would
§ 1-5 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-5
result in the creation of no more than
one additional single family residential
lot; nor shall it apply to land for which
parkland had previously been dedicated
to satisfy the requirements of this
Section. It is the intention of the City
to develop each parcel of land
dedicated to meet this requirement for
park purposes when the area is
occupied by residents.
2. Amount of land to be dedicated:
a. The amount of land to be
dedicated shall be a portion of the net
developable area. The net developable
area will be computed by calculating,
from the plat or site plan, the land area
exclusive of proposed or existing
streets and other public lands.
b. The amount of land to be
dedicated shall be a percentage of the
net developable area, as follows unless
the result of applying the percentage is
demonstrated by the applicant or
developer to be manifestly unjust:
Single Family Residence
Zoning Districts (FR, SR, R-1,
and R-2)
5%
Two Family Dwelling Zoning
Districts (R-3) 7%
Multiple Residence Zoning
Districts (R-4, and RO) 9%
Commercial Zoning Districts
(NB, RTO, CB, GB, I, and
MB)
9%
c. An agreement between the City
and the applicant or developer may be
executed permitting the payment in lieu
of dedication over a period of time for
commercial zoning districts (NB, RTO,
CB, GB, MB and I) if the City
determines such payment in lieu of
dedication is in the best interest of the
City. Payment in lieu of dedication
may be paid as development takes
place.
d. If the Zoning District
classification for a parcel of land is
subsequently changed at the request of
an owner to a Zoning District requiring
a higher proportion of land for park
land purposes, or from a Zoning
District not requiring dedication to one
that does, then dedication of the park
land or additional park land required
for the subdivision by this Section, or
payment in lieu of dedication, becomes
due before the Zoning District change
becomes effective.
3. Where private space for park
purposes is provided in a proposed
subdivision, re-subdivision or lot
division, such areas may be credited
proportionately against the requirement
for park land dedication or payment in
lieu of dedication if the Council finds
that:
a. Such arrangement will be
consistent with the program for
development of public park lands in the
area; and
b. The proposed park land will
provide benefits to the users equivalent
to those that would be provided by the
credited portion of public park land;
and
c. The land is reasonably suitable
for the proposed park use; and
d. Adequate written assurances,
in the form of the development
agreement and a financial commitment,
are submitted guaranteeing that the
space will be developed in a timely
fashion for the park activity for which
the land is intended; and
e. The long term preservation of
the space, the right of the public to
access and to use the space, and its
adequate operation and maintenance
are provided for in a written agreement
enforceable by the City, a copy of
which shall be recorded in the office of
the Latah County Recorder.
4. Land Suitability: Land is
acceptable for dedication to meet the
requirements of this Section if in the
judgment of the Council the land is
suitable for beneficial park and open
space use considering its location, size,
configuration, public access,
§ 1-5 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-5
topography, surroundings, compliance
with standards for parks established in
the Moscow Parks and Recreation Plan
and the Moscow Comprehensive Plan,
and the needs of the public in that area.
Land acceptable for dedication is not
necessarily required to be located
within a proposed subdivision;
however, the land must conveniently
serve park land needs of residents of
the subdivision. The Council shall
consider recommen-dations received
from the Parks and Recreation
Commission on the suitability of a
particular parcel of land proposed for
dedication.
5. Payment in Lieu of Dedication: In
the event that the City determines in
good faith that proposed dedication
does not meet land suitability standards
and that there are no alternative
proposals which satisfy the conditions
of land suitability, then payment in lieu
of the land dedication shall be required
for all or any portion of land necessary
to meet the requirements of this
Section.
a. The amount of payment in lieu
of dedication shall be the current fair
market value of land suitable to meet
the parkland dedication requirement of
this Section. The payment in lieu of
dedication shall be computed by
averaging the value of the land
exclusive of improvements, (both
public and private), and multiplying by
the percent required for park
dedication. This value shall be
determined prior to granting final
approval of the subdivision,
resubdivision or lot division.
b. If the value of such land cannot
be determined satisfactorily by the City
and the developer, the following
procedure shall determine value:
(1) The parties shall each
submit an offer of value to the other, in
writing. For ten (10) days thereafter
either party may accept the other's offer
of value.
(2) If neither offer is
accepted, an appraiser, selected jointly
by the City and the developer shall
determine the value.
(3) If the parties cannot agree
on selection of an appraiser, the names
of two (2) Member Appraisal Institute
appraisers, one (1) designated by each
party, shall be placed in a container,
and one appraiser's name shall be
picked at random by the Mayor. This
appraiser shall then proceed to
determine value.
(4) The party who has
submitted the value closest to that
ultimately determined to be fair market
value by the appraiser shall be
considered the prevailing party. The
party not prevailing shall pay for the
appraisal-related expenses. Either
party may appeal the decision of the
appraiser to the district court. The
court shall consider the matter as a
review consistent with the
administrative procedures act. The
prevailing party shall be paid court
costs and reasonable attorney fees by
the party not prevailing.
c. Payment in lieu of dedication
shall be held by the City in a secure
account until it is spent. Payment in
lieu of dedication shall be spent for the
acquisition of those new park lands that
in the judgment of the Council will
most conveniently serve the people
who will use the development for
which payment in lieu of dedication
were collected. If the Council finds
that the development is served by an
adequate amount of park land, then the
payment in lieu of dedication may be
used to purchase landscaping materials
or for other capital improvements to
develop the park lands most
conveniently serving the needs of those
who will be users of the development.
d. The Council may make such
arrangements with a subdivider through
a contract to permit the payment in lieu
of dedication over a period of time.
§ 1-5 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-8
e. Payment in lieu of dedication
shall be expended as provided herein
within ten (10) years of the last receipt
of such payment in lieu of dedication in
the development unless such
expenditure is impractical or would
result in waste.
6. Dedicated park land may be sold or
traded only if the proceeds are used to
acquire other park lands which in the
judgment of the Council will better
serve those who would be users of the
park land sold.
7. Where the Council requires more
than single point access to a parcel of
land proposed for dedication, the City
shall be responsible for a proportional
share of the improvements serving the
park land beyond those provided at the
single access point.
8. Where Council determines it to be
in the best interest of the City, the
applicant or developer may execute and
file an agreement specifying the period
of time and the conditions pursuant to
which a combination of parkland
dedication and development of such
parkland shall occur.
G. Areas of Special Flood Hazard (as
defined in Title 4 of this Code):
1. All subdivision proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
2. All subdivision proposals shall
have public utilities and facilities such
as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
3. All subdivision proposals shall
have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
4. Base flood elevation data shall be
provided for subdivision proposals and
other proposed development which
contain fifty (50) or more lots or five
(5) or more acres.
5. Utilities:
a. All new and replacement water
supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the system.
b. New and replacement sanitary
sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharge from the
systems into flood waters.
H. Stormwater Runoff Control: All
subdivisions shall conform to the
stormwater runoff control requirements
contained in Title 5, Chapter 15 of this
Code.
Ref. Idaho Code § 67-6513; Res. 99-01,
2/16/99; (Ord. 85-15, 11/18/85; 86-05, 4/7/86;
86-31, 12/15/86; 88-13, 11/21/88; 97-04,
4/21/97; 97-07, 4/7/97; 97-08, 4/7/97; 97-09,
4/7/97; 99-23, 7/6/99; 99-25, 7/19/99; 99-32,
10/4/99; 2000-11, 6/19/00; 2007-17,
12/03/2007)
Sec. 1-6. Acreage Subdivision.
When a parcel is subdivided into larger
tracts than required for individual building
lots, such parcel shall be divided so as to
allow for the opening of major streets and
the ultimate extension of minor streets.
Sec. 1-7. Property Within One Mile
of the City.
Property partially or totally within one
mile as measured to the nearest recorded
city limits line of the City when
subdivided, platted, or replatted shall be
done as required in the Idaho Code.
Sec. 1-8. Preliminary Plats.
In seeking to subdivide land into
building lots and to dedicate streets, alleys
or other land for public use, the owner shall
submit five (5) copies of a preliminary plat
(which plat may be in pencil), so marked,
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
its approval, before submitting the final
plat. The preliminary plat, along with the
required fees and the names and addresses
of adjoining property owners, shall be
submitted at least fourteen (14) days before
the Planning and Zoning Commission
hearing date. A public hearing shall be
held by the Planning and Zoning
§ 1-8 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-9
Commission which shall act on the
application within forty-five (45) days of
the hearing date. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall forward its
recommendation on the preliminary plat to
the Council. The Council shall review the
preliminary plat and recommendation, and
shall accept or reject the preliminary plat as
submitted, accept it with specified changes,
or return the matter to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for further public
hearing and recommendation.
A. The preliminary plat shall be drawn to
a scale not smaller than one inch (1")
equals two hundred feet (200') and
shall show:
1. Existing property lines, streets, and
alleys with their names, buildings,
water courses, other features and
section corners.
2. The title under which the proposed
subdivision is to be recorded and the
name of the subdivider.
3. The location of existing sewer and
water lines, streets, and other utilities.
4. Date, north point, scale and name
of surveyor or engineer.
5. The names of all adjoining
subdivisions with lines of abutting lots,
the owners and departing property lines
of adjoining properties not subdivided,
and the locations, names and widths of
existing streets and alleys and similar
facts regarding property which is
immediately adjacent. The Planning
and Zoning Commission may require a
contour map showing contour intervals
consistent with the shape of the ground.
B. Preliminary plats will be checked for:
1. Conformity to the highway plan of
the City and the State.
2. Conformity to the probable
development of adjacent properties.
3. Conformity to the existing street
system of the City.
4. Lot size and arrangement.
5. Necessary public utility easements.
6. Proposed protective covenants.
7. Conformity to the existing zoning
regulations.
8. Availability of water and sewage
facilities.
C. Relevant Criteria and Standards.
Approval or denial of preliminary plats
shall be based upon the following
criteria:
1. The proposed subdivision is in
conformance with all applicable City
Code requirements;
2. The proposed subdivision is in
general conformance with the
Comprehensive Plan;
3. Public Services and utilities are
available or can be made available and
are adequate to accommodate the
proposed subdivision; and
4. The proposed subdivision will not
be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or general welfare.
Names of all proposed streets and
alleys must be approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
One (1) copy of the approved
preliminary plat will be kept on file for
public examination and one shall be
returned to the owner. Such approval of
the preliminary plat shall be valid for a
period of twelve (12) months from the date
of approval of the preliminary plat by the
City Council. Before the expiration of the
initial twelve (12) month period of
approval, the applicant may request of the
Council a one (1) time extension of the
preliminary plat approval for an additional
period not to exceed six (6) months (i.e.,
for a total time period not to exceed
eighteen (18) months from the date of the
City Council preliminary plat approval).
(Ord. 2010-22, 10/18/2010; 2016-04, 04/04/2016)
Sec. 1-9. Final Plat.
The final plat, including the legal
description of the exterior boundaries of
the subdivision, must be prepared in
accordance with the Idaho Code. The
original tracing together with four (4) prints
shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for its approval at least
two (2) days before the Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting. If approved,
§ 1-9 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-9
the tracing and prints shall have endorsed
thereon the approval of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and the acceptance of
the Council. Of the prints, so endorsed,
one copy shall be retained by the Planning
and Zoning Commission; one copy shall be
delivered to the Council; and two (2)
copies shall be returned to the subdivider
along with the original tracing. Approval
of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be void unless the original tracing,
bearing the endorsements of the City
Engineer and the Council, is offered to the
Latah County Clerk and Recorder for filing
within one hundred eighty (180) days from
the date of the Planning and Zoning
Commission's approval. Upon written
request by the subdivider, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may grant one
hundred eighty (180) day extensions if the
Planning and Zoning Commission finds
conditions in the area have not significantly
changed since the Planning and Zoning
Commission's original approval. The final
plat shall be checked for conformity with
the approved preliminary plat, and shall
show:
A. The boundaries of the property, the
names and widths of all proposed
streets and alleys and the boundaries of
all other portions intended to be
dedicated to the public use.
B. The exact length and bearing of the
center lines of all streets and rights-ofway
and the exterior boundary of the
plat.
C. The angle of departure of adjoining
property, street and alley lines.
D. Widths and names of abutting streets
and alleys, the names and boundaries
of all subdivisions which have been
previously recorded, and adjacent
thereto, must be shown upon the plat
offered for record, in dotted lines, to
show their relationship to the
subdivision offered for record; if
adjoining land is unplatted show same
as such.
E. All lot areas and symbols for all lots
and blocks. All lots and blocks must be
numbered separately.
F. All dimensions, both linear and
angular, for locating boundaries of
subdivision, lots, streets, alleys, public
easements and private easements. The
linear dimensions shall be expressed by
bearings. All curves shall be circular
arcs and shall be defined by the radius,
central angle, tangent, arc and chord
distances. The description and location
of all monuments shall be shown, and
chord bearing, if not tangent. All
dimensions, both linear and angular,
are to be determined by an accurate
control survey in the field which must
balance and close within a limit of one
in five thousand (1 in 5,000). Plat
dimensions shall be adjusted to close
precisely. The owner shall show that
the County has checked the plat as
required by the Idaho Code and the
owner shall be responsible for any fee
imposed therefor.
G. A definite tie between not less than two
(2) prominent points on the exterior
boundary of the subdivision and the
triangulation system of the County as
established by the United States
Government and supplemented by the
County, either by bearing and distance
or by rectangular coordinate. The said
tie may be made to a line of a County
plat, or a plat of a neighboring
subdivision which conforms to the
above requirements.
H. The title under which the subdivision is
to be recorded, with the name of the
surveyor platting the tract. The
surveyor shall in every case have a
valid certificate of registration with the
Idaho Board of Registration of
Professional Engineers and
Professional Land Surveyors. The
name and title of the subdivision shall
not duplicate the name of any existing
subdivision.
§ 1-9 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-10
I. Date, north point, scale. Minimum
scale shall be one inch equals one
hundred feet (1"=100'). Street profiles
showing continuity to adjoining
property shall be required where the
contour of the surface warrants such
consideration.
(Ord. 99-25, 7/19/99)
Sec. 1-10. Subdivision Improvements;
Agreement and Security.
A. Before the final subdivision plat is
signed by the Mayor, all Developers
shall be required to complete all of the
improvement work required under
Sections 5-1-5(D) and (E) of this
Chapter. Such Developer shall
dedicate said public improvements and
property to the City free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances on the
dedicated property and public
improvements.
B. In lieu of completing all of the required
public improvements, before approval
of the final site plan by the Council the
Developer may execute and file an
agreement with the City specifying the
period of time within which the
Developer shall complete all
improvement work required under
Sections 5-1-5(D) and (E) of this
Chapter, and providing that if the
Developer shall fail to complete such
work within the specified period or fail
to maintain such improvements and
correct deficiencies therein as may be
directed by the Council or the Director
of Public Works during a period of one
(1) year following completion and
acceptance of such improvements, the
City may, at its option, direct the
completion of such work and recover
the full cost and expense thereof from
the Developer. The agreement may
also provide for:
1. Construction of the improvement in
units;
2. An extension of time under
conditions therein specified;
3. The termination of the agreement
upon the completion of proceedings
under a local improvement district for
the construction of improvements
deemed by the Council to be at least
the equivalent of the improvements
specified in said agreement and
required to be constructed by the
Developer; and/or
4. Proportional refund or release of
security for completed improvements
to the Developer from any Developer
security which is set forth in Section
5-1-5(C) of this Chapter and filed with
the agreement.
C. 1. To assure such Developer's full and
faithful performance of the agreement
set forth at 5-1-10(B) of this Chapter,
the Developer shall also file with the
agreement one of the following forms
of security:
a. certified check,
b. cashier's check,
c. cash,
d. irrevocable letter of credit from
a certified bank or financial institution,
e. any other form of security
which is approved by the Council.
2. Any form of security as set forth at
5-1-10(C)(1)(a through e) of this
Chapter shall be in an amount as
determined by the City, sufficient to
cover the cost of said public
improvements which are required by
the Council and the maintenance,
corrections, and inspections,
engineering and administration thereof.
The amount of the security shall be the
City Engineer's estimated cost of the
work to be completed plus ten percent
(10%) contingency plus twelve percent
(12%) engineering and administration
costs.
3. The City may accept cash in the
amount of the City Engineer's
estimated cost of the required public
improvements plus ten percent (10%)
contingency plus twelve percent (12%)
Engineering and Administration costs
§ 1-10 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 1-11
in lieu of the security required in this
subsection C if the City Engineer
determines it to be in the best interest
of the City to do so. Cash paid to the
City pursuant to this subsection shall
be utilized to pay the cost of
completing said public improvements
and shall relieve Developer from any
further payment and/or expense
regarding said public improvements.
D. In the event the Developer shall fail to
complete all improvement work in
accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter and Title and in accordance
with the agreement and the City shall
have completed same, the City may
utilize the security to pay costs of
completing said public improvements,
including construction, engineering,
and administration.
E. No extension of time, or releases of any
form of security required herein shall
be made except upon certification by
the City Engineer that work covered
Hereby has been satisfactorily
completed.
(Ord 98-.32, 9-8-98; 99-25, 7/19/99; 2001-09,
05/07/01)
Sec. 1-11. Subdivision Development
Fee Schedule.
The Council shall, from time to time,
adopt and amend subdivision fees by
resolution.
§ 2-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 2-1
Chapter 2
VACATING FEES
Sec. 2-1: Fees Required for
Vacating
Sec. 2-1. Fees Required for
Vacating.
The Council shall, from time to time,
adopt and amend vacating fees by
resolution.
(Ord. 1417, 8/11/80)
§ 3-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-2
Chapter 3
SEWERS
Sec. 3-1: Purpose of Sewer System
Sec. 3-2: Definition of Terms
Sec. 3-3: Premises to Connect to
Public Sewer; Penalty
Sec. 3-4: Sanitary Facilities Required
Sec. 3-5: Sewers Property of the City
Sec. 3-6: Extension of Public Sewers
Sec. 3-7: Construction Specifications
for Sewers
Sec. 3-8: As-Built Plans Required
Sec. 3-9: Sewer Extensions Property
of City
Sec. 3-10: Side Sewer Construction and
Repair; Permit Required
Sec. 3-11: Permit Required to Work on
Sewers
Sec. 3-12: Sewer Taps
Sec. 3-13: Permit Fees
Sec. 3-14: Right to Revoke Permissions
Sec. 3-15: Excavation Permit Required
Sec. 3-16: Construction Specifications
for Side Sewers
Sec. 3-17: Construction Specifications
for Private Sewers
Sec. 3-18: Notice of Inspections
Sec. 3-19: Sewage to be Discharged
into Wastewater Treatment
System
Sec. 3-20: Unpolluted Water Not
Permitted in Sanitary Sewer
Sec. 3-21: Unpolluted Water
Discharged to Storm Drain
Sec. 3-22: Types of Wastes Prohibited
From Public Sewers
Sec. 3-23: Discharge of Certain Waters,
Wastes, Etc., Possessing
Characteristics Likely to
Cause Harm
Sec. 3-24: Action Upon Discharge
Having Deleterious Effect
Sec. 3-25: Admission and Control of
Industrial Wastes into Public
Sewers
Sec. 3-26: Principles for Computing
Industrial Waste Service
Charge
Sec. 3-27: Powers and Authority of
Inspectors
Sec. 3-28: Authority of City to Waive
Certain Requirements
Sec. 3-29: Sewer Rates
Sec. 3-30: When Due and Payable,
Billing Periods; Fines for
Overdue Accounts;
Delinquent Accounts; Fines
for Delinquent Accounts
Sec. 3-31: Interceptors
Sec. 3-32: Permits
Sec. 3-33: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 3-34: Rules and Regulations
Sec. 3-35: Invalidation Clause
Sec. 3-36: Liability for Injury or
Damage
Sec. 3-1. Purpose of Sewer System.
For the purpose of promoting health,
safety and the general welfare of the City, a
system for the collection, transmission and
disposal of sanitary sewage shall be
constructed, extended, maintained,
repaired, replaced, operated and removed
within the City by which to provide an
adequate system for the collection,
transmission and disposal of sanitary
sewage from domestic, commercial,
industrial and such other uses and purposes
for which said system may be used.
Ref. Idaho Code § 42-3201
Sec. 3-2. Definition of Terms.
A. Terms used in this Chapter shall have
the meanings herein given to them:
1. Best Management Practices
(BMPs). This includes schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement
the requirements of City ordinances.
2. Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(abbreviated as BOD). The quantity
of oxygen, expressed in parts per
million by weight, utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory
determinations made in accordance
with procedures set forth in "Standard
§ 3-2 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-2
Methods," for five (5) day BOD
determination.
3. Building Drain. The building
drain is that part of the lowest piping
of a drainage system which receives
the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls
of the building and conveys it to the
side sewer beginning two feet (2’)
outside the building wall.
4. Chlorine Requirements. The
amount of chlorine, in parts per
million by weight, which must be
added to the sewage to produce a
specified residual chlorine content, or
to meet the requirements of some
other objective, in accordance with
procedures set forth in "Standard
Methods."
5. Commercial User. All persons
not specifically classified as domestic
or as an industrial waste contributor.
6. Composite Sample. Not less than
twelve (12) individual samples taken
at not less than thirty (30) minute
intervals for a period of not less than
six (6) hours.
7. Dwelling Unit. A building or
structure or portion thereof that is
constructed and used primarily for
residential purposes.
8. Garbage. The residue from the
preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage
and sale of food products and produce.
9. Grease Interceptor. A plumbing
appurtenance or appliance (Gravity
Grease Interceptor, Hydro-mechanical
Grease Interceptor, or Electromechanical
Grease Interceptor) that is
installed in a wastewater system to
intercept non-petroleum fats, oil, and
grease (FOG) and food waste from a
wastewater discharge.
10. Ground Garbage. The residue
from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that has been
shredded to such degree that all
particles will be carried freely in
suspension under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers
with no particle greater than one-half
(1/2) inch in any dimension.
11. House Service Line. The
extension from the building drain to
the public sewer and is sometimes
referred to as a service connection or
side sewer.
12. Industrial Wastes. The liquid
wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from sanitary sewage.
13. Interceptor. A plumbing
appurtenance or appliance designed
and installed in order to separate and
retain deleterious, hazardous or
undesirable matter from normal wastes
while permitting normal sewage or
liquid wastes to discharge into the
drainage system. This definition
applies to any intercepting device to
be installed on the sanitary sewer or
the storm sewer systems.
14. MG. Million gallons.
15. Natural Outlet. Any outlet in a
watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
16. pH. The logarithm (base 10) of
the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per
liter and is a measure of the acidity or
alkalinity of a solution. It shall be
determined by one of the procedures
outlined in "Standard Methods."
17. Parts Per Million. A weight to
weight ratio; the parts per million
value multiplied by the factor 8.345
shall be equivalent to pounds per
million gallons of water.
18. Private Sewer. A sewer serving
one or more buildings, residences, or
properties, constructed by private
contract.
19. Public Sewer. A sewer in which
all owners of abutting property have
equal rights, and is controlled by
public authority that serves one or
more persons and ultimately discharge
into the City sanitary sewer system,
even though those sewers may not
have been constructed with City funds.
§ 3-2 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-2
20. Sanitary Sewage. Wastes that are
derived principally from dwellings,
business buildings, institutions and
industrial waste, exclusive of storm
and surface waters.
21. Sanitary Sewer. A sewer that
conveys sanitary sewage or industrial
wastes, or a combination of the two
(2), and into which storm, surface, and
ground waters or unpolluted industrial
wastes are not admitted.
22. Service Charge. The charge
levied on all users of the sewage
system.
23. Service Tap. A connection of
side sewer to public sewer.
24. Sewage Treatment Plant.
Wastewater treatment plant.
25. Sewage. Wastewater.
26. Sewer. A pipe or conduit for
conveying wastewater or any other
waste liquids.
27. Sewerage System. The facilities
for the collection, transportation,
pumping, treatment and final
disposition of sewage, or any and all
such facilities.
28. Side Sewer. The extension from
the building drain to the public sewer
and shall mean house service line.
29. Standard Methods. The
examination and analytical procedures
set forth in the most recent edition of
"Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water, Sewage, and
Industrial Wastes," published jointly
by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water
Works Association, and the Federation
of Sewage and Industrial Wastes
Association.
30. Standard Sewage. Sewage and
acceptable wastes that are within
specifications regarding PH, BOD,
dissolved oxygen, suspended solids,
and grease.
31. Storm Sewer or Storm Drain. A
pipe or conduit which carries ground
water drainage, storm surface waters,
and unpolluted cooling or process
waters, but excludes sewage and
polluted industrial wastes.
32. Suspended Solids (SS). Solids
that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or
industrial waste, and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration
device. Quantitative determination of
suspended solids shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth
in "Standard Methods."
33. Unpolluted Water. Any water or
liquid containing none of the
following: Free or emulsified grease
or oil; acids or alkalis, substances that
may impart taste and odor or color
characteristics; toxic or poisonous
substances in suspension, colloidal
state or solution; odorous or otherwise
obnoxious gases. It shall contain not
more than thirty (30) mg/1 each of
suspended solids or biochemical
oxygen demand. Analytical
determination shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth
in "Standard Methods."
34. Wastewater. The water carried
human, animal or household wastes in
a public or private sewer, and may
include industrial wastes.
35. Wastewater Treatment Plant. An
assemblage of devices, structures, and
equipment for treating domestic,
commercial, and industrial waste.
36. Wastewater Treatment System
(also termed sewerage system). All
facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of domestic,
commercial, and industrial waste, and
includes sewers as well as the
wastewater treatment plant.
37. Watercourse. A channel in which
a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. Any other terms used herein shall have
their usual and customary meaning.
(Ord. 2015-17, 12/07/2015)
§ 3-3 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-6
Sec. 3-3. Premises to Connect to
Public Sewer; Penalty.
A. The Public Works Director is hereby
empowered in all cases where there is
a public sewer in any street, or
easement in the City to compel every
owner of land, buildings, or premises
used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or used for
other purposes requiring sanitary
facilities and abutting on such street,
or easement or within three hundred
feet (300’) of the same, to construct or
cause to be constructed a sufficient
side sewer in the manner herein
prescribed which shall connect said
land, building or premises, and all
water closets and pipes therein or
thereon used as a receptacle or
conductor of sewage with such nearest
accessible public sewer within ninety
(90) days after date of official notice,
unless in the opinion of the Public
Works Director such connection is
impracticable by reason of the
topography of the ground.
B. Any owner of premises who shall fail
or neglect to connect said land,
building or premises to such nearest
accessible public sewer within ninety
(90) days after date or official notice,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as provided for in this
Chapter. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 3-4. Sanitary Facilities
Required.
A. Every person owning any land or
premises used in the manner and
situated within the limits prescribed in
this Chapter, in all cases where there
is a public sewer in any street,
highway, alley or easement, shall
make sufficient house drain and side
sewer from such person’s house, lot or
premises connected with such sewer;
and the City shall have power in all
cases where there is a public sewer as
aforesaid to cause said person to
install suitable sanitary facilities in
said house, lot or premises and to
cause such connections to be made,
and shall give such person’s agents or
tenants notice in writing, specifying
the time when such drain and facilities
must be completed; provided, such
time shall not exceed ninety (90) days.
B. A separate and independent side sewer
shall be provided for every building,
residence or property, except as
approved by the Council.
Ref. Idaho Code § 50-1326
Sec. 3-5. Sewers Property of the
City.
All sewers located in any street alley
or easement in the City shall belong to the
City. All connections with the City sewer
system in any street or alley or easement
shall belong to the City and no private
sewer, except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter shall be deemed valid and binding
upon the City or any of its inhabitants. It is
the intent and purpose of the Chapter to
abolish all private sewer connections with
the City sewer system except as herein
provided and the City shall own all sewer
connections made by private persons along
any street or alley and the City shall own,
control and operate all sewers laid or
placed along any street or alley within the
corporate limits. Side sewers as defined
herein shall not be owned or maintained by
the City.
Ref. Idaho Code §§ 39-3609; 39-118
Sec. 3-6. Extension of Public
Sewers.
A. Extension including the construction
of new sewage systems, sewage
treatment plants or systems, other
waste treatment or disposal facilities,
or for modification or expansion to
existing sewage treatment plants or
systems, waste treatment or disposal
§ 3-6 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-10
facilities, to the public sewer system
by a sewer user at such user’s own
expense shall have prior approval and
shall be in accordance with the
standards and designs of the City.
Plans, specifications, and any other
pertinent information relating to the
proposed extension shall be submitted
to the City Engineer for approval.
B. The City shall secure all necessary
state and federal approvals prior to
approving the submittal under this
Section. No construction of the
proposed facilities shall commence
until such approvals are obtained in
writing.
Sec. 3-7. Construction
Specifications for Sewers.
Specifications for the construction of
sewers shall be enforced by the City. The
City Engineer is hereby empowered to
prepare and put into effect "Regulations
Governing Sewer Construction in the City,"
herein referred to as "regulations." Copies
of the regulations may be obtained from the
office of the Clerk or City Engineer. The
regulations shall contain specifications
relative to materials, construction,
procedure, inspection, testing, backfilling
and responsibilities in sewer installations.
Specific installations not fully covered by
the regulations shall be ruled upon by the
City at the time of occurrence. The
regulations, revisions thereof and additions
thereto shall be issued by the Council.
Sec. 3-8. As-Built Plans Required.
No deviation shall be made from the
approved plans and specifications without
the prior approval of the City Engineer.
Within thirty (30) days of the completion
of construction of the extension to the
public sewer system, complete and accurate
plans and specifications depicting the
actual construction, alteration, or
modification performed must be submitted
to the City Engineer together with such
other pertinent information as may be
required.
Sec. 3-9. Sewer Extensions Property
of City.
The extension to the sewer system by
the user, when accepted, shall thereafter
constitute a part of the sewer system of the
City. All rights, title and interest in and to
such extensions shall be held by the City
and be used, operated, maintained and
managed by the City as part of its sewer
system.
Sec. 3-10. Side Sewer Construction
and Repair; Permit
Required.
A. The owner of premises shall be
responsible for all construction and
maintenance expense related to
installing and maintaining side sewers
and private sewers located on said
premises. When any side sewer or
private sewer connected with any
public sewer or drain becomes
obstructed, broken or out of order, the
City shall, if the owner of such
premises, fails to repair the same after
two (2) day's notice so to do, cause
such drain to be removed and
reconstructed, repaired, altered or
cleansed, as he may deem expedient,
at the expense of the owner, agent or
occupant of such premises as
aforesaid. Tree roots which travel
through the side sewer and into the
public sewer in such a manner as to
cause hindrance or blockage in the
public sewer shall, at the owner's
expense, be repaired to prevent roots
from entering the side sewer. City
shall repair at owner's expense after
thirty (30) days notice. Reasonable
cost of repair shall be filed as a lien
against owner's property upon owner's
failure to reimburse the City for the
cost of repair.
B. No person shall relay, repair any side
sewer connecting with any of the
public sewers, nor shall any opening
be made into the same until the person
making the same shall obtain a side
sewer permit.
(Ord. 99-25, 7/19/99)
§ 3-11 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-11
Sec. 3-11. Permit Required to Work
on Sewers.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof,
without first obtaining a written permit
from the City , and no construction of
a side sewer shall be commenced
without first obtaining such permit. An
application for a side sewer permit
shall state the location of the sewer,
the number of the lot and block, and
the number of the building to be
connected, and the type of occupancy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to
extend any private sewer or side sewer
beyond the limits of the building or
property for which a permit has been
given without obtaining an additional
permit for the desired extension.
C. Whenever any side sewer or other
connection is made with any public
sewer or private sewer, or any part of
such side sewer or other connection is
constructed, the said work shall be
inspected by the City.
D. There shall be two (2) classes of side
sewer permits:
1. For single dwelling units; and,
2. All units other than single
dwelling units, including multiple
dwelling units, commercial
establishments and industrial
establishments.
E. The owner or owner’s agent shall
make application for a side sewer
permit on a form furnished by the
City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment
of the City Engineer.
F. Whenever a person desires to
construct a side sewer intended to be
connected with or discharged into any
sewer, he shall, before beginning work
upon the same, file with the City the
plan thereof, which shall show the
whole course of the side sewer from
the connection with the sewer to its
terminus at the house or premises with
the location of all branches and
fixtures to be connected therewith.
Said plans, or a copy thereof, shall be
left on file in the office of the City
Engineer.
G. If, upon investigation of said plan, the
City shall find that the same does not
conform to the requirements of this
Chapter, the City shall not issue any
permit for its construction or
connection with any public sewer and
it shall be unlawful to construct said
sewer or to connect the same either
directly or indirectly with any public
sewer. Suitability or adequacy of
structures or means of metering,
measuring, sampling or otherwise
determining the nature, quantity or
quality of sewage shall be determined
and inspected by the City.
H. A side sewer permit shall be valid only
for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days from the date of issuance and, if
such side sewer construction is not
completed and inspected within that
time, the permit shall be automatically
rendered null and void and an
additional permit shall be obtained
prior to continuing or beginning
construction. The existence of a side
sewer permit shall in no way be
construed as making permissible any
work for which an excavation permit
may be required by the provisions of
this Code. All costs and expense
incident to the installation and
connections of a side sewer shall be
borne by the owner.
I. The owner performing the said
installation and connection shall
indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of
the side sewer.
§ 3-11 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-14
J. Existing side sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination
and test by the City to meet all
requirements of this Chapter.
Sec. 3-12. Sewer Taps.
A sewer tap fee shall be required for
all sewer connections into existing public
sewer lines. The applicant shall excavate
the sewer line intended for tapping in such
a manner as to provide a safe and adequate
access as determined by the City Engineer.
City personnel will make the tap on the
sewer line. The applicant shall be
responsible for completion of the side
sewer in accordance with the permit and
the provisions of this Chapter.
Sec. 3-13. Permit Fees.
A. Before any permit is issued for the
installation or alteration of plumbing
or sewers, or before any sewer
connection permit is issued, the person
making the application therefor shall
pay to the City, a fee set from time to
time by resolution of the Council or
occasioned by the following necessary
functions:
1. Excavation Permit: Required for
excavations in any street, alley or
public place.
2. Sewer Tapping Fee: Required for
connection directly to an existing
public sewer line.
3. Sewer System Fee: Required for
all new sewer users and users whose
expansion or change in use places
additional demand for capacity on the
sewer system. The user shall be given
credit for existing use in determining
the amount of the sewer system fee.
4. Side Sewer Inspections: Required
for each building with a side sewer.
5. Construction Inspection for
public sewer pipe inspection (new or
repair).
B. Every permit issued by the City
under the provisions of this Code shall
expire by limitation and become null
and void, if the work authorized by
such permit is not commenced within
sixty (60) days from date of such
permit, or if the work authorized by
such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work
is commenced for a period of one
hundred twenty (120) days. Before
such work can be recommended a new
permit shall be first obtained to do so,
and the fee therefor shall be one-half
(1/2) of the amount required for a new
permit for such work, provided no
changes have been made, or will be
made, in the original plans and
specifications for such work; and
provided, further that such suspension
or abandonment has not exceeded one
year.
(Ord. 85-04, 5/6/85; 86-25, 7/21/86)
Sec. 3-14. Right to Revoke
Permissions.
A. All permits or permissions given under
this Chapter shall be subject to the
condition that the City may at any time
revoke and annul the same for just and
proper cause and the permittee or
permittee’s successors in interest, shall
have no right to claim any damage in
consequence of such permit or
permission being revoked or annulled.
Said just cause shall exist when the
permittee violates any law, ordinance,
resolution, or other order regulating
sewers in the City or violates the terms
of the permit or permission granted by
the City.
B. The issuance or granting of a permit or
approval of plans shall not prevent the
City from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in said plans and
specifications or from preventing
construction operations being carried
on thereunder when in violation of this
Chapter or of any other ordinance or
from revoking any certificate of
approval when issued in error.
§ 3-15 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-21
Sec. 3-15. Excavation Permit
Required.
No permit shall be granted to do side
sewer work in any street, alley or public
place until the applicant has first obtained
the permit for excavation as required by the
provisions of this Chapter.
Sec. 3-16. Construction
Specifications for Side
Sewers.
A. Specifications for the construction of
side sewers shall be enforced by the
City. The City Engineer is hereby
empowered to prepare and to put into
effect "Regulations Governing Side
Sewer Construction," in the City,
herein referred to as "regulations."
Copies of the regulations may be
obtained in the office of the Clerk or
City Engineer.
B. The regulations shall contain
specifications relative to materials,
construction, procedure, inspection,
backfilling and responsibilities in side
and private sewer installations.
C. Specific installations not fully covered
by the regulations shall be ruled upon
by the City Engineer at the time of
occurrence. The regulations, revisions
thereto and additions thereof shall be
issued by the City Engineer.
Sec. 3-17. Construction
Specifications for Private
Sewers.
A. Specifications for construction of
private sewers shall be by the City
Engineer. Specifications for private
sewers shall be those for side sewers,
except as modified or deemed
necessary by the City Engineer.
B. Private sewers shall be constructed
only as permitted specifically by the
Council. Each branch of a private
sewer serving a single residence,
building or property shall be
considered a side sewer and shall
require a side sewer permit. Only the
part carrying the sewage of two (2) or
more side sewers shall be considered a
private sewer.
C. A tapping permit shall be required for
all private sewers.
Sec. 3-18. Notice of Inspections.
Notice in writing must be given the
City Engineer at his or her office by any
person desiring to make connection with
any public sewer or drain at least five (5)
hours previous to the time of making such
connection, stating when such work will be
ready for inspection, and the City or its
agent, shall inspect the same. The
connection must be made in the manner
prescribed in this Chapter and to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer before the
trench is filled. When any person desires to
lay or drive any pipe in any alley or
easement in which a public, private or side
sewer is laid, notice shall be given at least
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the City
Engineer.
Sec. 3-19. Sewage to be Discharged
into Wastewater
Treatment System.
All sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
or other polluted waters shall be discharged
into the Wastewater Treatment System. It
shall be unlawful for any person to dispose
otherwise of said sewage, wastes and
polluted waters except as otherwise
authorized by the City.
Sec. 3-20. Unpolluted Water Not
Permitted in Sanitary
Sewer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge or cause to be discharged any
storm water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, cooling water or
unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer.
Sec. 3-21. Unpolluted Water
Discharged to Storm
Drain.
Storm water shall be discharged to
such sewers as specifically designated as
storm drains, or to a natural outlet approved
§ 3-21 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-23
by the City Engineer. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process water may be
discharged upon approval of the City
Engineer to a storm drain, or natural outlet.
Sec. 3-22. Types of Wastes
Prohibited from Public
Sewers.
Except as hereinafter provided, no
person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described
waters or wastes to any public sewer:
A. Any water or waste which may contain
more than one hundred (100) parts per
million by weight of animal or
vegetable fat, oil or grease.
B. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable liquid, solid or
gas, or other petroleum products and
derivatives.
C. Any garbage that has not been
properly shredded.
D. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or
other solid or viscous substance
capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interferences
with the proper operations of the
sewage system.
E. Any waters or wastes having pH lower
than five and five-tenths (5.5) or
higher than nine (9.0) or having any
other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to sewer
structures, equipment, personnel of the
sewage system, or to be adversely
active on sewer treatment processes.
F. Any waters or wastes containing a
toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or
interfere with sewage treatment
processes constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant.
G. Any waters or wastes containing
suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or
expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment
plant.
H. Any noxious or malodorous solids,
liquids, or gases which either singly,
or by interaction with other
substances, are capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life or
preventing entry into sewers for their
maintenance or repair.
Sec. 3-23. Discharge of Certain
Waters, Wastes, etc.,
Possessing Characteristics
Likely to Cause Harm.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into a sewer any of the
following described substances,
materials, waters or wastes if it
appears likely in the opinion of the
Public Works Director or technical
expertise at his or her disposal that
such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or
equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, or can otherwise
endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance.
B. In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes the
Public Works Director will give
consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the
sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree to treatability
of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and other pertinent factors. The
substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a
temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) sixtyfive
degrees Centigrade (65°C).
2. Septic tank effluent.
3. Any water or waste containing
fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, containing
substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures
§ 3-23 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-24
between thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit
(32°F) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) zero and sixty-five
degrees Centigrade (O and 65°C).
4. Any waters or wastes containing
strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether
neutralized or not.
5. Any ground or unground fruit
peelings and cores from canneries and
packing plants. Cull fruits vegetables.
Fruit and vegetable pits and seeds.
6. Any waters or wastes containing
phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Public
Works Director or expertise at his or
her disposal as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to
meet the requirements of the state,
federal, or other public agencies or
jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or
isotopes of such halt life or
concentration as may exceed limits
established by the Public Works
Director or expertise at his or her
disposal in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations.
8. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of
inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fullers earth, lime
slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not
limited to sodium sulfate).
b. Excessive discoloration
(such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
c. Unusual five (5) day BOD
(biochemical oxygen demand), or
chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works.
d. Unusual volume of flow or
concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
e. Waters or wastes containing
substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage
treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such
degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 3-24. Action Upon Discharge
Having Deleterious Effect.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged,
or are proposed to be discharged into
the sewers which in the judgment of
the Public Works Director may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the City shall:
1. Reject the wastes; and/or
2. Require pretreatment to an
acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers; and/or
3. Require control over the
quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
4. Require additional payment to
cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions.
B. If the Public Works Director permits
the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Council.
Where preliminary treatment facilities
are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at his or her expense.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
§ 3-25 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-25
Sec. 3-25. Admission and Control of
Industrial Wastes into
Public Sewers.
A. Applicability: This Section shall
apply to industrial wastes as
previously defined, and further to
wastes from industries which exhibit
strengths or characteristics of BOD in
excess of or equal to two hundred
forty (240) milligrams per liter (mg/l)
or suspended solids in excess of or
equal to two hundred forty (240)
milligrams per liter (mg/l) based upon
a composite sample of the wastes.
B. Review and Acceptance of Wastes:
Review and acceptance of the City
shall be obtained prior to the discharge
into the public sewers of any waste
having a BOD greater than two
hundred forty (240) milligrams per
liter (mg/l) or a suspended solids
content greater than two hundred forty
(240) milligrams per liter (mg/l).
C. Preliminary Treatment or Processing
Facilities Generally: When required,
in the opinion of the Public Works
Director to modify or eliminate wastes
that are harmful to the structures,
processes, or operation of the sewage
treatment works, the person shall
provide at his or her expense such
preliminary treatment or processing
facilities as may be determined
necessary to render such wastes
acceptable for admission to the public
sewers.
D. Canning, Freezing or Food Packing
Operations: Any industry discharging
wastes from a canning, freezing, or
food packing operation shall provide
pretreatment to include but not limited
to vibrating or rotary screens to
remove any particle larger than twenty
(20) mesh.
E. Volume of Flow Used for Computing
Industrial Waste Charges: The
volume of flow used for computing
industrial waste charges shall be the
metered water consumption of the
person as shown in the records of
meter readings maintained by the City.
If the person discharging industrial
wastes into the public sewers procures
any part, or all, of his or her water
from sources other than the City Water
Department, all or a part of which is
discharged into the public sewers, the
person shall install and maintain at his
or her expense water meters of a type
approved by the City for the purposes
of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
F. Authority of City to Request
Negotiations Where Wastes Show
Character or Concentration in Excess
of Acceptable Limits: If, in the
opinion of the Public Works Director,
tests taken of industrial wastes show
the character or concentration of these
wastes to be in excess of those limits
established, the City shall have the
authority to request negotiations with
representatives of such industry
concerned to arrive at any special
agreement concerning pretreatment
and/or payment of any surcharge or
additional service charges necessary
for additional City facilities.
G. 1. Observation Manholes Required:
When required by the City, the owner
of any property serviced by side sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall, after
notice, install a suitable manhole in
the side sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measuring
the wastes. Such manhole, when
necessary, shall be accessibly and
safely located and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by
the City Engineer. The manhole shall
be installed by the owner at his or her
expense and shall be maintained by
the owner so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
2. In lieu of requiring the
construction of an observation
manhole, the City may direct that each
person discharging industrial wastes
into public sewer shall obtain
sufficient composite samples on which
§ 3-25 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-27
to base and compute such person's
industrial waste service charge.
H. Industrial User Determination: The
City may determine, by at least three
(3) composite waste samplings during
a year, if a waste discharged to a
public sewer, based on either BOD or
suspended solids, exceeds two
hundred forty (240) milligrams per
liter (mg/l) organic load or the average
flow exceeds ten percent (10%) of the
sewage treatment plant's design
capacity. If three (3) consecutive
measurements by the City indicate that
the two hundred forty (240)
milligrams per liter (mg/l) organic
load or the (0.25) mg per day flow rate
is being exceeded, then the waste shall
be classified as industrial waste.
Commercial users may have the option
of using the commercial or industrial
rates established herein.
I. Industrial Waste: The waste samples
shall be collected in tests performed
by the City. Laboratory procedures
used in the examination of industrial
wastes shall be those set forth in
"Standard Methods." However, the
Public Works Director shall approve
alternate methods for certain analysis
of industrial wastes if he or she is
reasonably satisfied as to the accuracy
of such alternate methods.
J. Basis for Determining Industrial
Waste Charges: The total yearly
treatment plant operation,
maintenance, and debt service costs
chargeable to each user shall be
computed on the basis of the industrial
waste load discharged to the
wastewater treatment system. The
industrial waste charge shall be
computed using the metered water
flow to the premises as basis for waste
flow and the laboratory analysis of
samples procured as directed by the
Public Works Director as a basis for
computing BOD and suspended solids
content of the waste. Metered water
flow shall include all water delivered
to or used on the premises. Water not
discharged to a public sewer may be
separately metered at the person's
expense to allow deduction of such
flow from the total water used on the
premises in computing the industrial
waste sewer service charge.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 3-26. Principles for Computing
Industrial Waste Service
Charge.
Industrial waste service charges shall
be based upon flow, BOD, SS, and these
rate factors are considered separately as
they apply to the cost of wastewater
treatment system construction and plant
operation .
Sec. 3-27. Powers and Authority of
Inspectors.
A. Right of Entry Generally: The City
and all duly authorized agents of the
City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
The City shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper, or other industries
beyond those which have a reasonably
direct bearing on the kind and source
of discharge to the sewers or
waterways to facilities for waste
treatment.
B. Observance of Safety Rules: While
performing the necessary work on
private properties referred to above,
the City and all duly authorized agents
of the City shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises
established by the owner and the
owner shall be held harmless for
injury or property damage asserted
against the owner and growing out of
the gauging and sampling operation
except as such may be caused by
§ 3-27 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-31
negligence or failure of the owner to
maintain safe conditions.
C. Right of Entry on Private Properties
Through Which City Holds Easement:
The City and other duly authorized
agents of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City
holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of
any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said
easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
Sec. 3-28. Authority of City to Waive
Certain Requirements.
The City may waive certain
requirements in these rules and regulations
when special conditions indicate that the
purpose of these requirements and
regulations can be achieved without strict
adherence to all of the provisions and
requirements. Variances shall be
determined and approved for the specified
time limits by the Public Works Director
with technical expertise he or she considers
necessary.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 3-29. Sewer Rates.
The schedule of rates, fees, tools and
charges for the sanitary sewer facilities and
services furnished by or through, or for the
use of, the City sewer system, which rates,
fees, tolls, and charges shall be from time
to time set forth by resolution of the
Council and approved by the Mayor and
thereby found and declared to be
reasonable and just, taking in account and
consideration the cost value of the system
and the cost of maintaining and operating
the system, and the proper and necessary
allowances for the depreciation thereof and
the amounts necessary for the retirement of
all bonds and other securities payable from
the revenues of the system, accruing
interest on all such bonds, and reserves
therefor, be and the same are thereby fixed,
established, levied, imposed and otherwise
prescribed.
Sec. 3-30. When Due and Payable;
Billing Periods; Fines for
Overdue Accounts;
Delinquent Accounts;
Fines for Delinquent
Accounts.
Whenever a resolution setting forth
the sewer rates is adopted by the Council
and approved by the Mayor, such
resolution shall include the period of time
for which billings are to be assessed, the
due date for payment of billings, the
amount of fines to be assessed on accounts
not paid when due, the time at which
overdue accounts shall be deemed
delinquent, the amount of fines to be
assessed on delinquent accounts, provision
for discontinuing water service to
properties on which accounts are
delinquent, and any other such policy,
rules, or regulations relating to the
procedure for billing accounts and
collection.
Sec. 3-31. Interceptors.
A. The Public Works Director or
designee shall have the authority to
require the installation of grease, oil,
and/or sand interceptors for the proper
handling of wastewater containing
grease, oil, sand, or other substances
prohibited by this Chapter. All
interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the City and
shall be located so as to be easily
accessible for maintenance, cleaning,
and inspection.
B. The Public Works Director or
designee shall have the authority to
establish Best Management Practices
(BMPs) in order to carry out any
provision(s) of this Chapter, and such
BMPs shall be fully enforceable under
this Code.
§ 3-31 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 3-36
C. Where installed, all grease, oil and
sand interceptors shall be maintained
by the owner or occupant, at the
owner’s or occupant’s expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all
times in accordance with established
BMPs.
D. Failure to maintain any interceptor in
continuously efficient operation in
accordance with established BMPs
subjects the owner or occupant to
enforcement as provided for in this
Chapter.
E. The introduction of chemical,
biological, enzymatic, or any other
additive into an interceptor, directly or
indirectly, that may cause interference
with the normal operation of the unit
or causes pass-through of prohibited
substances is prohibited.
(Ord. 2015-17, 12/07/2015)
Sec. 3-32. Permits.
No permit shall be issued for the
construction of any building or structure in
the City unless the plans and specifications
show connections in compliance with this
Chapter.
Sec. 3-33. Violations; Penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use
any building or structure in violation
of this Chapter. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this Chapter,
in addition to the penalties provided
herein, shall be subject to all remedies
available to the City under State and
Federal law, including recovery of
costs to the City resulting from such
violation.
B. Any person violating any provision of
this Chapter shall be subject to the
following:
It is an infraction punishable by a
fine of one hundred dollars ($100)
plus court costs for any person to
violate provisions of this Chapter for
the first time. A second violation
within five (5) years is an infraction
punishable by a fine of three hundred
dollars ($300) plus court costs. A
third violation within five (5) years
shall be a misdemeanor as defined by
the Idaho Code and shall subject such
person up to the maximum
misdemeanor penalties as provided in
the Idaho Code.
Each separate day during which
any violation of this Chapter occurs or
continues shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable
as stated herein. (Ords. 859, 1/12/48; 894,
6/22/50; 992, 4/23/58; 1326, 6/6/77; 82-1492,
6/7/82; 85-04, 5/6/85; 86-25, 7/21/86; 2015-
17, 12/07/2015)
Sec. 3-34. Rules and Regulations.
The Public Works Director is hereby
authorized to adopt rules and regulations to
carry out and enforce the provisions of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 3-35. Invalidation Clause.
If any section, paragraph, clause or
provision of this Chapter shall be held to be
invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall
not affect the validity or enforceability of
the remaining provisions thereof.
Sec. 3-36. Liability for Injury or
Damage.
Nothing contained in this Chapter is
intended to be nor shall it be construed to
create or form the basis for any liability on
the part of the City, or its officers,
employees or agents, for any injury or
damage resulting from the failure of a side
sewer to conform to the provisions of this
Chapter, or by reason or in consequence of
any inspection, notice, order, certificate,
permission or approval authorized, issued
or done, or failure to act in connection with
the implementation or enforcement of this
Chapter, or by reason of any action or
inaction on the part of the City related in
any manner to the enforcement of this
Chapter by its officers, employees or
agents.
(Ord. 2015-17, 12/07/2015)
§ 4-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 4-3
Chapter 4
WATER REGULATIONS
Sec. 4-1: Premises to Connect to
Water Line
Sec. 4-2: Water Distributed Through
Meters
Sec. 4-3: Meters Requirement and
Installation Charge
Sec. 4-4: Charges Against Property
Owner
Sec. 4-5: Damage to Meters, Liability
Sec. 4-6: Requirements After Repairs
for Turning on Water
Sec. 4-7: Maintenance and Repair
of Meters
Sec. 4-8: Unlawful to Waste Water
Sec. 4-9: Inspection and Right of
Entry
Sec. 4-10: Water Rates
Sec. 4-11: Water Service Outside
City Limits
Sec. 4-12: Water Billing Regulations
Sec. 4-13: Meter Reread on
Disputed Charges
Sec. 4-14: Refunds
Sec. 4-15: Deposits
Sec. 4-16: Return of Deposits
Sec. 4-17: Regulation
Sec. 4-18: Water System Property of
City
Sec. 4-19: Service Connections
Sec. 4-20: Temporary Connections
Sec. 4-21: Water Line Extension
Sec. 4-22: Water Line Extension
Plans and Approval
Sec. 4-23: Water Line Extension
Specifications
Sec. 4-24: Connection Revocation
Sec. 4-25: Rules and Regulations
Sec. 4-1. Premises to Connect to
Water Line.
The City is hereby empowered, and it
is hereby made its duty in all cases where
there is a public water line in any street, or
easement in the City to compel every
owner of land, buildings or premises used
for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or used for other purposes
requiring potable water and abutting on
such street or easement or within three
hundred feet (300’) of the same, to
construct or cause to be constructed a
sufficient water service line which shall
connect said land, building or premises to
said water line within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice, unless in the opinion
of the City such connection is not desirable.
Every owner of premises shall connect
said land, building or premises to such
nearest accessible water line within ninety
(90) days after date of official notice.
Sec. 4-2. Water Distributed
Through Meters.
All property owners upon whose
premises water is consumed by the owners,
by tenants or otherwise, must have a water
meter to be furnished by the City at the
expense of the property owner, installed in,
at and upon the respective premises, and all
City water used therein or upon said
premises shall pass through and be
measured by said water meter. In the event
that any property owner shall refuse to
allow such meter to be installed or refused
to pay for the same, or refuse to pay for the
metered water used, it shall be the duty of
the City to forthwith discontinue the water
from the premises of such property owner
or the property.
Sec. 4-3. Meters Requirement and
Installation Charge.
Each residence and business
establishment to which water is supplied by
the City, whether inside or outside of the
City, must have a separate meter
connection directly to the main, excepting
however, those portions of buildings used
principally for offices or apartments where
the property owner furnishes the water
supplied to the tenants.
Before a meter is installed, the
property owner shall pay to the City the
cost of said meter together with the cost of
installation thereof as determined by the
City.
§ 4-4 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 4-9
Sec. 4-4. Charges Against Property
Owner.
When a meter has been installed,
water will not thereafter be supplied to the
premises of such property or property
owner, except upon metered water rates.
All water charges shall be the ultimate
responsibility of the property owner;
provided, however, that a non-property
owner or tenant may pay said water
charges.
In the event a tenant or other
non-property owner is to pay water charges
on behalf of the property owner, the name
and address of the tenant or non-property
owner shall be submitted to the City.
Sec. 4-5. Damage to Meters,
Liability.
When any water meter or meter box
has been damaged by reason of the
negligence of the user of City water or a
third party, or by reason of the defective
condition of the plumbing on the premises
of the water user, or by reason of the
backing up of hot water from premises of
the water user, then such water user shall
pay for the replacement or repair of said
meter in an amount to be determined by the
City.
Sec. 4-6. Requirements After
Repairs for Turning on
Water.
Whenever the City is called upon to
repair or replace a meter which has been
damaged as set forth in Code Section 5-4-5,
it may, at its discretion, refuse to repair or
replace said meter, and disconnect the
water service line to said premises, and
refuse to connect same until a check valve
is installed between the water meter and the
premises on which water is used, in order
to prevent the water from backing up from
said premises, and it may also require that a
safety valve or "pop off" be placed in
service to relieve pressure on the hot water
tank or other plumbing fixtures located
upon said premises. Whenever the City
finds an electrical hazard, especially those
caused by faulty electrical equipment
where a water pipe ground exists, work will
stop and the electrical inspector notified.
Work will resume after the problem is
corrected or all power on the property is
turned off. Within thirty (30) days the
cause of the problem must be determined
and permanently corrected.
Sec. 4-7. Maintenance and Repair of
Meters.
The City will repair or replace all
defective meters without cost to the
property owner, except in those instances
where the meter has been damaged by
reason of the negligence of the water user,
or by reason of the defective condition of
the plumbing on the premises of the water
user, or by reason of the backing up of hot
water from the premises of the water user.
Sec. 4-8. Unlawful to Waste Water.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
waste water or allow it to be wasted by
imperfect or leaking stops, valves, pipes,
closets, faucets or other fixtures, or to use
water closets without self-closing valves, or
to use water in violation of the Chapter
regulating said use of water.
If such waste of water continues after
receiving notice from the City to make
repairs and to desist from the waste of
water, the City shall shut off the water
supply from such premises until the
necessary repairs have been made.
Sec. 4-9. Inspection and Right of
Entry.
The City and the duly authorized
agents of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be
permitted at proper and reasonable hours of
the day to enter all properties, premises or
buildings to which water is furnished from
the City water system for testing or
inspection or repair of any part of the
public water system and sewer collection
system. Also, the City and the duly
authorized agents of the City bearing
§ 4-9 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 4-14
proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the City holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purpose of, but
not limited to, inspection, observation,
repair and maintenance of any portion of
the City water system and sewer collection
system lying within said easement.
(Ord. 99-25, 7/19/99)
Sec. 4-10. Water Rates.
The Council shall establish water rates
which shall be effective from and after
approval by resolution adopted by the
Council. Said water rates shall include
rates for:
A. Installation costs of meters.
B. Minimum service charge for
maintenance of water system.
C. Water rate charge for water furnished
within boundaries of the City.
D. Water rate charge for water furnished
outside boundaries of the City.
E. Water rate charge for Moscow
Cemetery Maintenance District.
F. Water rate charge for the University of
Idaho water system.
G. Connection fee.
H. Late water charges.
All water charges shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property
which receives the water. The City is
authorized to receive payment from either
the property owner or tenant or agent of the
property owner on his behalf.
Sec. 4-11. Water Service Outside
City Limits.
In the event of need and/or at the
discretion of the Council, any service
outside the City limits may be terminated at
any time by order of the Council. The
fixing of water rates for water service
outside the City is not to be read as
imposing a duty upon the City to make
such water service.
Sec. 4-12. Water Billing Regulations.
The City shall establish by rule and
regulation a system of billing, collection
and enforcement of all water charges. Said
system shall be effective after approval by
the Council and shall include:
A. Reading meters and establishing water
charges.
B. Notice of any delinquency to be made
to both property owner, agent and
tenant if applicable prior to shut off of
water for nonpayment of water
charges.
C. Provisions limiting the liability of
nonresident property owners for
delinquent tenant water charges to a
maximum of three (3) times the
previous year's monthly average
billing.
D. Discontinuance of water service for
nonpayment of water charges after
notice of delinquency.
E. Penalty for payment after due date.
F. Connection fee for reconnecting water
service.
G. Discontinuance of water for failure to
pay all services provided by the City
after notice of delinquency.
Sec. 4-13. Meter Reread on Disputed
Charges.
Where any questions arise as to the
validity of any amount due for water
consumed during one month, the City is
hereby authorized to have the water meter,
through which the water flows, over which
controversy arises, tested, read and
investigated, and, if such meter is found to
have been over-read or an overcharge made
to the customer, such customer shall be
given credit for the amount of the
overcharge on future charges against the
customer for water consumed.
Sec. 4-14. Refunds.
No officer shall rebate or refund any
money for overcharges on water consumed
until a full investigation by the City has
been made, and report having been filed
with the Mayor and Council, and an order
made by the Council ordering such rebate.
§ 4-15 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 4-22
Sec. 4-15. Deposits.
All applications to have water turned
on shall be made to the City. The City may
require a deposit fee established from time
to time by Resolution of the Council.
Water may be discontinued for failure to
make said deposit.
(Ord. 2009-19, 08/17/2009)
Sec. 4-16. Return of Deposits.
Deposits shall be returned by the City
at the end of tenancy, upon showing to the
City that all arrearages for water rents and
fines, if any, have been paid to the City.
Deposits shall not otherwise be returned
and no interest shall be paid upon return of
the deposit.
Sec. 4-17. Regulation.
The City is authorized to deny use of
water to any and/or to restrict use of water
by any water user when said denial or
restriction is necessary for the public
welfare.
Sec. 4-18. Water System Property of
City.
All mains, service lines up to and
including the meter, pipes, hydrants and
fixtures now laid, constructed or installed,
or hereafter to be laid, constructed or
installed in, under, across or through the
streets, avenues, alleys and other
thoroughfares of the City or easement
rights of way granted to the City or
adjacent territory, for supplying water to
the City and the inhabitants thereof are
hereby declared to be the property of the
City, under the control thereof and subject
to the provisions of this Chapter. No
person or persons will be allowed to claim
the right to exclusive use of any such water
line.
Sec. 4-19. Service Connections.
No property service connections to a
City water line shall be made without a
permit being issued by the City and the
installation of a proper water meter by the
City. All such connections shall be made
under the supervision of the City and no
connections shall be covered until the work
has been inspected by the City. No
property shall be granted a service
connection unless there is an existing water
main which abuts and is contiguous to said
property, and which will provide the
shortest service connection feasible to the
premises on said property.
Further, the City may require
installation of adequate water lines for fire
prior to granting connection to a City water
line.
Sec. 4-20. Temporary Connections.
Temporary connections to the City
water line may be authorized. Said
temporary connection shall not be made to
the water lines unless a permit is granted by
the City.
The City is authorized to regulate the
use of temporary connections to the City
water line by restricting the amount of
water to be taken, time of taking, place of
taking and type of connection to be used.
The City shall charge a reasonable fee for
use of water by temporary connection to
the water line.
Sec. 4-21. Water Line Extension.
The total expense of extending any
existing water mains, laterals or lines
through the streets, avenues, alleys and
other thoroughfares of the City or easement
rights of way granted to the City or
adjacent territory for supplying water to
property within the area to be served by
such extension shall be borne by the
property owners desiring service at the time
of installation. In no instance will property
owners be required to pay the costs or part
thereof of a preceding extension.
Sec. 4-22. Water Line Extension
Plans and Approval.
Plans for the extension of any water
mains, laterals or lines through the streets,
avenues, alleys and other thoroughfares of
the City or easement rights of way granted
to the City or adjacent territory shall be
§ 4-22 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 4-25
submitted to the City for approval. In no
instance shall construction on such water
line extensions begin prior to the approval
of the City. All plans submitted for
approval shall be clearly and neatly drawn
to a scale of not more than one hundred
feet (100’) to one inch (1”) showing the
placement of all valves, meters, hydrants,
other accessories and connections, their
size and type. All lots or parcels of land
affected by the water line extension will be
shown on each plan together with the
names of the property owners.
Sec. 4-23. Water Line Extension
Specifications.
Extensions to any water mains, laterals
or lines through the streets, avenues, alleys
and other thoroughfares of the City or
easement rights of way granted to the City,
or adjacent territory must meet the
minimum specifications and standards as
established by the City.
Sec. 4-24. Connection Revocation.
The City shall revoke any permanent
or temporary connection to a service or a
water line or extension thereof which is
made contrary to plans and specifications
submitted to, and approved by, the City or
which is thereafter altered contrary to plans
and specifications previously submitted to,
and approved by the City.
Sec. 4-25. Rules and Regulations.
The City is authorized to recommend
rules and regulations to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter. Said rules and
regulations shall be effective after approval
by the Council.
§ 5-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 5-4
Chapter 5
RESTRICTIVE USE OF WATER
Sec. 5-1: Emergency Declared
Sec. 5-2: Extent of Water Usage
Sec. 5-3: Allowed Uses
Sec. 5-4: Notice
Sec. 5-1. Emergency Declared.
Due to reduced gallonage on hand in
the water system of the City, an emergency
exists and is hereby declared, and all
property owners, tenants or other persons
in charge of premises where water is
consumed by sprinkling of lawns, gardens
and exterior premises from the water
system of the City may be prohibited from
such water consumption or may be
restricted in the use of such water
consumption except during the hours to be
defined by Resolution of the Council and
published by Proclamation of the Mayor.
Sec. 5-2. Extent of Water Usage.
The Mayor and Council are hereby
authorized to declare an emergency and
may by proclamation totally prohibit the
use of City water for the sprinkling of
lawns, gardens, and exterior premises, and
any other use of City water designated by
resolution of Council; or the Mayor and
Council are hereby authorized, if a partial
use of City water for the sprinkling of
lawns, gardens, and exterior premises shall
be permitted during such emergency, to
declare such an emergency and publish
such hours of sprinkling pursuant to
Resolution of the Council.
Sec. 5-3. Allowed Uses.
The Mayor and Council are hereby
authorized to change, alter, increase or
decrease by Resolution of the Council the
hours of sprinkling permitted according to
the exigencies of the emergency, with any
change in hours to be published as set forth
hereinabove .
Sec. 5-4. Notice.
The Mayor shall have the authority to
announce the emergency and publish the
prohibition of the use of City water for the
sprinkling of lawns, gardens, and exterior
premises, and any other use of City water
designated by Resolution of Council; or the
Mayor shall have the authority, if a partial
use of City water for the sprinkling of
lawns, gardens, and exterior premises shall
be permitted during such emergency, to
publish the permissive hours of sprinkling
by Proclamation, and shall have authority
to announce termination of the emergency,
and all of the foregoing shall be published
in each instance three (3) times in three (3)
consecutive issues of the City’s official
newspaper.
§ 6-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 6-3
Chapter 6
EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 6-1: Short Title
Sec. 6-2: Definitions
Sec. 6-3: Excavation Permit
Sec. 6-4: Application
Sec. 6-5: Excavation Permit Fees
Sec. 6-6: Security Deposits
Sec. 6-7: Protective Measures and
Routing of Traffic
Sec. 6-8: Clearance for Vital
Structures
Sec. 6-9: Protection of Traffic
Sec. 6-10: Relocation and Protection
of Utilities
Sec. 6-11: Abandonment of
Substructures
Sec. 6-12: Protection of Adjoining
Property
Sec. 6-13: Care of Excavated
Material
Sec. 6-14: Clean-Up
Sec. 6-15: Protection of
Watercourses
Sec. 6-16: Breaking Through
Pavement
Sec. 6-17: Depth of Structures
Sec. 6-18: Backfilling
Sec. 6-19: Restoration of Surface
Sec. 6-20: Trenches
Sec. 6-21: Prompt Completion of
Work
Sec. 6-22: Urgent Work
Sec. 6-23: Emergency Action
Sec. 6-24: Noise, Dust and Debris
Sec. 6-25: Preservation of
Monuments
Sec. 6-26: Inspections
Sec. 6-27: Maintenance of Drawings
Sec. 6-28: Liability of City
Sec. 6-1. Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known and may
be cited as the "Street Excavation
Ordinance of the City of Moscow."
Sec. 6-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the
following terms, phrases, word, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
A. Excavation. Any opening in the
surface of a public place made in any
manner whatsoever, except an opening
into a lawful structure below the
surface of a public place, the top of
which is flush with the adjoining
surface and so constructed as to permit
frequent openings without injury or
damage to the public place.
B. Facility. Pipe, pipeline, tube, main,
service, trap, vent, vault, manhole,
meter, gauge, regulator, valve,
conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line,
anchor, cable, junction box,
transformer or any other material,
structure, or object of any kind or
character, whether numerated herein
or not, which is or may be lawfully
constructed, left, placed or maintained
in, along, across or under any public
place.
C. Public Place. Any public street, way,
place, alley, sidewalk, park, square,
plaza or any other similar public
property owned or controlled by the
City and dedicated to public use.
D. Substructure. Any pipe, conduit, duct,
tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable,
or wire, or any other similar structure
located below the surface of any
public place.
E. Utility. A private company and/or
corporation or municipal department
engaged in providing a particular
service to the general public.
Sec. 6-3. Excavation Permit.
No person shall make any excavation
or fill any excavation in any public place
without first obtaining a permit so to do
from the City except as otherwise provided
in this Chapter. No permit to make an
§ 6-3 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 6-6
excavation or fill an excavation in a public
place shall be issued except as provided in
this Chapter. The City may issue an annual
blanket permit for miscellaneous
excavations approved by the City to the
following:
A. A public utility regulated by the Public
Utilities Commission of the State of
Idaho.
B. A person holding a franchise from the
City.
C. The Water and Street Departments of
the City.
Sec. 6-4. Application.
No excavation permit shall be issued
unless a written application (on a form
provided by the City) for the issuance of an
excavation permit is submitted to the City.
The written application shall state the name
and address and principal place of business
of the applicant, the authority of applicant
to occupy the public place for which the
permit is sought, the location and
dimensions of the installation or removal
and the facility and the approximate time
which will be required to complete such
work, including backfilling said excavation
and removing all obstructions, material and
debris. An extension of time may be
granted by the City for good and sufficient
reasons. The application, when approved
and signed by the City Engineer, shall
constitute a permit.
Sec. 6-5. Excavation Permit Fees.
The Council shall, from time to time,
adopt and amend excavation permit fees by
Resolution.
Sec. 6-6. Security Deposits.
A. Cash Deposits, Bonds and Insurance:
1. Cash Deposit: The application
for an excavation permit to perform
excavation work under this Chapter
shall be accompanied with a cash
deposit made to the City in accordance
with the security deposit rate schedule
duly adopted by Resolution of the
Council.
2. Bonds: The permittee may
deposit with the City a performance
bond in the amount required by the
security deposit rate schedule payable
to the City in lieu of the cash deposit.
The bond shall be: Conditioned that
the permittee will fully perform and
comply with all the conditions,
obligations and acts of this Chapter, to
be performed by the permittee,
including payment to the City for fees
and costs herein provided for. An
annual bond may be given under this
provision which shall remain in force
for one (1) year conditioned as above
but applicable to all excavation work
in public places by the principal in
such bond during the terms of one (1)
year from said date of issuance.
B. Purpose: Any security deposit made
hereunder shall serve as security for
the repair and performance of work
necessary to put the public place in as
good a condition as it was prior to the
excavation if the permittee fails to
make the necessary repairs or to
complete the proper refilling of the
opening and the excavation work
under the excavation permit.
C. Refund of Security Deposits: Upon
the permittee's completion of the work
covered by such permit in conformity
with this Chapter as determined by the
City, such security deposit, shall be
promptly refunded by the City to the
permittee.
D. Use of Deposits: The City may use
any or all of any such security deposit
to pay the cost of any work the City
performs to restore or maintain the
public place as herein provided in the
event the permittee fails to perform
such work, in which event the amount
refunded to the permittee shall be
reduced by the amount thus expended
by the City.
(Ord. 2009-03; 02/02/2009)
§ 6-7 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 6-10
Sec. 6-7. Protective Measures and
Routing of Traffic.
All protective measures and routing of
traffic required under this Chapter shall
conform so far as possible to requirements
in the current edition of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets
and highways (MUTCD), and other
standards issued or endorsed by the federal
highway administrator. (Idaho Code § 49-201)
It shall be the duty of every person
cutting or making an excavation in or upon
any public place, to place and maintain
barriers, warning devices, or flagpersons
necessary for safety of the general public.
Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc.,
shall conform to the requirements of the
City and shall be provided by the permittee.
Warning lights shall be electrical markers
or flashers used to indicate a hazard to
traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of
the next day.
Electrical markers or flashers shall
emit light at sufficient intensity and
frequency to be visible at a reasonable
distance for safety. Reflectors or reflecting
material may be used to supplement, but
not replace, light sources.
The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to assure that during the
performance of the excavation work, traffic
conditions as near normal as possible shall
be maintained at all times so as to minimize
inconvenience to the occupants of the
adjoining property and to the general
public.
When traffic conditions permit, the
City Engineer or designee may by written
approval permit the closing of streets and
alleys to all traffic for a prescribed period
of time, if necessary. Such written
approval may require that the permittee
give notification to various public agencies
and to the general public. In such cases,
such written approval shall not be valid
until such notice is given.
Warning signs shall be placed far
enough in advance of the construction
operation to alert traffic within a public
street and cones or other approved devices
shall be placed to channel traffic, in
accordance with the instructions of the
City.
Sec. 6-8. Clearance for Vital
Structures.
The excavation work shall be
performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire
stations, fire escapes, water gates,
underground vaults, valve housing
structures, and all other vital equipment as
designated by the City.
Sec. 6-9. Protection of Traffic.
The permittee shall maintain safe
crossings for two (2) lanes of vehicle traffic
at all street intersections where possible
and safe crossings for pedestrians at
intervals of not more than three hundred
(300) feet. If any excavation is made
across any public street, alley or sidewalk,
adequate crossings shall be maintained for
vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is
not wide enough to hold the excavation
material without using part of the adjacent
sidewalk, a passageway sufficient for the
safe movement of pedestrians shall be
maintained as determined by the City.
Sec. 6-10. Relocation and
Protection of Utilities.
The permittee shall not interfere with
any existing facility without the written
consent of the City and the owner of the
facility. If it becomes necessary to relocate
an existing facility this shall be done by its
owner. No facility owned by the City shall
be moved to accommodate the permittee
unless the cost of such work be borne by
the permittee. The cost of moving privately
owned facilities shall be similarly borne by
the permittee unless it makes other
arrangements with the person owning the
facility. The permittee shall support and
protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus
which may be in any way affected by the
excavation work, and do everything
necessary to support, sustain and protect
§ 6-10 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 6-13
them under, over, along or across said
work. The permittee shall secure approval
of method of support and protection from
the owner of the facility. In case any of said
pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus
should be damaged, and for this purpose
pipe coating or other encasement or devices
are to be considered as part of a
substructure, the permittee shall promptly
notify the owner thereof. All damaged
facilities shall be repaired by the agency or
person owning them and the expense of
such repairs shall be charged to the
permittee. It is the intent of this paragraph
that permittee shall assume all liability for
damage to facilities and any resulting
damage or injury to anyone because of such
facility damage and such assumption of
liability is a contractual obligation of the
permittee. The only exception will be such
instances where damage is exclusively due
to the negligence of the owning utility. The
City shall not be made a party to any action
because of this paragraph. The permittee
shall inform itself as to the existence and
location of all underground facilities and
protect the same against damage.
Sec. 6-11. Abandonment of
Substructures.
Whenever the use of a substructure is
abandoned, except the abandonment of
service lines designed to serve single
properties, the person owning, using,
controlling, or having an interest therein,
shall within thirty (30) days after such
abandonment file with the City a statement
in writing giving in detail the location of
the substructure so abandoned. If such
abandoned substructure is in the way, or
subsequently becomes in the way, of an
installation of the City or any other public
body, which installation is pursuant to a
governmental function, the owner shall
remove such abandoned substructure or pay
the cost of its removal during the course of
excavation for construction of the facility
by the City or any other public body.
Sec. 6-12. Protection of Adjoining
Property.
The permittee shall at all times and at
his or its own expense preserve and protect
from injury any adjoining property by
providing proper foundations and taking
other measures suitable for the purpose.
Where in the protection of such property it
is necessary to enter upon private property
for the purpose of taking appropriate
protection measures, the permittee shall
obtain a license from the owner of such
private property for such purpose and if he
cannot obtain a license from said owner,
the City may authorize him to enter the
private premises solely for the purpose of
making the property safe. The permittee
shall, at its own expense shore up and
protect all buildings, walls, fences or other
property likely to be damaged during the
progress of the excavation work and shall
be responsible for all damage to public or
private property or highways resulting from
its failure properly to protect and carry out
said work. Whenever it may be necessary
for the permittee to trench through any
lawn area said area shall be reseeded or the
sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and
replaced after ditches have been backfilled
as required in this Chapter. All
construction and maintenance work shall be
done in a manner calculated to leave the
lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a
condition as nearly as possible to that
which existed before such work began.
The permittee shall not remove, even
temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist
in parking strip areas without compliance
to this Code and without first obtaining the
consent of the City.
Sec. 6-13. Care of Excavated
Material.
All material excavated from trenches
and piled adjacent to the trench or in any
street shall be piled, and maintained in such
manner as not to endanger those working in
the trench, pedestrians or users of the
§ 6-13 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 6-16
streets, and so that as little inconvenience
as possible is caused to those using streets
and adjoining property. Where the
confines of the area being excavated are
too narrow to permit the piling of
excavated material beside the trench, such
as might be the case in a narrow alley, the
City shall have the authority to require that
the permittee haul the excavated material to
a storage site. It shall be the permittee's
responsibility to secure the necessary
permission and make all necessary
arrangements for all required storage and
disposal sites.
All material excavated shall be laid
compactly along the side of the trench and
kept trimmed so as to cause as little
inconvenience as reasonably possible to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as
specified by the City. Whenever necessary,
in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to
abate the dirt or dust nuisance, tow boards
or bins may be required by the City to
prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic
lanes. Excavation in the City shall comply
to all relevant Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 99-25, 7/19/99)
Sec. 6-14. Clean-Up.
As the excavation work progresses, all
streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all
rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All clean-up
operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the
expense of the permittee and shall be
completed to the satisfaction of the City.
From time to time, as may be ordered by
the City and in any event immediately after
completion of said work, the permittee
shall, at permittee’s expense, clean up and
remove all refuse and unused materials of
any kind resulting from said work, and
upon failure to do so within twenty-four
(24) hours after having been notified to do
so by the City, said work may be done by
the City or designated third party and the
cost thereof charged to the permittee, and
the permittee shall also be liable for the
cost thereof under the surety bond provided
hereunder.
Sec. 6-15. Protection of
Watercourses.
The permittee shall maintain all
gutters free and unobstructed for the full
depth of the adjacent curb and for at least
one foot (1’) in width from the face of such
curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter
crosses an intersecting street, an adequate
waterway shall be provided and at all times
maintained.
The permittee shall make provisions to
take care of all surplus water, muck, silt,
slicking, or other run-off pumped from
excavations or resulting from sluicing or
other operations and shall be responsible
for any damage resulting from its failure to
so provide.
Sec. 6-16. Breaking Through
Pavement.
A. Heavy duty pavement breakers may be
prohibited by the City when the use
endangers existing substructures or
other property.
B. Saw cutting of Portland cement
concrete may be required by the City
when the nature of the work or the
condition of the street warrants. When
required, the depth of the cut shall be
not less than one inch in depth;
however, depths greater than one inch
may be required by the City when
circumstances warrant. Saw cutting
may be required by the City outside of
the limits of the excavation over
cave-outs, overbreaks and small
floating sections.
C. Approved cutting of bituminous
pavement surface ahead of
excavations shall be required by the
City to confine pavement damage to
the limits of the trench.
D. Sections of sidewalks shall be
removed to the nearest score line or
joint.
E. Curbs shall be saw cut.
§ 6-16 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 6-19
F. Unstable pavement shall be removed
over cave-outs and overbreaks and the
subgrade shall be treated as the main
trench.
G. Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a
vertical face and neatly aligned with
the center line of the trench.
H. Cutouts outside of the trench lines
must be normal or parallel to the
trench line.
I. Boring or other methods to prevent
cutting of new pavement may be
required by the City.
J. Permittee shall not be required to
repair pavement damage existing prior
to excavation unless his cut results in
small floating sections that may be
unstable, in which case permittee shall
remove and pave the area.
Sec. 6-17. Depth of Structures.
No person shall, without written
permission of the City Engineer, install any
substructure, except manholes, vaults,
valve casings, culverts, and catch basins at
a vertical distance less than:
A. Streets: Twenty-four inches (24”)
below the established flow line of the
nearest gutter. If said flow line is not
established, then the depth shall be at a
minimum of twenty-four inches (24”)
below the surface of the nearest outermost
edge of the traveled portion of the street.
B. Parkway:
1. The minimum depth of any
substructure shall be sixteen inches
(16”) below established gutter grade
when said substructure parallels the
parkway.
2. The minimum depth of any
substructure shall be twelve inches
(12”) below the top of the established
sidewalks or curb when such
substructure is at right angles to the
parkway.
C. Other Public Places: The minimum
depth of any substructure in any other
public place shall be twelve inches
(12”) below the surface; provided,
however, that the City may permit a
lesser depth in special cases. Nothing
in this Section shall impose a duty
upon the permittee to maintain said
specifications as required herein upon
subsequent changes of grade in the
surface unless the grade in said
substructure interferes with the
maintenance of, or travel on, a public
street.
Sec. 6-18. Backfilling.
All backfilling shall conform to the
Standard Construction Specifications and
Drawings of the City as adopted from time
to time by Resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 99-25, 7/19/99)
Sec. 6-19. Restoration of Surface.
Upon the completion of the backfill,
the permittee shall cover the top surface of
the backfill material with two (2) inches of
bituminous temporary resurfacing material.
The temporary resurfacing material shall be
cold mix, except that the permittee may
use, or the City may require, hot mix. All
temporary pavement material shall conform
closely to the level of the temporary paving
surface and shall be compacted so that it is
hard enough and smooth enough to be safe
for pedestrian travel over it, as well as
vehicular traffic to pass safely over it at a
legal rate of speed. The permittee shall
maintain temporary paving until permanent
resurfacing of the excavation has been
completed, except that if it is not possible
to maintain the surface of the temporary
paving in a safe condition for pedestrian
travel or vehicular traffic, then the City
may require the permittee to maintain
barriers and lights as herein specified.
Permanent resurfacing of excavations
shall be made as soon as possible by a firm
qualified to do such resurfacing and at the
expense of the permittee. After the
temporary resurfacing has been removed,
permanent resurfacing shall be placed over
the entire excavation and shall be a
bituminous hot mix, four (4) inches in
depth, placed in two equal lifts. As a
condition of securing the permit, the
§ 6-19 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 6-26
permittee will authorize the City to order
the permanent resurfacing done by
individuals so designated by the permittee,
and further agree that the expense for the
permanent resurfacing will be invoiced
under the name of the permittee.
(Ord. 99-25, 7/19/99)
Sec. 6-20. Trenches.
The maximum length of open trench
permissible at any time shall be in
accordance with existing ordinances or
regulations or as may be specified by the
City and no greater length shall be open for
pavement removal, excavation,
construction, backfilling, patching and all
other operations without the written
permission of the City Engineer.
Sec. 6-21. Prompt Completion of
Work.
After an excavation is commenced, the
permittee shall prosecute with diligence
and expedition all excavation work covered
by the excavation permit and shall
promptly complete such work and restore
the street to its original condition, or as
near as may be, so as not to obstruct the
public place or travel thereon more than is
reasonably necessary.
Sec. 6-22. Urgent Work.
When traffic conditions, the safety or
convenience of the traveling public or the
public interest require that the excavation
work be performed as emergency work the
City shall have full power to order, at the
time the permit is granted, that a crew of
men and adequate facilities be employed by
the permittee twenty four (24) hours a day
to the end that such excavation work may
be completed as soon as possible.
Sec. 6-23. Emergency Action.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to prevent the making of such
excavation as may be necessary for the
preservation of life or property or for the
location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for
making repairs, provided that the person
making such excavation shall apply to the
City for such a permit on the first working
day after such work is commenced.
Sec. 6-24. Noise, Dust and Debris.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry
out excavation work in such manner as to
avoid unnecessary inconvenience and
annoyance to the general public and
occupants of neighboring property. The
permittee shall take appropriate measures
to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in
the performance of the excavation work,
noise, dust and unsightly debris and
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. shall
not use, except with the express written
permission of the City Engineer or in case
of an emergency as herein otherwise
provided, any tool, appliance or equipment
producing noise of sufficient volume to
disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of
the neighboring property.
Sec. 6-25. Preservation of
Monuments.
Any monument set for the purpose of
locating or preserving the lines of any
street or property subdivision, or a precise
survey reference point, or a permanent
survey bench mark within the City, shall
not be removed or disturbed or caused to be
removed or disturbed without first
obtaining permission in writing from the
City Engineer so to do. Permission to
remove or disturb such monuments,
reference points or bench marks shall only
be granted upon condition that the person
applying for such permission shall pay all
expenses incident to the proper
replacement of this monument by the City.
Sec. 6-26. Inspections.
The City Engineer or designee shall
make such inspections as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this
Chapter. The City Engineer shall have the
authority to promulgate and cause to be
§ 6-26 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 6-28
enforced such rules and regulations as may
be reasonably necessary to enforce and
carry out the intent of this Chapter.
Sec. 6-27. Maintenance of
Drawings.
Every person owning, using,
controlling or having an interest in
substructures, under the surface of any
public place used for the purpose of
supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulse, water, steam,
ammonia or oil in the City, shall, when
requested, file with the City within one
hundred twenty (120) days after the
adoption of this Chapter a map or set of
maps each drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch to two hundred feet (200'), scale
showing in detail the plan location, size and
kind of installation, if known, of all
substructures, except service lines designed
to serve single properties beneath the
surface of the public place belonging to,
used by or under the control of such person
having any interest, and shall file with the
City annually at a time specified by the
City, a corrected map or set of maps each
drawn to said scale including all
installations made during the previous year
to and including the last day of such year,
provided, however, that a public utility
owner may at its option provide corrected
atlas sheets at more frequent intervals.
Sec. 6-28. Liability of City.
This Chapter shall not be construed as
imposing upon the City or any official or
employee any liability or responsibility for
damages to any person injured by the
performance of any excavation work for
which an excavation permit is issued
hereunder, nor shall the City or any
official, employee, or agent thereof be
deemed to have assumed any such liability
or responsibility by reason of inspections
authorized hereunder the issuance of any
permit or the approval of any excavation
work.
§ 7-1 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 7-3
Chapter 7
SIDEWALKS
Sec. 7-1: Definitions
Sec. 7-2: Sidewalk Policies
Sec. 7-3: Construction
Sec. 7-4: Immediate Repair
Sec. 7-5: Hearings
Sec. 7-6: Standard Specifications
Adopted
Sec. 7-7: Application
Sec. 7-8: Supervision, Line, and
Grade
Sec. 7-9: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 7-1. Definitions.
A. Deteriorated Sidewalk shall include
any sidewalk seriously heaved,
cracked, spalled or broken. A
sidewalk shall be presumed
deteriorated when vertical differential
exceeds one-half inch (1/2") and/or
heave exceeds one degree (1°) and/or
cracked pieces are less than eighteen
inches (18") in size.
B. Sidewalk. Any concrete, asphaltic
paving or brick material adjacent to a
public right-of-way, whether within
the public right-of-way or on private
property, which is designed for
pedestrian use.
C. Unsafe Sidewalk. The City is
empowered to declare a sidewalk
unsafe when deterioration or other
condition creates a situation where the
possibility of injury to a citizen can
clearly be determined. (1981 Code)
Sec. 7-2. Sidewalk Policies.
The following shall constitute the
general sidewalk policies of the City:
A. It shall be the responsibility of the
adjacent property owner to maintain in
good repair and safe condition and to
keep clear of all snow, ice and debris,
the sidewalks which are adjacent to
the owner's property including the
portion of the sidewalk which runs to
the middle of any adjacent public
alley. This duty applies to natural
snowfall; it does not extend to snow
displaced onto sidewalks by City
snowplows after the adjacent property
owner has removed natural snowfall.
B. As part of future development and
major repair and improvement, it shall
be the policy of the City to require
sidewalks as shown on Standard
Construction Specifications and
Drawings of the City as adopted and
as amended from time to time by
resolution of the Council.
(Res. 97-04, 4/21/97; Ord. 2009-20,
10/05/2009)
Sec. 7-3. Construction.
New construction or repair of
sidewalks may be required under the
following circumstances:
A. Where no sidewalks exist on a street,
the Council may require construction
by the property owner.
B. Where a special need exists due to
heavy pedestrian traffic, and existing
pedestrian walkways are inadequate,
the Council may require construction
of sidewalks.
C. Where a dangerous situation exists,
the City may require immediate repair
or replacement by the property owner.
D. Where a deteriorated sidewalk exists,
the Council may require replacement
after a public hearing with notice to all
affected property owners.
E. Financing for new sidewalks may be
achieved by any method deemed
proper by the Council including Local
Improvement Districts and the
procedures set forth in this Code and
the Idaho Code. The City will attempt
to find and utilize all possible
resources to finance construction,
including grants and the use of
available City funds. In areas where
the City has ordered replacement of a
sidewalk, the City will be responsible
for the portion of the cost related to
§ 7-6 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 7-6
replacement of sidewalk within the
public alley right-of-way as well as the
area of sidewalk at intersections which
is within ten feet (10') of the
intersecting curb lines. The property
owner shall have an affirmative
responsibility to reach agreement with
the City on the cost of sidewalk in
these two (2) areas prior to
construction of the sidewalk.
Sec. 7-4. Immediate Repair.
Where it has been determined by the
City Engineer that an unsafe situation
exists, the City Engineer is hereby
empowered to require the adjacent property
owner to repair, restore or replace said
sidewalk within thirty (30) days of receipt
of written notice.
A. The property owner shall have the
right to appeal the decision of the City
Engineer to require repair or
replacement and may exercise this
right by filing a written request for
appeal with the Council within fifteen
(15) days of receipt of written notice
from the City Engineer which requires
the repair, restoration, or replacement
of the sidewalk.
B. Such appeal shall be heard by the
Council at such time and place as is
convenient for the Council, however it
need not be heard at a regularly
scheduled hearing. The property
owner shall be given notice of hearing
at least five (5) days before said
hearing and all action by the City
Engineer regarding the subject portion
of said sidewalk shall be stayed
pending such a hearing.
C. Should the property owner fail to
repair, restore or replace said sidewalk
within thirty (30) days of written
notice, the City is empowered to
proceed with replacement of said
sidewalk utilizing City employees to
perform such work or by contracting
with a contractor for said work.
D. Upon completion of said work, the
City shall forward to the property
owner a billing itemizing all
expenditures for work performed,
including twelve percent (12%)
administrative overhead expense item.
E. Should the property owner fail to pay
said bill in full within thirty (30) days
of receipt thereof, a fourteen percent
(14%) per annum finance charge shall
be assessed to said bill at the annual
percentage rate, during the period the
bill remains unpaid. The City
Supervisor is hereby authorized to
approve a payment contract not to
exceed six (6) months in duration and
requiring the fourteen percent (14%)
per annum finance charge. Should the
property owner fail to enter into and
fulfill a payment contract, said costs
(including financing charges estimated
to the tax payment date) shall be
forwarded to the County Treasurer and
Assessor for inclusion with property
taxes for the property in question
pursuant to State law. Said assessment
shall constitute a lien on said property.
(Ord. 85-07, 7/1/85)
Sec. 7-5. Hearings.
All hearings held pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter shall:
A. Provide for a minimum of five (5)
days written notice of hearing. Notice
shall be deemed adequate if served
upon the property owner of record
personally, by certified or regular U.S.
mail or by publication in the official
newspaper.
B. Provide that all persons having any
interest whatsoever will have the right
to comment and present evidence.
(Ord. 2011-03, 05/16/2011)
Sec. 7-6. Standard Specifications
Adopted.
The 'Standard Construction
Specifications (March 1978)' of the City
are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this Ordinance. Three (3) copies
of said document shall be kept by the office
of the Clerk. Said document and any
§ 7-6 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 7-9
revisions thereto shall comprise the
standards for the construction of sidewalks
and curbs within the City.
(Res. 97-04, 4-21-97)
Sec. 7-7. Application.
Persons desiring to construct walks
and curbs shall make written application to
the City Engineer upon forms supplied by
the City.
Sec. 7-8. Supervision, Line, and
Grade.
All sidewalks and curbs constructed
within the corporate limits of the City shall
be constructed under the supervision of,
and subject to, the inspection of the City
Engineer or his or her representative, and in
conformity with the standard specifications
herewith outlined in this Chapter and the
lines and grades as approved by the City
Engineer. Stakes set by the City Engineer
shall be preserved by the owner and the
contractor doing the work.
(Ord. 2009-04; 02/02/2009)
Sec. 7-9. Violations; Penalties.
Maintaining a defective sidewalk or
obstructing a sidewalk shall constitute a
public nuisance. The act of maintaining a
defective or unsafe sidewalk after notice
and reasonable time to correct defect shall
constitute a public nuisance which shall be
punishable as a misdemeanor. The act of
obstructing a sidewalk or permitting
rubbish or other material to obstruct a
public sidewalk shall constitute a public
nuisance punishable as a misdemeanor.
These misdemeanors shall be punishable
pursuant to this Code and the Idaho Code.
§ 8-1 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-3
Chapter 8
COMMUNITY FORESTRY
Sec. 8-1: Short Title
Sec. 8-2: Statement of Intent and
Purpose
Sec. 8-3: Definitions
Sec. 8-4: Applicability
Sec. 8-5: Duties and Powers of the
Administrator
Sec. 8-6: Damaging, Destroying or
Topping of Public Trees
or Shrubs
Sec. 8-7: Licensing/Certification
Procedures
Sec. 8-8: Permit Procedures for
Individuals and For-Fee
Licensees
Sec. 8-9: Street Trees Required
Sec. 8-10 Care of Trees Within the
City
Sec. 8-11: Public Nuisances
Sec. 8-12: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 8-1. Short Title.
This ordinance shall be known and
cited as the City Community Forestry
Ordinance.
Sec. 8-2. Statement of Intent and
Purpose.
This ordinance is intended to
encourage the preservation, expansion,
protection and proper maintenance of the
community forest of the City. Enhancing
the beauty of the City, stimulating the
planting and growing of desirable trees and
educating the public about the community
forest are the primary goals of this
ordinance.
Sec. 8-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the
following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense
include the future tense, and words used in
the future tense include the present tense,
and words in the plural include the singular
and words in the singular include the
plural. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory and "may" is permissive.
Words not defined in this section shall have
their common and ordinary meaning:
A. Administrator means a City staff
member appointed by the Mayor to be
responsible for coordinating requests to and
recommendations from the Moscow Tree
Commission. The Administrator oversees
the Community Forest and acts to
effectuate the Community Forestry
Ordinance.
B. Applicant means a person who is
applying for a license, certification or
permit as required by this chapter.
C. Community Forest means the sum of
all trees and shrubs within the City.
D. Controller means every person
(owner, agent, tenant, occupant or
lessee) who exercises care, custody
and control of private real property
that abuts a right-of-way upon which a
public tree or shrub is located.
E. Diseased tree means a tree or part
thereof which has become blighted,
defaced or has become significantly
diseased.
F. Injurious Pest or Disease refers to
organisms capable of seriously
damaging the form or structural
integrity of a tree.
G. Licensee means a person with a valid
contractor's license and/or tree service
certification as required by this
Chapter.
H. Moscow Tree Commission means an
advisory committee appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the Council to
assist the City in the management of
its community forest.
I. Park trees means all public trees in
public parks and in all areas owned by
the City or to which the public has free
access, but excluding those trees in the
public right-of- way.
§ 8-3 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-3
J. Planted tree means a tree having a
minimum diameter of one inch (1”) at
one and one-half feet (1½’) above
ground level.
K. Private tree or shrub means a tree or
shrub that is not a public tree or shrub.
L. Pruning means the removal of plant
parts, dead or alive, in a careful and
systematic manner so as not to damage
other parts of the plant or the tree as a
whole.
M. Public right-of-way means improved
or unimproved public property owned
by, dedicated to, or deeded to, the
public or for the public's use, for the
purpose of providing vehicular,
pedestrian and other public use. Such
public property provides circulation
and travel to abutting properties and
includes, but is not limited to, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, tree lawn,
provisions for public utilities, cut and
fill slopes, and open public space.
N. Public tree or shrub means a tree or
shrub that is situated in such a manner
that fifty-one percent (51%) or more
of the tree trunk or shrub base at
ground level is on public property or
public right-of-way, including the tree
lawn.
O. Shrub means a multiple stemmed,
woody plant whose height at maturity
is between three feet (3’) and fifteen
feet (15’).
P. Street means that portion of the public
right-of-way which is improved,
maintained and intended for use by
vehicles to provide traffic circulation,
primary access to abutting properties
and parking. This definition includes
all of the area typically located
between curbs.
Q. Street trees means all public trees
located within the public right-of-way.
R. Substantial Improvement.
Reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before
the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred
“substantial damage”, regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The
market value of the structure should
be:
1. The appraised value of the
structure prior to the start of the initial
repair or improvement; or
2. In the case of damage, the value
of the structure prior to the damage
occurring. This term includes
structures which have incurred
“substantial damage”, regardless of
the actual amount of repair work
performed.
The term does not include either:
a. A project for improvement
of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications,
which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions, or
b. Alteration of an Historic
Structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as an Historic
Structure.
S. Topping means the severe cutting back
of limbs within a tree's crown to such
a degree that only stubs remain or the
removal of the top part (trunk and
limbs) of a coniferous tree, thereby
removing a significant portion of the
normal crown.
T. Tree means a woody perennial plant
usually having one main stem or trunk
and many branches. It usually exceeds
fifteen feet (15’) in height at maturity,
however, its failure to achieve such
height at maturity shall not preclude
its inclusion as a tree.
U. Tree lawn means that portion of the
public right-of-way lying between the
street and private property boundary
lines which is generally unimproved
§ 8-3 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-6
and planted with grass or other
vegetation.
V. Tree service means services provided
for trees, including, but not limited to:
planting, removal, topping, pruning or
engaging in technical arboricultural
practices.
W. Tree standards means the set of
specifications concerning the planting,
care and maintenance of trees as found
in the Arboricultural Specifications
And Standards Guide For The City Of
Moscow.
X. The terms Ordinance and Chapter
shall have the same meaning as used
herein.
(Ord. 2017-01, 01/17/2017)
Sec. 8-4. Applicability.
This Chapter shall apply to any public
tree, all trees and shrubs located in the
public right-of-way, in public parks, in a
tree lawn, and on other City property as
well as to those trees and shrubs located on
public and private property that have been
declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to
Section 10 of this Chapter. Further, this
Chapter shall apply to all for fee tree
services performed on any tree within the
City, whether public or private.
(Res. 99-01, 2/16/99)
Sec. 8-5. Duties and Powers of the
Administrator.
A. Task Assignment. The duties of the
Administrator shall be assigned to a
staff member by the Mayor.
B. Duties and Responsibilities. The
Administrator, subject to the
provisions of this Chapter, is hereby
authorized to:
1. Carry out the municipal public
tree responsibilities outlined in
Section 9 of this Chapter;
2. Oversee and require compliance
by controllers in the execution of their
responsibilities as outlined specifically
in Section 9(B) of this ordinance and
noted in detail in other sections of this
Chapter;
3. Develop a licensing and
certification program for the
controlled supervision of commercial
tree care management in the City.
This program shall include the
development of a controlled practical
testing program for potential licensees
and/or certificate holders, on-site
supervision of tree care services,
establishment of a license /
certification suspension / revocation
process and the appeal process
thereof;
4. Develop a permitting program for
non-fee and fee tree work to include
procedures for the approval and
control of topping practices, planting
and removal of public shrubs and
trees;
5. Develop and oversee the
implementation of the Dutch Elm
Disease (DED) Management Program
for the City.
C. Authority of the Administrator
1. The Administrator is authorized
to declare trees in the City public
nuisances, as defined in this Chapter.
2. The Administrator is authorized
to approve, deny, suspend or revoke
tree work licenses, certifications or
permits issued by the City, in
accordance with this Chapter.
3. The Administrator is authorized
to inspect and approve any public
tree/shrub work done in the City.
Sec. 8-6. Damaging, Destroying or
Topping of Public Trees or
Shrubs.
Unlawful Practices Prohibited. It is
unlawful for any person to:
1. damage, mutilate or destroy any
public tree or shrub of the City;
2. store or place, or cause to be
stored or placed: oil, gasoline,
chemicals and other materials which
are harmful to trees and shrubs,
around or near public trees and shrubs;
3. attach a potentially harmful
device or structure (i.e., tree houses) to
§ 8-6 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-7
or on public trees unless otherwise
authorized by the Administrator;
4. spill or dump substances, whether
liquid or solid, which are toxic to trees
and shrubs, on the soil between the
base of the public tree and the extent
of its root system;
5. damage public trees through
construction operations in violation of
the Arboricultural Standards and
Specifications Guide for tree
protection measures;
6. make excavations in the soil near
roots of public trees unless appropriate
measures are taken to prevent exposed
soil from drying out;
7. damage roots of a public tree by
compacting or filling on or around the
base of the tree;
8. to damage a public tree by the
practice of "topping", except under
special circumstances, provided, that
trees severely damaged by storms or
other causes, or certain trees under
utility wires or other obstructions
where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from
this Section at the determination of the
Administrator, based upon good cause
therefore.
Sec. 8-7. Licensing/Certification
Procedures.
A. Licenses Required. It is unlawful for
any person to engage in the business
of planting, pruning, or removal of a
public tree or shrub for a fee without
being licensed as required by this
Chapter. It is unlawful for a "for-fee"
contractor to provide tree service in
the City without being licensed as
required by this Chapter.
B. Types of Licenses.
1. Tree Service Contractor's
License. Any person engaged in the
business of tree service for a fee shall
obtain a license from the
Administrator. Such license shall
require that the contractor or at least
one employee of the contractor shall
be certified as required by Section
7(B)(2),and such certified individual
shall be on site whenever and
wherever technical arboricultural
practices are being performed. It shall
also be required that the contractor's
insurance as defined in Sections 7(F)
and 8(G) of this Chapter shall extend
to all of its employees while
conducting tree service work within
the City.
2. Tree Service Certification. A tree
service certification is required of any
individual who personally performs
technical arboricultural services or
procedures allowed under this Chapter
for a fee, unless that person is working
under the direct supervision of a
certified tree service worker. The
successful procurement of a tree
service certification shall not permit a
person to engage in tree services for a
fee unless that person has obtained a
valid tree service contractor's license
as required by Section 7(B)(1) of this
Chapter.
C. License Application Procedures.
1. Application for a tree service
contractor's license shall be submitted
to the Administrator on a form
supplied by the Administrator and
shall be accompanied by proof of
insurance as required in Sections 7(F)
and 8(G) of this Chapter. The
Administrator shall approve or deny
the application within seven (7) days,
based upon the following criteria:
a. the applicant has not been
convicted of a violation of Section 7
of this Chapter within the preceding
two (2) years: and,
b. the applicant shows proof
that he or she has obtained a valid tree
service certification, or that the
applicant is currently employing a
holder of a valid tree service
certification.
2. Tree Service Certification.
Application for a tree service
certification shall be submitted on a
§ 8-7 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-7
form supplied by the Administrator.
The Administrator shall approve or
deny the application within seven (7)
days, based upon the following
criteria:
a. the applicant must complete
a written examination to be
administered by the Administrator and
shall, at the discretion of the
Administrator, submit to an
examination of his or her practical
skills;
b. the applicant has not been
convicted of a violation of Section 7
of this Chapter within the preceding
two (2) years.
3. If the application is denied, the
applicant may appeal the denial as
provided by Section 7(K) of this
ordinance, or may re-apply when the
requirements are met.
4. The Administrator shall forward
the approved tree service contractors
license and/or tree service certification
application to the Clerk, who shall
issue the license and/or certification to
the applicant upon payment of any
required fee.
D. License Terms and Renewal. The tree
service contractor's license and tree
service certification shall be valid for
the remainder of the calendar year in
which it was issued and will expire on
December 31st of each year.
1. Tree service contractor's licenses
may be renewed by filing a renewal
application with the Administrator,
including the annual license fee and
proof of insurance as required herein.
2. Tree service certification may be
renewed by filing a renewal
application with the Administrator,
provided, that if the holder of a tree
service certification fails to renew his
or her certification within twelve (12)
consecutive months of its expiration,
then the applicant shall not be eligible
for renewal and shall be required to
file a new application for certification
as required by Section 7(C)(2) of this
Chapter.
E. License Fee. Fees shall be established
from time to time by resolution of the
Council taking into consideration
recommendations of the Moscow Tree
Commission and the Administrator.
F. License Insurance Coverage.
Applications for a tree service
contractor's license shall be
accompanied by proof of insurance
acceptable to the Administrator
showing the applicant to have in effect
during the term of the license a policy
of liability and property damage
insurance covering the work of the
applicant and the applicant's
employees, and listing the City as an
additional insured in a sum not less
than that provided by Idaho Code
Section 6-926, et seq.
G. Workers Compensation Insurance.
Applications for a new tree service
contractor's license or renewal must be
accompanied by proof that the
licensee has current workers
compensation insurance coverage as
required by Idaho Code, if applicable.
H. Licensee Responsibility. All licensees
shall be responsible for the work
performed under the provisions of this
Chapter and shall comply with the
professional standards as noted in
Section 9(D) of this Chapter. All
licensees shall:
1. Utilize safety measures and
equipment to protect workers and the
public as prescribed by law;
2. Obtain required permits for tree
removal;
3. Comply with all applicable
ordinances of the City, and all
applicable County, State and Federal
laws;
4. Comply with the City's
Arboricultural Specifications and
Standards Guide for planting, pruning
and removal.
§ 8-7 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-7
I. License/Certification Transfer or
Refund. Licenses and certifications
granted pursuant to this Chapter shall
not be transferable, nor shall any part
of any license or certification fee be
refundable.
J. License Suspension/Revocation. The
Administrator may suspend or revoke
any license or certification when the
licensee commits one or more certain
acts or omissions. These acts or
omissions shall include, but are not
limited to:
1. Violation of any provision of this
Chapter;
2. Knowingly combining or
conspiring with another person by
permitting one's license or
certification to be used by such other
person unless employed by the
licensee;
3. Acting as an agent, partner,
associate or in any other capacity with
another person in an attempt to evade
the provisions of this Chapter.
K. Appeal Procedures. When a license or
certification is suspended, revoked, or
denied, the appeal procedure shall be
as follows:
1. The licensee/applicant shall be
notified in writing that the license has
been suspended, revoked or denied,
and said notice shall be by certified or
regular mail or personal service within
seven (7) days after the
Administrator's action. The written
notice shall specify the reasons for the
action and inform the
licensee/applicant of his or her right to
appeal the decision of the
Administrator to the Moscow Tree
Commission.
2. Upon receipt of such notice, the
licensee/ applicant may request an
appeal hearing. The request shall be
in writing and submitted to the
Administrator within fourteen (14)
days from the date of mailing or
personal service of the Administrator's
decision.
3. If an appeal hearing is requested
by the licensee/applicant, the
Administrator shall arrange a time,
date and place for the hearing within
thirty (30) days before the Moscow
Tree Commission and shall so notify
the licensee/applicant no more than
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of
the hearing.
4. When the hearing is conducted,
the licensee/ applicant may be in
attendance, and/or he or she may be
represented. The hearing will be open
to the public. The evidence presented
by either party may consist of relevant
physical evidence and testimony.
Upon completion of the hearing, the
Tree Commission shall take under
advisement all evidence presented and
shall notify the licensee/applicant in
writing within fourteen (14) days from
the hearing, of its findings and ruling,
which shall either affirm, overturn or
modify the action of the
Administrator.
5. If the licensee/applicant is
aggrieved by the decision of the
Moscow Tree Commission, the
applicant/licensee may appeal that
decision to the Council by filing an
appeal, in writing to the
Administrator. An appeal of a
decision of the Moscow Tree
Commission must be taken within
fourteen (14) days from the date of the
adverse decision. The hearing before
the Council shall take place within
thirty (30) days from the filing of the
appeal. The procedures to be followed
when conducting the appeal hearing
shall be in conformance with Section
7(K)(4). The Council shall issue its
decision within thirty (30) days from
the date of the appeal hearing.
(Ord. 2011-03, 05/16/2011)
§ 8-8 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-9
Sec. 8-8. Permit Procedures for
Individuals and For-Fee
Licensees.
A. Public tree work permits required.
1. There will be no charge for a
planting or removal permit.
2. It is unlawful for any person,
including a licensee, to plant or
remove a public tree without a valid
permit.
3. In addition to a tree work permit,
a temporary street closure approval is
required whenever such tree work will
impair the free and full use of any
sidewalk, street or alley, as determined
by the City Engineer.
4. Appeals from granting or denial
of permit. Any controller may appeal
the decision of the Administrator in
the granting or denial of a permit
required under this Chapter, as
follows:
a. an appeal must be made in
writing delivered to the Administrator
within fourteen (14) days of the
granting or denial of the permit;
b. an appeal hearing shall be
granted before the Moscow Tree
Commission within thirty (30) days
from the receipt of the notice of
appeal, at which time the Commission
shall conduct the hearing in
conformance with Section 7(K)(4) of
this Chapter.
c. an aggrieved party may
appeal the decision of the Moscow
Tree Commission to the Council by
filing a written notice of appeal with
the Administrator within fourteen (14)
days of the decision of the Moscow
Tree Commission. A hearing shall be
had before the Council within thirty
(30) days from the filing of the appeal,
and the procedures followed in
conducting such hearing shall be in
conformance with Section 7(K)(4) of
this ordinance.
B. Permit Application Procedures:
Planting or removal.
1. Application for a permit to do
public tree work consisting of either
planting or removal shall be made on a
form supplied by the Administrator
and shall be submitted to the
Administrator for approval.
2. Tree Topping: Special Permit
Required (see Section 6(A)(8)).
Sec. 8-9. Street Trees Required.
A. Intent. The City of Moscow has been
recognized as Tree City USA since
1994 and has a Tree Commission that
works for the preservation, protection,
and management of the community
urban forest. The requirement to
install street trees is intended to
provide long-term benefits to the
community by producing oxygen and
cleaning pollutants from the air,
filtering stormwater runoff, stabilizing
soils to help with erosion and flood
control, reducing noise levels and
glare, and providing shade which
reduces cooling costs in the summer.
The presence of trees increases
residential property values and
encourages shoppers to linger in
commercial districts. Street trees
create a buffer between the street and
sidewalk which creates a safer walking
environment for pedestrians and also
creates a sense of place which adds
significantly to the aesthetics of the
community.
B. Applicability. Street trees shall be
required to be installed prior to the
issuance of a building permit for a
new principal structure, or the
substantial improvement to any
existing principal structure upon any
lot or parcel or land within the City of
Moscow in accordance with this
Section, Resolution No. 2017-01, and
the Standard Construction
§ 8-9 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-10
Specifications and Drawings adopted
by the Council from time to time.
This requirement shall not apply to
those subdivisions that contributed to
the Street Tree Fund prior to effective
date of this Section.
C. Number of Trees Required. The
number and size of street trees
required for each property shall be
determined by the Community
Forestry Administrator in accordance
with Resolution 2017-01 and the
City’s Arboricultural Standards and
Specifications Guide.
D. Street Tree Installation Process.
1. Permit Required. Prior to the
installation of any required street tree,
a permit to plant shall be obtained
from the Community Forestry
Administrator in order to review the
appropriateness of species and
location.
2. Single and Two-Family
Dwellings. Prior to the issuance of a
building permit for any new singlefamily
or two-family dwelling, or the
substantial improvement to any
existing single-family or two-family
dwelling the applicant shall either:
a. install the required street trees; or
b. enter into an agreement which
shall require the installation of the
required street trees prior to the
issuance of the final Certificate of
Occupancy for the structure; or
c. furnish a financial security in a
form acceptable to the City in the
amount set by the current Fee
Resolution as adopted by the Council.
3. Multi-Family and Commercial
Structures. Prior to the issuance of a
building permit for any multi-family
or commercial principal structure, or
the substantial improvement to any
existing multi-family or commercial
principal structure, the applicant shall
submit a landscape plan that shall
identify the number, location and type
of street trees proposed for approval
by the Community Forestry
Administrator. The required street
trees for such projects shall be
installed prior the issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy for any
multi-family and commercial principal
structure. If a Certificate of
Occupancy is requested to be issued
prior to the installation of the required
street trees, the applicant shall furnish
a financial security in a form
acceptable to the City in the amount
set by the current Fee Resolution as
adopted by the Council.
E. Financial Security.
1. The amount of the financial
security shall be established within the
City of Moscow Fee Resolution as
adopted by the Council and shall be in
a form of cash, bond, or other security
deemed acceptable to the City.
2. Release of Security. Financial
security for any required street tree
shall be released to the applicant or
property owner within sixty (60) days
of the inspection and approval of the
street tree installation by the
Community Forestry Administrator.
3. If an applicant does not install the
required street tree within twenty-four
(24) months from the date of the
Certificate of Occupancy for the
principal structure, the City may
utilize the security to pay the costs of
installing the required street trees.
(Ord. 2017-01, 01/17/2017); (Res. 2017-01,
01/17/2017)
Sec. 8-10. Care of Trees Within the
City.
A. City Responsibilities. The City shall
be responsible for the following:
1. Care and maintenance of park
trees and shrubs;
2. Removal of dead, diseased, or
hazardous park trees and shrubs;
3. Controlling insects and diseases
of park trees and shrubs;
4. Care and maintenance of all
public trees in the downtown area;
§ 8-10 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-10
5. Managing insect and disease
management programs for all trees in
the City (e.g., Dutch Elm Disease).
B. Private/Controller Responsibilities.
Every controller shall be responsible
for the following:
1. Meeting all the requirements and
obtaining all the permits necessary for
work done on adjacent public trees as
described in this Chapter;
2. Care and maintenance of public
trees and shrubs located on the rightof-
way adjacent to the controller's
private real property, including:
a. removal and replacement of
public trees or removal of those
portions of public trees declared to be
a public nuisance when they are
located on the right-of-way adjacent to
the controller's private real property;
b. pruning of public trees and
shrubs located on the right-of-way
adjacent to the controller's private real
property. Branches of trees that
overhang sidewalks must be pruned to
provide eight feet (8’) of vertical
clearance and branches that overhang
the street must be pruned to provide
twelve feet (12’) of vertical clearance;
c. control of injurious pests for
public trees and shrubs located on the
right-of-way adjacent to the
controller's private real property ;
d. repairing damage done to the
sidewalk and surrounding areas by the
roots of private trees or shrubs, or
public trees and shrubs located on or
adjacent to the controller's private real
property;
e. removal of private trees and
shrubs located on the controller's
private real property that have been
declared to be a public nuisance;
3. Control of significant pests for
private trees and shrubs on the
controller's private real property.
C. Clearing. The controller is
responsible for removing all tree work
derived debris from the street and
sidewalk, by sunset of the day on
which the work is done unless street
closure is authorized.
D. Standards. Care and maintenance of
public trees and shrubs shall be
governed in part by the City's
Arboricultural Specifications and
Standards Guide.
E. Removal of Public Trees and Shrubs.
1. Policy. It is the policy of the City
that public trees and shrubs shall not
be removed without written
authorization of the Administrator,
who may seek concurrence from the
Moscow Tree Commission. Permits
will be granted only under the criteria
specified below:
a. the tree or shrub is
sufficiently diseased or is an alternate
host of a significant disease;
b. the tree or shrub is harboring
injurious insects or pathogens and may
cause significant potential danger to
the City community forest;
c. the tree or shrub is dead or
near dead and/or constitutes a public
safety hazard;
d. the tree interferes with
overhead utility lines and creates an
unresolvable public safety hazard;
e. the tree or shrub causes sight
obstruction that cannot be resolved in
a more moderate manner;
f. any other criteria deemed
appropriate by the Administrator.
2. Removal Permit Required. It is
unlawful for anyone to remove a
public tree or shrub unless a permit
therefor has been issued by the
Administrator. Applications for such
tree removal permit shall be filed with
the Administrator. If removal is
justified, the Administrator shall issue
a removal permit within ten (10)
working days. Work may be inspected
by the Administrator or his or her
agent. All costs of the removal shall
be at the expense of the applicant.
3. Replacing Trees or Shrubs -
Required. Whenever a public tree or
shrub is removed, as a condition of
§ 8-10 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-12
issuance of a permit for removal, the
applicant shall replace the tree or
shrub removed, unless such
requirement is waived by the
Administrator for good cause shown.
4. Replacing Trees and Shrubs -
Selection Criteria. Selection and
location of required replacement trees
and shrubs shall be based on the City's
Arboricultural Standards and
Specifications Guide.
(Res. 99-01, 2/16/99)
Sec. 8-11. Public Nuisances.
A. The following are hereby declared
public nuisances under this Chapter:
1. Any dead tree or shrub located on
city-owned property, including the
public right-of-way;
2. Any tree or shrub which harbors
pathogens or injurious insects which
reasonably may be expected to injure
or harm other trees or shrubs;
3. Any tree or shrub which obstructs
the free passage of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic or which obstructs a
street light or traffic control device;
4. Any tree or shrub or portion
thereof which obstructs the view in
the "visibility triangle" as defined by
Idaho Code;
5. Any tree or shrub which, by
reason of location or condition,
constitutes an imminent danger to the
health, safety, or welfare of the
general public.
B. Right to Inspect Suspected Nuisance
Trees and Shrubs. The officers,
agents, servants and employees of the
City shall have the authority to enter
onto private property whereon there is
reasonable cause to believe that there
is located a tree or shrub that is
suspected to be a public nuisance as
defined herein.
C. Abatement. The following are the
prescribed means of abating public
nuisances under this Chapter:
1. Any public nuisance located on
City-owned or private property shall
be pruned, removed or otherwise
treated, in whatever fashion required
by the Administrator in accordance
with the requirements of this Chapter.
2. The Administrator shall cause a
written notice to be personally served
or sent by certified or regular mail to
the person listed by the Latah County
Assessor's Office as the record owner
of the particular property.
3. In the event the nuisance is not
abated by the date specified in the
notice, the Administrator is authorized
to cause the abatement of said
nuisance. The reasonable cost of such
abatement shall be filed as a lien
against the property on which the
nuisance was located. In addition, the
owner of the property upon which the
nuisance is located shall be subject to
prosecution under this Chapter, or this
Code or the Idaho Code for
maintaining a public nuisance.
Nothing in this provision shall be
construed to exempt any person from
the requirement of obtaining permits
under Section 8 of this Chapter. The
Administrator is empowered to cause
the immediate abatement of any public
nuisance provided that the nuisance is
determined by the Administrator to be
an immediate threat to any person or
property. The Administrator is hereby
empowered to seek from a court of
competent jurisdiction, an order
directing immediate abatement of any
public nuisance.
(Ord. 99-25, 7/19/99; Ord. 2011-03,
05/16/2011)
Sec. 8-12. Violations; Penalties.
A. Damage to, or destruction of a public
tree or shrub by any person, except as
provided lawfully herein, may result in
the assessment of fees against such
person set at a rate not greater than the
International Society of
§ 8-12 TITLE 5 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 8-12
Arboriculture's replacement or
appraisal value formulas for said
damaged tree or shrub. Such fees
shall be established by the
Administrator utilizing said value
formulas.
B. Intentional interference with the
Administrator in the performance of
his or her duties so as to prevent, delay
or otherwise interfere with the
performance of his or her supervisory
responsibilities outlined above is
unlawful and a misdemeanor
punishable pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code.
C. Failure to perform tree services in
compliance with accepted and
established arboricultural practices as
outlined in the Arboricultural
Standards and Specifications Guide of
the City shall be a violation of this
Chapter and subject to prosecution as
set out in Section 5-8-12D, below.
D. Any person violating any provisions of
this Chapter shall be subject to the
following:
1. It is an infraction punishable by a
fine of one hundred dollars ($100)
plus court costs for any person to
violate provisions of this Chapter for
the first time. A second violation
within five (5) years is an infraction
punishable by a fine of three hundred
dollars ($300) plus court costs. A
third violation within five (5) years
shall be a misdemeanor as defined by
the Idaho Code and shall subject such
person up to the maximum
misdemeanor penalties as provided in
the Idaho Code.
2. Each separate day during which
any violation of this Chapter occurs or
continues shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable
as stated herein.
(Ord. 917, 9/2/52; 1285, 8/18/75; 90-14,
7/16/90; 91-10, 3/25/91; 93-07, 3/22/93; 93-
12, 4/19/93; 2006-02, 02/06/06; 2014-17,
10/06/2014; 2017-01, 01/17/2017)
§ 9-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 9-6
Chapter 9
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE
Sec. 9-1: Definitions
Sec. 9-2: Public Nuisance
Sec. 9-3: Owner to Remove
Sec. 9-4: Notice
Sec. 9-5: City May Abate
Sec. 9-6: Public Offense
Sec. 9-1. Definitions.
A. Owner. Owner of record as
determined from the records of the
Latah County Assessor's office or such
other records or information as the
City may determine reasonable.
B. Sidewalk. Any concrete, asphaltic
paving or brick material adjacent to a
public right-of-way, whether within
the public right-of-way or on private
property, which is designed for
pedestrian use.
Sec. 9-2. Public Nuisance.
The existence of snow and/or ice on
sidewalks within the City which affect the
safe pedestrian use of said sidewalks is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Sec. 9-3. Owner to Remove1.
It shall be the duty of every owner of
any land, building, or lot within the City to
remove snow and/or ice from adjacent
sidewalks to permit the safe pedestrian
passage upon said sidewalks bordering said
property and to abate the nuisance set forth
in this Chapter. This duty applies to natural
snowfall; it does not extend to snow
displaced onto sidewalks by City
snowplows after an owner has removed
natural snowfall.
(Ord. 83-5, 6/6/83)
Sec. 9-4. Notice.
Upon a determination that a parcel of
property within the City is in violation of
1 See also subsection 5-7-1(A) of this Code.
this Chapter, the City or the Chief of Police
shall cause notice, in writing, to be served
upon the owner, tenant or person in control
of said property, or to be posted upon
property which is in violation of this
Chapter.
Said notice shall require the owner,
tenant and/or the person in control of said
property, to abate said nuisance within
twenty four (24) hours of the time of
service or posting of notice.
Sec. 9-5. City May Abate.
If the property owner, tenant or person
in control of the aforementioned property
fails to abate the nuisance as provided in
this Chapter within the twenty four (24)
hour period provided in this Chapter, the
City may cause the sidewalk adjacent to
said property to be cleared of snow and ice.
The City shall then bill the property owner
for the City's reasonable costs in abating
said nuisance.
Within ten (10) days of receipt of
billing, the owner may request a hearing
before the Council if the owner believes
such billing was unjust. The Council shall
confirm, modify or annul the charges made.
Said charges may be collected in any
manner consistent with the Idaho Code and
shall constitute an outstanding lien on the
property in violation.
Sec. 9-6. Public Offense.
A. The owner of any property who has
allowed snow or ice to remain on the
sidewalk abutting his or her property
for a period of twenty four (24) hours,
after notice as provided herein, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Where the City can demonstrate that
tenant or individual other than the
owner is responsible for maintaining
the sidewalk free and clear of snow
and ice and where such person has
failed, after notice, to abate the
nuisance as provided herein, such
person shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 9-6 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 9-6
C. Each twenty four (24) hour period
after notice during which said owner,
tenant or person responsible for
maintaining the property shall fail,
refuse or neglect to remove snow or
ice from the sidewalk adjacent to said
property, shall give rise to a separate
and distinct offense.
D. Each violation of this Chapter shall be
a misdemeanor. Any person(s)
convicted of a violation of this
Chapter shall be fined pursuant to this
Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 84-04, 1/23/84)
§ 10-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 10-2
Chapter 10
PUBLIC LIGHTING
Sec. 10-1: Purpose and Definitions
Sec. 10-2: Charges
Sec. 10-3: Billing
Sec. 10-4: Separate Fund
Sec. 10-5: Right to Appeal Charge
Sec. 10-6: Sections Severable
Sec. 10-1. Purpose and Definitions.
A. Expenses associated with public
lighting within the City shall be
financed by charges assessed to the
owners and occupants of improved
real property.
B. "Public lighting" shall refer to all
lighting of exterior public areas, which
may include lighting of public streets,
sidewalks, walkways, bike paths,
adjacent private property, and other
areas not specifically excluded herein,
which is paid for and/or maintained by
the City for the benefit of the general
public.
C. The charges assessed shall be included
in the general utility billing as a
separate item and as hereinafter set
forth; provided, however, that the
costs of lighting to illuminate parks
and play fields shall be paid from the
City General Fund. Improved City
property shall be subject to said fees,
to be paid from the appropriate
department budget.
D. Improved real property, within the
meaning of this Chapter, shall include
real estate which:
1. has City water service; or
2. is paved; or
3. landscaped; or
4. has erected thereon any
construction for which a building
permit would be required.
E. For the purpose of this Chapter and
any related resolution, residential
property shall include property having
occupancy or living accommodations
on a permanent or semi-permanent
basis.
Sec. 10-2. Charges.
A. The owners and/or occupants of all
improved real property within the City
are hereby made subject to service
charges for public lighting.
B. Service charges shall be enacted by
resolution. The owners and/or
occupants of improved real property
shall be jointly and severally liable for
such charges; the charges shall
become a lien upon and against the
property against which the charge is
levied to the extent permitted by the
laws of the State of Idaho and the
ordinances of the City and may be
collected in any manner permitted or
hereafter permitted by such laws and
ordinances.
C. Public lighting charges shall be fixed
and determined in amounts sufficient
to pay the costs incurred under lease
agreements with Washington Water
Power Co., electrical energy costs,
billing expense, replacement expenses,
and costs of labor and materials
necessary to maintain the public
lighting system within the City.
D. The public lighting costs shall be
distributed on the basis of the relative
proportionate benefit received by the
various occupancies within different
lighting intensity zones existing in the
City as determined by the Council or
in such other manner as is determined
to be fair and reasonable by the
Council. Such charges may be
changed or amended by the Council
from time to time, as determined
necessary to finance these street
lighting costs. Any changes or
amendments to such service charges
may be made and fixed by the Council
by resolution. Three (3) copies of
such resolution, duly certified by the
Clerk, shall be kept on file by the
Clerk for the use of and examination
by the public. Such fees shall not take
effect until at least thirty (30) days
after adoption of such resolution.
§ 10-3 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 10-6
Sec. 10-3. Billing.
A. All billings for public lighting charges
shall be made by, and all payments
shall be paid to the City. Billings shall
be in the name of either the owner or
occupant, or both, of the premises
against which the charge is made, as
determined by the City.
B. Billings for charges levied and
assessed under the provisions of this
Chapter may be made monthly,
quarterly or at such other intervals as
may be determined by resolution of
the Mayor and the Council, and shall
be fixed at such intervals as will
correspond to billings of the same
improved real property for water,
garbage and sewer services. Such
billings may be billed on the same
statement; provided, however, that the
billings for each service shall be
segregated. Such charges shall be due
at the same time as charges for water,
garbage, and sewer services.
Sec. 10-4. Separate Fund.
All funds received for public lighting
shall be accounted for separately and shall
be used only for payment of expenses
related to providing lighting services.
Sec. 10-5. Right to Appeal Charge.
Any person billed for public lighting
services who believes that such billing is in
excess of the relative proportionate benefits
received from lighting shall have the right
to file a written appeal to the Council. Such
appeal shall set forth all reasons as to why
such charges are excessive. Appeals shall
be reviewed by the Clerk and action
consistent with current fee resolutions may
be taken by City staff. The Council shall
have the right to modify such charges upon
a demonstration that charges made are
clearly in excess of relative proportionate
benefits received from lighting services.
Sec. 10-6. Sections Severable.
Each section and each provision or
requirement of any section of this Chapter
shall be considered severable and the
invalidity of any portion of a section or the
invalidity of any portion of the section as to
any person or persons shall not affect the
validity or enforcement of any other
portion.
(Ord. 88-08, 9/6/88; Ord. 93-19, 6/21/93; Ord. 98-
33, 9-8-98)
§ 11-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 11-5
Chapter 11
DUST SUPPRESSANTS
Sec. 11-1: Purpose
Sec. 11-2: Definitions
Sec. 11-3: Disposal
Sec. 11-4: Approved List
Sec. 11-5: Application Denial and
Appeal
Sec. 11-6: Application of Dust
Suppressants
Sec. 11-7: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 11-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
protect air and water quality resources vital
to the public health, safety, and economic
future of the City by controlling the
discharge of petroleum products,
by-products, or other petroleum-based
products which may find their way into the
Moscow aquifer or groundwater, and to
reduce the level of air-borne contaminants
released by unregulated dust suppressants.
Sec. 11-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the
following terms have the following
meaning:
A. Applicator is any person who places or
causes to be placed upon the streets or
alleys of the City substances for the
purpose of suppressing dust.
B. Disposal. Any method by which
petroleum, petroleum by-products, and
petroleum base products are
discharged, deposited, spilled,
sprayed, spread, or otherwise
dispersed into the environment.
C. Dust Suppressants. Substances
approved by the Public Works
Director including, but not limited to,
Magnesium Chloride and asphalt
emulsions.
D. Petroleum Product, By-Product, Or
Petroleum-Based Product. Any of the
following:
1. any mixture of a solution of
hydrocarbons and may be one of a
number of oils including oils which
have a paraffin base or a naphthene
base;
2. any mixture of a solution of
hydrocarbons that is produced as a
result of refining, processing,
synthesizing, or any other process
dealing with petroleum;
3. any lubricating fluid including
crankcase oil, power steering fluid,
automatic transmission fluid, gearbox
lubricants, hydraulic oil, metal
working oil, refrigeration oil,
compressor oils, and other fluids such
as these.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 11-3. Disposal.
Disposal of petroleum products, byproducts,
and petroleum-based products
into sewer systems, drainage systems,
surface or groundwaters, and by disposal
on land by depositing said materials on the
streets and alleys of the City, is hereby
prohibited and declared to be unlawful.
Sec. 11-4. Approved List.
The Public Works Director of the City
shall provide a list of approved dust
suppressants which minimize damage to
the environment. Three (3) copies of the
list of approved dust suppressants shall be
on file with the Clerk and shall be available
to the public.
Any person may request that the
Public Works Director add a dust
suppressant to the approved list. Any
person affected by the Public Works
Director's decision to place a dust
suppressant on the approved list or deny
adding a dust suppressant to the list may
appeal that decision in accordance with the
provisions of Code Section 5-11-5.
Sec. 11-5. Application Denial and
Appeal.
A. Upon a showing of cause to believe
that grounds exist to deny the
application of any person to add or
remove a dust suppressant to the
§ 11-5 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 11-7
approved list, the Public Works
Director shall notify the applicant by
certified mail, or personal service, of
the grounds for said denial and of the
opportunity to appeal such denial to
the Health and Environment
Commission. Failure of a person to
actually receive a notice sent or
severed, shall not invalidate the denial.
The applicant, after notice of the
denial, may appeal said denial by
making a written request for a hearing
before the Health and Environment
Commission within ten (10) working
days of the date of the above notice.
B. Hearing and Determination: The
hearing shall be before the Health and
Environment Commission. At such
hearing the applicant may present
evidence, call witnesses called by the
City and be represented by counsel. A
recorded transcript shall be made.
Within twenty (20) working days after
the date of the hearing the Health and
Environment Commission shall either:
1. approve the action of the Public
Works Director; or
2. allow the application upon such
modifications or conditions reasonably
related to the use of the application.
C. Appeal of Decision: The decision of
the Health and Environment
Commission shall be final and
conclusive unless an appeal to the
Council is made, in writing, within ten
(10) days. If appeal is made to the
Council, the Council shall hold a de
novo hearing consistent with this
section within thirty (30) days and
shall render its decision within twenty
(20) days. Appeal from a Council
decision must be made to the District
Court for Latah County in accordance
with Idaho's Administrative
Procedures Act.
Sec. 11-6. Application of Dust
Suppressants.
The use or application in the City by
any person or any dust suppressant not
approved by the Public Works Director is
hereby prohibited and declared unlawful.
Sec. 11-7. Violations; Penalties.
Any violation of a provision of this
chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Any
person(s) convicted of a violation of this
Chapter shall be fined pursuant to this
Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 90-07, 3/26/90)
§ 12-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 12-7
Chapter 12
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
Sec. 12-1: Public Nuisance
Sec. 12-2: Identification of Trees
Sec. 12-3: Unlawful to Interfere with
Inspector
Sec. 12-4: Rules and Regulations
Sec. 12-5: Pruning or Removal of Tree
Sec. 12-6: Removal of Trees by Owner
Sec. 12-7: Disposing of Wood
Sec. 12-8: Elm Wood
Sec. 12-9: Cleaning Equipment
Sec. 12-10: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 12-11: Replacement of Trees
Sec. 12-1. Public Nuisance.
Any tree identified as having Dutch
Elm Disease (DED) is hereby declared a
public nuisance.
Sec. 12-2. Identification of Trees.
The Director of the Department of
Parks and Recreation (Director) is hereby
authorized to designate a person or persons
to identify, inspect, investigate, and declare
to be nuisances trees within the City which
are diseased or which contain quantities of
dead material. Such inspector shall have
the authority to enter on to private property
to investigate possible disease, take
samples or perform other necessary
requirements, obtaining a search warrant if
necessary.
Sec. 12-3. Unlawful to Interfere with
Inspector.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
prevent, delay or interfere with an inspector
or his/her agent while engaged in the
performance of duties imposed by this
Chapter in accordance with all state and
federal laws and constitutional
requirements.
Sec. 12-4. Rules and Regulations.
The Director or his/her designee is
hereby granted the authority to promulgate
such reasonable rules, regulations and
specifications as may be necessary or
proper to protect the elm trees within the
City.
Sec. 12-5. Pruning or Removal of
Tree.
The owner of any tree which is
declared a public nuisance as defined by
this Chapter, shall promptly remove said
tree, including removal or debarking of the
stump, or properly prune diseased portions
of the tree if such action is directed. The
Director may order removal, pruning, root
severing, disposal or any other accepted
procedures of any such tree giving the
property owner ten (10) days written
notice. The Director may extend this time
period where the possibility that the DED
fungus will spread to other trees is
minimal.
Sec. 12-6. Removal of Trees by
Owner.
The property owner shall be
responsible for removal, pruning, root
severing, disposal or any other accepted
procedures of all elm trees on private
property or the right-of-way adjacent to
private property infected with the disease
or harboring elm bark beetle larvae.
Should the property owner fail to remove
or prune any tree or take appropriate action
as ordered by the Director, the City may
cause such action to take place with the
associated property owner being billed for
all such costs. Should the owner fail to pay
such costs, the unpaid costs may be added
to the property owner's taxes as permitted
by Idaho Code. Any tree removal located
in the public right-of-way must be in
compliance with Chapter 8, Title 5 of this
Code.
Sec. 12-7. Disposing of Wood.
All elm wood, including chips, shall
be disposed of in accordance with
procedures approved by the Director. The
Director is authorized to burn elm wood on
an as-needed basis independent of any
other City established burning bans.
§ 12-8 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 12-11
Sec. 12-8. Elm Wood.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to
import into the City, store, sell, or purchase
any elm firewood that has not been totally
debarked.
Sec. 12-9. Cleaning Equipment.
Any person pruning or removing any
elm tree within the City shall immediately
and properly disinfect all equipment which
has been in contact with the tree.
Sec. 12-10. Violations; Penalties.
Failure to remove or prune a tree or
take such other appropriate action as
required by this Chapter, after written
notice from the Director, shall be a
misdemeanor punishable pursuant to this
Code and the Idaho Code.
Sec. 12-11. Replacement of Trees.
The cost of replacing trees lost to
Dutch Elm Disease on City right-of-way
shall be borne by the property owner.
Selection and location of required
replacements shall be based on the City's
Arboricultural Standards and
Specifications Guide.
(Ords. 90-14, 7/16/90; 91-10, 3/25/91; 93-12,
4/19/93)
§ 13-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 13-4
Chapter 13
CITY PARKS
Sec. 13-1: Purpose
Sec. 13-2: Application
Sec. 13-3: Definitions
Sec. 13-4: Prohibited Activities
Sec. 13-5: Agent to be Personally
Liable for Noise Ordinance
Violations
Sec. 13-6: Director Authorized to
Promulgate Regulations
Sec. 13-7: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 13-1. Purpose.
The stated purpose of this ordinance is
to provide rules and regulations for the use
of and conduct in the parks of the City.
Sec. 13-2. Application.
This ordinance shall apply to all parks,
as herein defined, of the City unless
expressly exempted herein. This ordinance
is not intended to replace or supersede any
Federal Law or any other law or penalty set
forth in this Code or in the Idaho Code .
Sec. 13-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance and
any regulations promulgated hereunder, the
following terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall have the meanings given
in this section. When consistent with the
context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" and
"'will" are mandatory, and "may" is
permissive. Words not defined in this
Section shall have their common and
ordinary meaning.
A. Agent shall mean a person authorized
by an entity to act for or in the place of
the entity, which shall be the principal.
B. Director shall mean the Director of
Parks and Recreation of the City or his
or her duly appointed designee.
C. Entity shall mean any form of
partnership, firm, business association,
corporation, company or organization
of any kind. An entity shall have an
authorized agent.
D. Park shall mean a park, playground, or
any other area of the City owned or
used by the City and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
E. Principal shall mean the entity which
has directed the agent to act for the
entity's benefit and subject to such
entity's direction and control.
Sec. 13-4. Prohibited Activities.
The following acts are prohibited in a
park:
A. To engage in threatening or abusive
language or to engage in any
disorderly conduct or behavior that
would breach the public peace, or that
would interfere unreasonably with any
person lawfully using the park.
B. To possess alcoholic beverages or to
be under the influence of any alcoholic
beverage while present in a park
except in accordance with specific
regulations adopted by the Council by
resolution or pursuant to a sidewalk
café license or as otherwise authorized
or permitted by City.
C. To discharge any illegal fireworks.
D. To throw, discharge or otherwise place
or cause to be placed in the waters of
any fountains, stream or other body of
water, in or adjacent to any park or
any tributary stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into such water, any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the
pollution of said waters.
E. To dispose of garbage, rubbish or
refuse in a park other than garbage,
rubbish or refuse generated within
such park. Garbage, rubbish or refuse
generated within such park shall be
deposited in the receptacles so
provided. Where receptacles are not
provided, all such garbage, rubbish or
§ 13-4 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 13-7
refuse shall be carried away from the
park by any person or entity
responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
F. To attach or implant stakes, posts,
rope, cable or other contrivance to any
tree, fence, railing, bench or other
structure without prior approval.
G. To dig or remove, without
authorization of the Director, any soil,
rocks, sand, stones, trees, shrubs,
plants or other wood or materials or
make any excavation whatsoever.
H. To use a restroom in an unsanitary
manner.
I. To drive any motor vehicle on any
area except the paved park roads or
parking areas or such areas as may be
specifically designated as temporary
areas, unless authorized by the
Director.
J. To kindle, build, maintain or use a fire
except in places provided for such
purposes. Any fire allowed herein
shall be continuously under the care
and direction of a competent adult
from the time it is kindled until the
time it is extinguished.
K. To camp or stay overnight anywhere
except in designated areas with prior
approval of the Director.
L. To set up temporary shelter for any
use except pursuant to a valid permit.
M. To paste, glue, tack or otherwise post
any signs, advertisements or
inscriptions whatever, except as may
be authorized by the Director.
N. To engage in what has been defined as
a "Special Use" by regulation, without
a permit or fail to pay fees and
deposits if required by the Director.
O. To fail to produce and exhibit any
permit upon request of any authorized
person who shall desire to inspect the
same for any lawful purpose.
P. To fail to abide by any such other
regulations and requirements
promulgated by the Director as
authorized by this ordinance.
(Ord. 2010-11, 06/07/2010)
Sec. 13-5. Agent to be Personally
Liable for Noise Ordinance
Violations.
Any agent of a person or of an entity
using parks pursuant to this Ordinance shall
be personally liable for any violation of the
Moscow City Noise Ordinance (Code Title
10, Chapter 11) resulting from such use.
Sec. 13-6. Director Authorized to
Promulgate Regulations.
The Director may, from time to time,
promulgate regulations regarding park use
not inconsistent with this ordinance.
Sec. 13-7. Violations; Penalties.
Any person or entity violating the
provisions of this Chapter shall, unless
otherwise provided by law, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined pursuant to
this Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 95-13, 6/5/95)
§ 14-1 TITLE 5 – PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 14-5
Chapter 14
TREE LAWNS
Sec. 14-1: Definitions
Sec. 14-2: Nuisance
Sec. 14-3: Owner to Maintain
Sec. 14-4: Notice
Sec. 14-5: City May Abate
Sec. 14-6: Penalty
Sec. 14-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the
following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the following
meanings:
A. Maintenance. Preservation from
failure or decline, or providing care,
upkeep, and provision.
B. Owner. The owner of record of real
property adjacent to a public right-ofway
within the City as determined
from the records of the Latah County
Assessor’s office or such other records
or information as the City may
determine reasonable.
C. Public Right-of-Way. The improved
or unimproved public property owned
by, dedicated to, or deeded to, the
public or for the public’s use, for the
purpose of providing vehicular,
pedestrian and other public use. Such
public property provides circulation
and travel to abutting properties and
includes, but is not limited to, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, tree lawn,
provisions for public utilities, cut and
fill slopes, and open public spaces.
D. Tree Lawn. That portion of the public
right-of-way lying between the street
and private property lines which is
generally unimproved and planted
with grass or other vegetation.
Sec. 14-2. Nuisance.
Failure of an owner to maintain the
tree lawn adjacent to such owner’s real
property within the City is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and a violation of this
Chapter.
Sec. 14-3. Owner to Maintain.
A. Maintenance of the area of public
right-of-way between a City street and
the property adjacent to the City street
shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the adjacent property. Such
maintenance includes, but is not
limited to, the removal of ice and
snow accumulations on walkways, and
the care, watering, trimming, mowing
and general upkeep of any grass, trees,
shrubbery or any other vegetation,
hardscape, or landscape, or landscape
element planted or placed in such
public right-of-way, area, or tree lawn.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a
property adjacent to a public street or
highway to install, maintain, or allow
an object to occupy the adjacent
public street or highway in a manner
that provides less than twelve feet
(12’) of vertical clearance, unless
authorized by the City.
(Ord. 2012-04, 05/01/2012)
Sec. 14-4. Notice.
Upon a determination that the owner’s
failure to maintain the tree lawn adjacent to
such owner’s real property within the City
is in violation of this Chapter, the City shall
cause notice in writing to be served upon
the owner, tenant and/or the person in
control of said property or may post such
notice upon the property in a manner to
reasonably inform such owner, tenant
and/or the person in control of said
property of the nature of the violation of
this Chapter.
Said notice shall require the owner,
tenant and/or the person in control of said
property, to abate said nuisance within
twenty-four (24) hours of the time of
service or posting of notice.
Sec. 14-5. City May Abate.
If the property owner, tenant or person
in control of the aforementioned property
fails to abate the nuisance as provided in
this Chapter within the twenty-four (24)
hour period provided herein, the City may
§ 14-5 TITLE 5 – PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 14-6
cause the tree lawn adjacent to such
owner’s real property to be maintained and
may cause the nuisance to be abated. The
City shall then bill the property owner for
the City’s reasonable costs in abating said
nuisance.
Within ten (10) days of receipt of
billing, the owner may request a hearing
before the Council if the owner believes
such billing was unjust. The Council shall
confirm, modify or annul the amount of the
bill to abate such nuisance. Said bill may
be collected in any manner consistent with
Idaho law and shall constitute an
outstanding lien on the property until its
collection.
Sec. 14-6. Penalty.
A. The owner of any property who has
failed to abate the nuisance by
maintaining the tree lawn adjacent to
such owner’s real property within the
City in a manner consistent with this
Chapter within a period of twenty-four
(24) hours after notice as provided
herein, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as
provided in this Code or the Idaho
Code.
B. Where the City can demonstrate that a
tenant or individual other than the
owner is responsible for maintaining
the tree lawn adjacent to such owner’s
real property within the City and
where such person has failed after
notice to abate the nuisance as
provided herein, such person shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished pursuant to this
Code and the Idaho Code.
C. Each twenty-four (24) hour period
after notice during which said person,
tenant and/or person responsible for
maintaining the tree lawn adjacent to
the owner’s real property within the
City shall fail to abate the nuisance as
provided herein, shall give rise to a
separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 97-34, 12/15/97)
§ 15-1 TITLE 5 – PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 15-3
Chapter 15
STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL
Sec. 15-1: Purpose
Sec. 15-2: Definitions
Sec. 15-3: Stormwater Runoff Control
Required
Sec. 15-4: Exceptions
Sec. 15-5: General Requirements
Sec. 15-6: Design and Method
Sec. 15-7: Operation and Maintenance
of Stormwater Runoff
Control Facilities
Sec. 15-8: Public Nuisance
Sec. 15-9: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 15-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
ensure that the peak rate of stormwater
runoff does not increase with the addition
of impervious surfaces which accompany
the development of property within the
jurisdiction of the City.
Sec. 15-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the
following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the following
meanings:
A. Developer. A person who undertakes
to improve a lot, tract or parcel of land
for the purpose of transfer of
ownership of the property or for the
purpose of residential, commercial,
and/or industrial development.
B. Impervious Surface. A surface with a
runoff coefficient ‘C’ (as used in the
Rational Method for estimating
stormwater runoff) equal to or greater
than 0.60.
C. Postdevelopment. Condition of the
property after proposed improvements
have been installed on the property.
D. Predevelopment. Condition of the
property prior to improvements.
E. Residential Development. A
subdivision, or that portion of a
subdivision, containing only single
family or two family dwellings.
F. Non-Residential Development.
Improvement of property which is
developed for any purpose other than
residential development, including
institutional, commercial, industrial,
and multiple family tracts of land,
platted or otherwise.
G. Parking area(s) and Parking lot(s):
Parking area(s) and/or Parking lot(s)
as defined in Section 4-11-9 of this
Code.
H. Property. A lot, tract, or parcel of land
or any combination or portion thereof,
platted or unplatted, including rightsof-
way and easements.
I. Stormwater. Water resulting from
precipitation either in the form of rain,
snow, sleet, or hail.
J. Stormwater Runoff. Stormwater
which discharges from property,
structure(s) and/or surfaces on
property.
K. Zero Net Increase Runoff. The peak
rate of stormwater runoff discharging
from property following installation of
impervious surfaces (i.e. post
development) which is equal to or less
than the peak rate of stormwater
runoff discharging from property prior
to the installation of such impervious
surfaces (i.e. predevelopment) as set
forth in the Moscow Stormwater
Runoff Control Standards.
Sec. 15-3. Stormwater Runoff
Control Required.
A. No residential or nonresidential
development and/or parking area(s) or
parking lot(s), within the City shall be
allowed to increase the rate at which
stormwater runoff discharges from
property unless otherwise exempted as
provided herein.
B. 1. No building permit shall be
issued by the City for a principal
nonresidential structure and/or parking
area(s) or parking lot(s) unless the
design of the required stormwater
runoff control facilities has been
approved by the City. No certificate
§ 15-3 TITLE 5 – PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 15-5
of occupancy shall be issued by the
City for a principal nonresidential
structure and/or parking area(s) or
parking lot(s) until the installation of
such facilities has been approved by
the City.
2. No final subdivision approval
shall be granted by the City for a
residential subdivision unless the
design for the required stormwater
runoff control facilities has been
approved by the City Engineer and the
required stormwater facilities have
been constructed, or bonded for as
provided by section 5-1-10(C)(1-6) of
this Code, or waived by the Council.
3. No final subdivision approval
shall be granted by the City for a
nonresidential subdivision unless the
design for the required stormwater
runoff control facilities has been
approved by the City Engineer and the
required stormwater facilities have
been constructed, or bonded for as
provided by section 5-1-10(C)(1-6) of
this Code, or waived by the Council,
where such facilities are designed to
be publicly maintained.
C. Waiver. The Council may waive or
modify the requirements of this
Chapter.
Sec. 15-4. Exceptions.
A. This Chapter does not apply to
development or redevelopment:
1. Which has been permitted or
approved by the City prior to the
effective date of this Chapter, or
2. Where the total impervious
surface area on the property does not
exceed five thousand (5,000) square
feet, or
3. Where stormwater discharges
from the property directly into the
South Fork of the Palouse River from
property abutting the South Fork of
the Palouse River and where the total
impervious surface area on the
property does not exceed fortythousand
(40,000) square feet.
B. This Chapter does not apply to that
portion of property which, following
development or redevelopment, is at
or below the base flood elevation as
defined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
Sec. 15-5. General Requirements.
A. Any and all costs, design, engineering,
construction and installation of the
required stormwater runoff control
facilities shall be performed by or paid
for by developer.
B. The required stormwater runoff
control facilities shall be installed on
developer’s property unless developer
is granted legal authority to install and
maintain such facilities on another
property and such installation is
approved by the City.
C. Residential development.
1. Stormwater runoff control
facilities for residential development
shall be mutual, neighborhood-type
facilities designed and installed as a
public system to accommodate all
impervious surfaces which exist when
such residential development is
ultimately fully developed. Such
system shall be installed at the same
time as the required public
improvements.
2. Every individual lot within a
residential development where a
public storm control facility has been
provided shall be connected to such
public storm control facilities as a
condition of development approval.
D. Non-Residential Development.
1. Stormwater runoff control
facilities for a nonresidential
subdivision shall be designed and
installed to provide for the conditions
of the property which exist
immediately following the installation
of required public improvements and
shall be installed at the same time as
the required public improvements.
§ 15-5 TITLE 5 – PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 15-8
2. Stormwater runoff control
facilities for individual lots of nonresidential
development, platted or
otherwise, shall be designed and
installed at the same time as the
development of such individual lot.
Sec. 15-6. Design and Method.
A. Every stormwater runoff control
facility shall be designed by a person
duly licensed by the State of Idaho to
design such a facility. Complete
plans, stamped and sealed by a person
duly licensed by the State of Idaho to
design such facility, shall be submitted
to the City Engineer, along with all
reports and necessary calculations, for
review and approval prior to final
subdivision approval by the City
Engineer, development approval,
building permit issuance, or
installation of such facility, whichever
occurs first.
B. All methods and designs of
stormwater runoff control facilities
shall clearly demonstrate zero net
increase runoff from the property to
the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
C. Any and all stormwater runoff from
the property shall be diverted through
a system of drainage ditches, drainage
ways, pipes, culverts, and/or other
such appropriate appurtenances in a
manner which does not increase
downstream flooding or in a manner
which minimizes erosion which may
be caused by such stormwater runoff.
D. The design and installation of
stormwater runoff control facilities
shall be in accordance with the
requirements contained within the
Moscow Stormwater Runoff Control
Standards as adopted by resolution of
the Council from time to time.
E. Every stormwater runoff control
facility shall be designed to minimize
maintenance of such facility.
Sec. 15-7. Operation and Maintenance
of Stormwater
Runoff Control Facilities.
A. Residential Development.
1. The City shall assume the
operation and maintenance of all
residential development stormwater
runoff control facilities which fully
comply with the requirements of this
subsection. Until all of the conditions
of this subsection have been met,
maintenance shall remain the
responsibility of the developer.
Acceptance of operation and
maintenance by the City shall be
subject to the following:
a. Construction of such
facilities are fully complete and
operable, in accordance with the
approved plans; and
b. As-built mylar plans have
been furnished to the City; and
c. A thorough, neatly written
operation and maintenance
manual/plan prepared by the system's
designer has been submitted,
reviewed, and approved by the City
Engineer; and
d. All necessary easements
and/or rights-of-way to locate and to
access such facilities have been
properly granted; and
e. Such facilities are accepted
in writing by the City Engineer.
B. Non-Residential Development.
1. The property owner shall be
responsible for the continual operation
and maintenance of the required
stormwater runoff control facility.
Sec. 15-8. Public Nuisance.
Any person who knowingly causes,
creates or allows a condition which is not
in compliance with this Ordinance shall be
considered to have created a public
nuisance. In the event such nuisance is not
abated, the person notified of such nuisance
§ 15-8 TITLE 5 – PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 15-9
does not immediately abate such nuisance,
and the Public Works Director has
determined it to be an immediate threat to
any person or any property; the City is
hereby empowered to abate such nuisance.
The reasonable cost of such abatement
shall be filed as a lien against the property
upon which the nuisance was located.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 15-9. Violations; Penalties.
A. Failure to comply with this Chapter
shall be a misdemeanor. Any
person(s) convicted of a violation of
this Chapter shall be fined pursuant to
this Code and the Idaho Code.
B. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation of this Chapter shall not
excuse such violation or permit such
violation to continue and all such
persons shall be required to correct or
hereby remedy such violation(s) or
defect within five (5) days of receiving
notice of such violation.
C. Each twenty-four (24) hour period or
part thereof, following five (5) days
notice of a violation of this Chapter,
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 99-23, 7/6/99)
§ 16-1 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 16-4
Chapter 16
PORTABLE TOILET WASTE
DISCHARGE
Sec. 16-1: Purpose
Sec. 16-2: Definitions
Sec. 16-3: Discharge from portable
toilet waste haulers
Sec. 16-4: Portable toilet waste hauling
permit required; application
Sec. 16-5: Conditions of permit
Sec. 16-6: Manifest required
Sec. 16-7: Times and location of
discharge
Sec. 16-8. Fees
Sec. 16-9. Penalties
Sec. 16-10. Appeals
Sec. 16-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
regulate portable toilet waste discharge by
permitting such discharge into the City
Wastewater Treatment System only under
certain conditions provided.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04)
Sec. 16.2. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the
following terms have the following
meaning:
A. City Sanitary Collection System:
Municipal network used to convey
wastewater from its source to the City
Wastewater Treatment Plant.
B. City Wastewater Treatment Plant:
The City facility located at 2221 West
Pullman Road, Moscow, Idaho, where
chemical, biological and mechanical
processes are applied to contaminated
water to remove, reduce or neutralize
contaminates prior to release to a
receiving water.
C. Discharge: An addition to City
Wastewater Treatment System of
portable toilet waste from any
discernable, confined, discrete
conveyance.
D. Portable Toilet Waste: Typical
domestic waste from portable toilets
such as human feces, paper products,
and preservation chemicals and
perfumes. Portable toilet waste shall
not include sanitary waste from a
commercial or industrial facility or
waste from other sources such as
oil/water separators, grease traps or
grease interceptors.
E. Portable Toilet Waste Hauler: Any
person engaged in transporting or
discharging portable toilet waste.
F. Wastewater Treatment System: City
Sanitary Collection System and City
Wastewater Treatment Plant which is
designed to be used to dispose of
wastewater.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04)
Sec. 16-3. Discharge from portable toilet
waste haulers.
A. Permitted Discharge. A portable toilet
waste hauler shall be permitted to
discharge portable toilet waste at the
City Wastewater Treatment Plant only
with a valid permit authorized by this
Chapter.
B. Prohibited Discharge. Every portable
toilet waste hauler is prohibited from
discharging the following within City
limits:
1. Portable toilet waste(s) at any
location in the City’s sanitary
collection system; and
2. Domestic waste (waste from
household sources) from a source
other than a portable toilet holding
tank, marine holding tank, or other
such tank or container; and
3. Non-domestic waste including,
waste from an industrial or
commercial facility, oil/water
separator, or a grease trap.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04)
Sec. 16-4. Portable toilet waste hauling
permit required; application.
There is hereby required a permit for
every person who intends to discharge
portable toilet waste at the City Wastewater
Treatment Plant. Every portable toilet
§ 16-4 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 16-10
waste hauler shall complete a portable
toilet waste hauler permit application on a
form provided by City. The permit shall be
issued by City Wastewater Treatment Plant
Supervisor.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04)
Sec. 16-5. Conditions of permit.
Every portable toilet waste hauler
shall provide documentation concerning the
type and origin of the waste being
discharged. The portable toilet waste
hauler shall provide the name and address
of the customer, the volume of waste to be
discharged into City Wastewater Treatment
Plant and any other information required by
the portable toilet waste hauler permit.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04)
Sec. 16-6. Manifest required.
A. Every portable toilet waste hauler
shall complete a manifest in a form
supplied by City, prior to discharge at
City Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Such manifest shall require
documentation of the final destination
or disposal site of any included waste
which are rejected for disposal at
City’s Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Waste may be rejected for failure to
meet established sampling or
discharge requirements, limitations or
other conditions established by the
City.
B. The City may perform random
sampling without prior notice to a
portable toilet waste hauler to
determine the contents of the portable
toilet waste discharge. The City may
also develop and implement sampling
criteria and procedures as necessary to
meet trucked or hauled waste
monitoring requirements.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04)
Sec. 16-7. Times and location of
discharge.
Every permitted portable toilet waste
hauler shall discharge waste only at the
portable toilet waste hauler receiving
facility located at City Wastewater
Treatment Plant. Portable toilet waste shall
not be discharged to City’s Wastewater
Treatment System or City Collection
System at any other location. Regular
hours for receiving portable toilet waste
shall be established by City and
conspicuously posted at the City
Wastewater Treatment Plant.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04)
Sec. 16-8. Fees.
Fees for the discharge of portable
toilet waste(s) at City Wastewater
Treatment Plant shall be established by
Resolution of the Council from time to
time.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04)
Sec. 16-9. Penalties.
A. Any person who violates any
provision of this Section is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
B. Failure to comply with every portable
toilet waste hauler permit condition
shall result in the immediate
suspension of the portable toilet waste
hauler permit.
C. A portable toilet waste hauler whose
permit is suspended shall not have the
permit reinstated until City is satisfied
that the portable toilet waste hauler
shall comply with the provisions of
this Chapter. A decision of City
Wastewater Treatment Plant
supervisor to deny, to suspend or to
revoke a permit may be appealed to
the Council.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04)
Sec. 16-10. Appeals.
A. Appeal from a decision of City
Wastewater Treatment Plant
Supervisor shall be taken by filing
with the Clerk written notice thereof
within five (5) days following the
denial or entry of the order of
suspension or revocation of the permit.
The notice of appeal shall specify an
address at which the person appealing
§ 16-10 TITLE 5 — PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY § 16-10
may be given notice of hearing on the
appeal.
B. At the appeal hearing before the
Council, the applicant or person
appealing shall be entitled to appear in
person and offer evidence pertinent to
the denial, suspension or revocation or
may appear through legal counsel.
The Clerk, Public Works Director or
designee, and/or legal counsel for the
City shall likewise be entitled to
appear at the hearing and offer
evidence in support of the denial,
order of suspension or revocation.
C. The Council shall determine whether
the denial, suspension or revocation
shall be sustained and shall make a
final reasoned statement in writing
within fifteen (15) business days
following the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2004-06; 01/05/04; Ord. 2009-04,
02/02/2009)
§ 17-1 TITLE 5 — WATER CONSERVATION § 17-3
Chapter 17
WATER CONSERVATION
Sec. 17-1: Purpose
Sec. 17-2: General Water Usage
Regulations
Sec. 17-3: Definitions
Sec. 17-4: Outdoor Irrigation of
Impervious Surfaces
Prohibited
Sec. 17-5: Outdoor Irrigation Season
and Hours
Sec. 17-6: Exemptions from Water
Conservation Regulations
Sec. 17-7: Variance from Water
Conservation Regulations
Sec. 17-8: Penalties
Sec. 17-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
highlight the importance of water
conservation and to promote the
responsible use of water within the City
through reasonable regulation.
(Ord. 2004-27; 05/17/2004)
Sec. 17-2. General Water Usage
Regulations.
No person who uses water from the
City water supply system shall make,
cause, use or permit the use of such water
in a manner contrary to the provisions of
this Chapter whether or not such person is
an account holder or customer of such City
water supply system.
(Ord. 2004-27; 05/17/2004)
Sec. 17-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the
following term(s) shall have the meaning
given herein:
A. Automatic shut-off mechanism. A
device or attachment which
immediately and automatically shuts
off the flow of water from a hose
when the hose is not being physically
held or operated by a person, such as a
pistol or trigger spray hose nozzle or
other automatic positive shut-off
nozzle. A device or attachment which
shuts off water flow by measuring or
metering water (such as a mechanized
water timer) or a device or attachment
which shuts off water flow after a
certain measurement of time (such as
an electronic water timer), is not an
automatic shut-off mechanism for
purposes of this Chapter.
B. Impervious Surface. A durable
surface made of or similar to gravel,
asphalt, concrete, cement, brick, or
combination thereof, which is laid
down on or applied to an area
including, but not limited to, a
sidewalk, parking lot, etc., for the
purpose of creating a permanent or
semi-permanent surface which could
sustain vehicular, foot, or bicycle
traffic or other means of
transportation, and where vegetation is
unlikely to grow.
C. Irrigation System. Any device(s) or
system(s) utilizing a hose, pipe, and/or
other conduit which connects to any
source of ground and/or surface water
and through which water is conveyed
and/or drawn in order to apply such
water to land, crops, plants, and/or
other vegetation including, but not
limited to, sprinklers, in-ground
irrigation, or a similar system.
“Irrigation system” shall not include
an automatic shut-off mechanism, as
defined in this Chapter.
D. Outdoor Irrigation. The act or process
of watering or wetting landscaping,
grass, trees, plants, and/or other
vegetation by causing water from the
City’s water supply to flow upon,
over, through or into property with
sprinklers, sprinkler hoses, soaker
hose(s) (water weeping types), drip
irrigation systems, in-ground irrigation
systems, or by other similar means.
Irrigation with hand-held hose(s) of
one inch (1”) or less inside diameter
equipped with an automatic shut-off
mechanism or irrigation using a
container of five (5) gallons or less
§ 17-3 TITLE 5 — WATER CONSERVATION § 17-7
shall not be considered outdoor
irrigation for purposes of this Chapter.
E. Outdoor Irrigation Season. The period
within each calendar year declared by
the Public Works Director during
which Outdoor Irrigation is allowed
within City limits. As weather
conditions permit, the Outdoor
Irrigation Season shall begin seventy
two (72) hours after the Public Works
Director declares the start of such
Outdoor Irrigation Season. The Public
Works Director shall declare and
advertise the ending date of the
Outdoor Irrigation Season at least two
(2) weeks prior to such ending date.
(Ord. 2004-27, 05/17/2004; 2007-13,
11/19/2007; 2016-05, 04/18/2016)
Sec. 17-4. Outdoor Irrigation of
Impervious Surfaces
Prohibited.
No person shall cause or permit an
irrigation system under the ownership,
supervision, and/or control of such person
to apply water directly or indirectly to an
impervious surface, unless otherwise
allowed by this Chapter.
(Ord. 2007-13, 11/19/2007)
Sec. 17-5: Outdoor Irrigation Season
and Hours.
Outdoor Irrigation shall be allowed
only between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
10:00 a.m. local time, during the Outdoor
Irrigation Season unless modified by
variance pursuant to this Chapter. Outdoor
Irrigation shall be prohibited at all times
not within the declared Outdoor Irrigation
Season, unless permitted by Variance
issued by the Public Works Director in
cases of newly established lawns or
landscaping. Outdoor Irrigation by means
of soaker hose(s), (water weeping types) or
drip-irrigation systems may occur at any
time during the Outdoor Irrigation Season
specified herein.
(Ord. 2004-27; 05/17/2004; 2007-13, 11/19/2007;
2016-05, 04/18/2016)
Sec. 17-6. Exemptions from Water
Conservation Regulations.
The following uses of water shall not
be regulated by this Chapter:
A. Water required to be used for the
control of dust or compaction of soil
by this Code or by State and/or
Federal statute or regulation;
B. Water used to prevent or abate public
health, safety or accident hazards
including, but not limited to, fire
suppression, fire prevention, and
sanitation when a reasonable
alternative method is not available;
C. Water used for inspection,
maintenance, installation or repair of
automatic landscape sprinkling
systems or of the City’s water supply
system (including fire hydrants and
training facilities);
D. Water used by City or its agents or
franchisees for street sweeping,
construction, and maintenance; sewer
maintenance; or other established
utility and/or public works practices;
E. Water used for purposes other than
outdoor irrigation in the normal and
customary course of a business
operation and water used by a
commercial nursery for watering of
nursery stock;
F. Where water used for outdoor
irrigation is gray water (household
waste water other than from water
closets or kitchen sinks), treated waste
water or effluent, reused water, or
water from a source other than the
City water system, such as collected
rainwater.
(Ord. 2004-27; 05/17/2004; 2007-13,
11/19/2007)
Sec. 17-7. Variance from Water
Conservation Regulations.
The Public Works Director or
designee may grant permission to an
applicant for variance from the provisions
of this Chapter where it is established that
there is a hardship or special circumstance
§ 17-7 TITLE 5 — WATER CONSERVATION § 17-8
which requires such a variance (e.g.,
establishment of newly seeded or sodded
turf grass and/or landscaping; application
of chemicals which requires immediate
irrigation to preserve lawn or landscaping;
physical necessity; etc.). When granting a
variance, the Public Works Director or
designee shall establish such conditions
and limitations as are necessary to further
the purposes of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2004-27; 05/17/2004; 2007-13, 11/19/2007)
Sec. 17-8. Penalties
A. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof in a court of
competent jurisdiction, shall be
punished pursuant to this Code and the
Idaho Code.
B. The imposition of a penalty for any
violation of this Chapter shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to
continue.
C. Each day or part thereof in which an
activity occurs which is prohibited by
this Chapter, shall constitute a
separate offense.
D. For purposes of this Chapter, no
violation shall be prosecuted unless
the Public Works Director or designee
or the City Police Department has
made at least one (1) attempt to
contact and to request relief from the
person responsible for the violation.
(Ord. 2004-27; 05/17/2004; 2007-13,
11/19/2007)
§ 18-1 TITLE 5 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 18-5
Chapter 18
PUBLIC ART
Sec. 18-1: Purpose
Sec. 18-2: Capital Improvement Project
Defined
Sec. 18-3: General Requirements for
Art
Sec. 18-4: Administrative
Responsibilities
Sec. 18-5: Source of Funds
Sec. 18-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Ordinance and
the policy of the City through the
dedication of one percent (1%) of the total
cost of all funded Capital Improvement
Projects, as defined herein, to facilitate the
inclusion of art in public places related to
such Capital Improvement Projects when
appropriate, in order to beautify public
areas, to enhance the quality of life for
Moscow citizens, to attract tourism, and to
provide incentives to businesses to locate
within the City, thus expanding Moscow’s
economic base.
(Ord. 2004-30, 06/21/2004)
Sec. 18-2. Capital Improvement Project
Defined.
A. 1. For purposes of this Chapter and
except as otherwise provided for in
this Section, “Capital Improvement
Project” shall mean every capital
municipal construction or
improvement project or portion
thereof, paid for wholly or in part by
the City where the total cost of such
project is reasonably anticipated to be
in excess of twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000). A Capital
Improvement Project shall include
construction, renovation or remodel of
any public park, public building or
structure, street or road, or public
parking facility whether developed by
the City or developed privately and
leased back to the City.
2. Where a Capital Improvement
Project is funded in whole or in part by
State and/or Federal monies, only the
portion of the Capital Improvement
Project which permits expenditure of
such monies for the arts shall be used
to calculate the one percent (1%)
dedication for the arts. Where a
Capital Improvement Project is funded
in whole or in part by State and/or
Federal monies and the State or
Federal monies do not allow for
expenditure of such monies for the
arts, only the portion of the City’s
required financial contribution to such
Capital Improvement Project shall be
used to calculate the one percent (1%)
dedication for the arts and such one
percent (1%) shall be in addition to the
City’s minimum required contribution
to such Capital Improvement Project.
B. Capital Improvement Project shall not
include:
1. Maintenance of public
improvements such as streets,
sidewalks, curbs, alleys or right-ofway
improvements;
2. Subsurface public utility
improvements such as storm and
sanitary sewers, waterlines, fire
hydrants, and other appurtenances;
3. The portion of a Capital
Improvement Project funded by State
and/or Federal monies which prohibit
expenditure of such monies for the
arts;
4. A Capital Improvement Project
undertaken before the effective date of
this Ordinance; or
5. A Local Improvement District.
(Ord. 2004-30, 06/21/2004)
Sec. 18-3. General Requirements for
Art.
A. Public art may be an integral part of a
structure, attached to a structure or
detached from a structure within or
outside of it. Public art may also be
located on any publicly owned
property.
B. Any public art chosen shall be located
in a public place with public visibility
and impact, and further shall comply
with any addition to any guidelines
§ 18-1 TITLE 5 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 18-5
established by Council upon
recommendation of the Moscow Arts
Commission.
C. Nothing contained herein shall
preclude funding City public art by
matching monies, donations, or other
means.
(Ord. 2004-30, 06/21/2004)
Sec. 18-4. Administrative
Responsibilities.
A. The City designates its Arts Director
or designee, in cooperation with the
Moscow Arts Commission, to be
responsible for the location and
selection of all public art in the City.
The Arts Director shall make
recommendations for and shall advise
other City departments regarding the
maintenance, repair, or other
conservation of public art.
B. Public art selected shall be consistent
with the City’s Comprehensive Plan,
zoning and subdivision ordinances,
and land uses contemplated therein.
C. The Moscow Arts Commission shall
make reports regarding the public art
selected for the Capital Improvement
Project from time to time as requested
by the Mayor and/or the Council.
(Ord. 2004-30, 06/21/2004)
Sec. 18-5. Source of Funds.
A. From each funded Capital
Improvement Project, the City shall set
aside an amount equal to one percent
(1%) of such Capital Improvement
Project’s construction budget for
purchase and installation of public art
regardless of whether the Capital
Improvement Project is completed.
Calculation of the construction budget
of a Capital Improvement Project shall
be done in the same manner as is done
to determine the costs of building
permit fees in a construction project.
B. Of the one percent (1%) set aside from
every Capital Improvement Project
allocated to the public art account:
1. No less than seventy-five percent
(75%) shall be allocated toward such
public art, including purchase, design,
fabrication and installation.
2. No more than twenty-five percent
(25%) shall be used for administrative
costs, including, but not limited to,
costs of selection, maintenance, repair
and conservation.
(Ord. 2004-30, 06/21/2004)
§ 1-6 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 1-6
Chapter I
TRAILER HOMES
Sec. 1-1: Definitions
Sec. 1-2: Prohibited Within Fire
Limits
Sec. 1-3: Permit Required
Sec. 1-4: Application for Permit
Sec. 1-5: Clerk to Issue Permit; Time
Limit
Sec. 1-6: Permit Not Renewable
Sec. 1-7: Toilet Facilities;
Requirements
Sec. 1-8: Creating Fire Hazard or
Nuisance Prohibited
Sec. 1-9: Revocation of Permits
Sec. 1-10: Application for Revocation
of Permits
Sec. 1-11: Duties of Police
Sec. 1-12: Recreational Vehicle Parks
Excepted
Sec. 1-1. Definitions.
The words used herein shall have the
following meaning ascribed:
Trailer as used herein shall include:
A. All motor or other vehicles designed
or adapted for use as dwellings;
B. All portable dwelling houses, whether
the same be at any given time mounted
on wheels or not;
C. Any dwelling house, any single inside
dimension of which is less than eight
(8) feet.
Sec. 1-2. Prohibited Within Fire
Limits.
No person shall use any trailer as a
dwelling house or for dwelling house
purposes, while such trailer is parked at any
place on any street or alley of the City or at
any place within the fire limits of the City
as the same may be defined from time to
time.
Sec. 1-3. Permit Required.
No person shall use any trailer for
dwelling purposes at any place within the
City unless such person has a permit
therefor issued as provided hereinafter.
Sec. 1-4. Application for Permit.
Any person desiring to live in a trailer
within the City shall make application to
the Community Development Director or
designee for a permit so to do, setting forth
in said application the name of the
applicant, the names of all persons who
shall reside in such trailer, a general
description of the trailer sufficient to
permit identification of the same, the
applicant's automobile license number, the
location where the applicant proposes to
live in said trailer, the name of the person
owning, leasing or managing such ground
who gave permission to applicant to park
his trailer upon the proposed location, a
description of the toilet and sanitary
facilities which will be available to
applicant and such information as the
Community Development Director or
designee may require. There shall be no
fee for such permit.
(Ord. 2000-23, 10/02/2000)
Sec. 1-5. Community Development
Director to Issue Permit;
Time Limit.
Upon such application the Community
Development Director or designee may, in
the Director’s discretion, issue a permit
allowing such applicant and the persons
named in the application to reside in the
trailer described in said application, for a
period of not to exceed sixty (60) days.
Such permit shall be nontransferable.
(Ord. 2000-23, 10/02/2000)
Sec. 1-6. Permit Not Renewable.
A. Such permits shall be nonrenewable,
and no second permit may be issued
during any one (1) calendar year to the
same person, and no second permit
may be issued to any person during
one (1) calendar year for the use of the
same trailer. The Council may grant
on special application in writing a
permit for an indefinite period if
§ 1-6 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 1-12
unusual hardship is shown by the
issuance of an ordinary permit, but a
permit for an indefinite period shall
only be issued upon a showing that the
trailer is used to house an aged, infirm
or ill member of the immediate family
of the owner of the parcel of land upon
which said trailer is situated and upon
which the owner of said parcel of land
himself resides; and such permit shall
only remain in existence until the
termination of the condition which
required the application for a special
permit due to hardship.
B. It is further provided that in such event
the owner of the ground upon which
said trailer is situated shall not charge
any rent for the space occupied by said
trailer, and shall only be permitted to
keep said trailer on said grounds
during the time that said trailer is
occupied by an aged, infirm or ill
member of the immediate family of
the owner of said land.
C. It is further provided that the Council
shall have full discretionary powers
concerning requirements relative to
location of trailer on premises and
sanitation facilities.
D. It is further provided, that they shall
have the power of revocation of said
indefinite permit if upon proper
investigation it is determined that any
of such requirements are not complied
with, or if conditions are found to be
other than represented in the
application for said indefinite permit.
(Ord. 2000-23, 10/02/2000)
Sec. 1-7. Toilet Facilities;
Requirements.
No permit shall be issued unless the
applicant will, at the proposed location of
the trailer, be provided with toilet facilities
connected with the City sewer system, if
there is a sewer line within three hundred
(300) feet of the proposed location of the
trailer and sewer connection is practicable,
and if there is no sewer line within three
hundred (300) feet or such connection is
impracticable on account of elevation or
other reason then the applicant must, at the
proposed location of the trailer, be
provided with a sanitary privy conforming
to the specifications set forth elsewhere.
Sec. 1-8. Creating Fire Hazard or
Nuisance Prohibited.
Any license or permit granted
hereunder may be revoked by reason of
misrepresentation in the application
whereby the use of a trailer at any given
location may or is likely to increase
substantially the fire risk or create a
sanitary nuisance or other nuisance.
Sec. 1-9. Revocation of Permits.
Any permit granted hereunder may be
revoked by reason of misrepresentation in
the application, violation of the terms of the
permit, the creation of a fire hazard or a
sanitary nuisance or the violation of this
Chapter or the violation of any law relating
to sanitary matters, building construction,
zoning, fire hazards, vagrancy and the
preservation of peace and order.
Sec. 1-10. Application for Revocation
of Permits.
Any person may file application in
duplicate with the Community
Development Director or designee asking
for revocation of any trailer license.
(Ord. 2000-23, 10/02/2000)
Sec. 1-11. Duties of Police.
When any person shall live in a trailer
within the City in violation of the terms of
this Chapter, the Chief of Police may cause
said trailer to be taken into police custody
and towed away and stored and ultimately
sold in the same manner as provided for
illegally parked cars.
Sec. 1-12. Recreational Vehicle Parks
Excepted.
The terms of this Chapter shall be
inapplicable to recreational vehicle parks
conducted or operated within the City.
(Ord. 976, 10/10/56; Ord. 977, 2/20/57)
§ 2-1 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-3
Chapter 2
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Sec. 2-1: Title
Sec. 2-2: Statement of Purpose
Sec. 2-3: Definitions
Sec. 2-4: Application Procedure for
Mobile Home Development
Sec. 2-5: Application and Preliminary
Plans
Sec. 2-6: Final Plans
Sec. 2-7: Permits
Sec. 2-8: Fees
Sec. 2-9: Standards for Mobile Home
Park Development; Size, Lot
Size and Setbacks
Sec. 2-10: Phase Development
Sec. 2-11: Recreation Area
Sec. 2-12: Buffer Area
Sec. 2-13: Streets and Roads
Sec. 2-14: Private Streets
Sec. 2-15: Walkways
Sec. 2-16: Lighting
Sec. 2-17: Parking
Sec. 2-18: Utilities
Sec. 2-19: Refuse Handling
Sec. 2-20: Space Numbering
Sec. 2-21: Skirting
Sec. 2-22: Responsibilities of Park
Management
Sec. 2-23: Park Areas for Nonresidential
Uses
Sec. 2-24: Violation of Provisions;
Operations Suspension
Sec. 2-25: Variances
Sec. 2-26: Appeals
Sec. 2-27: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 2-28: Nonconforming Uses
Sec. 2-29: Parks Annexed Into the City
Sec. 2-30: Other Regulations
Sec. 2-1. Title.
This Chapter shall be known and
designated as the "New Mobile Home Park
Chapter" of the City. The standards
contained herein shall apply to all mobile
home parks developed after the effective
date of this Chapter and the future
expansion of existing mobile home parks.
Sec. 2-2. Statement of Purpose.
Realizing that the mobile home is
becoming an integral part of the nation's
housing supply, and realizing that safe
housing and a pleasant environment for the
residents of the City is of prime concern to
the Council, this Chapter is provided for the
following purposes:
A. To provide for the orderly placement of
mobile homes in mobile home parks
within the City and the area of City
impact.
B. To maintain a consistency of building
codes and housing standards within the
City.
C. To maintain property values throughout
the City.
D. To safeguard the health, safety and
environment of residents of mobile
home developments through adequate
regulation.
E. To allow a greater choice of housing
alternatives for residents of the City.
F. To provide for adequate traffic
circulation and open space within
mobile home developments.
Sec. 2-3. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, unless the
context otherwise indicates:
A. Accessory Parking Area. A common
enclosed area set aside for the parking
and storage of vehicles and mobile
units accessory to everyday life. Such
units may include, but are not limited
to, motor homes, travel trailers, pickup
campers, boats, motorcycles and other
similar items.
B. Accessory Structure. A structure
intended for other than dwelling
purposes that is within a mobile home
park. Such a structure would include,
but not be limited to, storage areas,
laundry facilities, recreation halls,
maintenance shops, etc.
C. Application, Mobile Home Park.
Required form provided by the City to
be completed and submitted to the City
along with accompanying maps and
other information.
§ 2-3 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-3
D. Building. Any structure having a roof
building for the complete enclosure of
persons or property of any kind upon
real property, but excluding all forms
of vehicles even though immobilized.
E. Building Code for Mobile Homes.
Provides for the standards for
construction of mobile homes as
adopted in the Idaho Advisory Building
Code as adopted by the State of Idaho.
F. Building Codes. The latest edition of
any building code as currently adopted
by the Council.
G. Building Permits. A written form of
permission to develop or alter
structures placed on real property or its
appurtenances constructed to the
standards provided for in the Code.
H. Buffer Zone. The area immediately
within the external property lines of
any mobile home park which is
intended as an open transitional area
between the mobile home development
and adjacent land uses.
I. Construction Permit. An official
certificate issued by the City granting
permission, after all final plans are
approved, to start construction (roads,
utilities, site preparation, etc.) on the
development of a mobile home park.
J. Mobile Home (Relocatable Housing).
A detached single family dwelling unit
or a dwelling unit for use as a
component in a two family or multi
family structure with all of the
following characteristics:
1. Designed for long term
occupancy, containing complete
sleeping accommodations, toilet
facilities, bath facilities, kitchen
facilities, with plumbing and electrical
connections provided for connection to
an outside system.
2. Designed to be transported after
fabrication on its own wheels, or on a
flatbed or other trailer or detachable
wheels.
3. Built to arrive at the site where it
is to be occupied as a dwelling unit
complete, including major appliances,
and ready for occupancy, except for
minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, location on
foundation supports or integration into
a prepared structure.
4. Meets the requirements set forth in
Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter 41, as
amended from time to time by the State
Legislature.
K. Mobile Home, Double Wide or Triple
Wide. A mobile home consisting
respectively of two (2) or three (3)
sections combined horizontally or
stacking vertically at the site to form a
single dwelling, while still retaining
their individual chassis for possible
future movement.
L. Mobile Home Park. A tract of land
under single ownership developed for
the purpose of providing rental space
for parking mobile homes on individual
lots and for accessory structures to
serve the residents within its confines.
M. Mobile Home, Single Wide. A
transportable structure which is at least
ten (10) feet in width and over thirtytwo
(32) feet in length, built on a
chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the
required utilities.
N. Mobile Home Stand. That part of an
individual lot in a mobile home park
which has been reserved for the
placement of a mobile home. Stand
shall be constructed of concrete as
required by the administrative
authority.
O. Park Operator's Permit. A written
form of permission by the Director of
Community Development upon
approval of satisfactory completion of
development and after final inspection
is made and approved before
occupancy is allowed on any completed
phase of development.
P. Recreation Area. Space within a
mobile home park having open area
and/or recreational equipment to be
§ 2-3 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-5
used for the leisure activities of
residents of the development.
Q. Setback. The area between the
property or lot line and the line beyond
which buildings may legally be located.
R. Setback Front. The distance from the
property or lot line on a private or
public right-of-way to the building line.
When the lot does not adjoin a private
or public right-of-way, any side of the
lot may be designated as the "front."
S. Setback Rear. The setback from the
property or lot line on the opposite side
of the lot from the front setback. For a
triangular shaped lot, the setback shall
be measured from a line ten (10) feet in
length within the lot which is parallel
to the front lot line, or parallel to the
chord of a curved front lot line.
T. Setback Side. The setbacks from the
property line or lot lines remaining
after the front and rear setbacks have
been determined.
U. Space Occupancy Permit. A written
form of permission issued by the
Director of Community Development
to the mobile home park owner or
operator to permit a mobile home to be
placed on a mobile home stand in a
mobile home park. Space occupancy
permit gives approval that the mobile
home can be occupied at that particular
site.
V. Structure. That which is built or
constructed, an edifice or building of
any kind, or any piece of work
artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite
manner.
W. Utilities. Basic public service facilities
such as water lines, sewer lines, natural
gas lines, electric power lines,
telephone wires and community
television antenna lines.
X. Yard. Open, unoccupied space in front,
rear or side on the same lot with a
building.
Sec. 2-4. Application Procedure for
Mobile Home Development.
The following is the application
procedure for the development of mobile
home parks in the City. A person wishing to
make application for a mobile home park
should contact the City Director of
Community Development or his or her
designee to determine the regulations and
requirements for such a development. A
conference between the applicant and
appropriate City staff will be scheduled.
A. To provide clarification of the entire
mobile home park development
process;
B. To allow the City staff to express their
professional views about the proposed
site;
C. To review adequacy of utilities for the
development; and
D. To clarify public utility and other
development policies of the City.
Sec. 2-5. Application and
Preliminary Plans.
The applicant shall submit an
application on the form prescribed by the
City and at least five (5) complete sets of
preliminary plans to the City Director of
Community Development for consideration
by the Planning and Zoning Commission at
least twenty (20) days prior to the meeting
at which such plans will be considered. The
application and preliminary plans shall
include at least the following:
A. Application:
1. Name, address of developer and
names of principal professional
personnel involved in plan preparation.
2. Legal description of development
site.
3. Area of proposed development
measured in acres and square feet.
4. Percentage of total area to be set
aside for use in common or recreation.
5. Number of spaces or lots intended
for development.
§ 2-5 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-6
6. Any intentions for phasing the
project.
B. Preliminary Plans:
1. A drawing to scale of not less than
one (1) inch to fifty (50) feet), showing
all land uses in the periphery of the
development and all public and private
roads within three hundred (300) feet
of the development. Development area
to be distinctly shown on the abovementioned
drawings.
2. A topographical map showing
existing and final contours and
drainage systems through the
development, with maximum contour
intervals of five (5) feet, extending not
less than one hundred fifty (150) feet
beyond the boundaries of the
development area.
3. Tentative patterns of streets,
bikeways and walkways, showing
width and separation of same, and their
relationship to similar facilities outside
the boundaries of the proposed
development, including sizing.
Proposed street names shall be shown.
4. Location and specific nature of
open area and playground equipment, if
any.
5. Location of all existing and
proposed structures within the
development.
6. Location and precise nature of
buffer area and its contents.
7. A conceptual plan of landscaping
indicating type (trees, shrubs, ground
cover) and general extent of plantings
and a statement regarding the proposed
maintenance program.
8. Tentative location of lots or
spaces and location of major areas
intended for use in common.
9. Any other details specifically
requested to be shown at the
preliminary conference.
C. The preliminary plans will be
submitted to the City to be examined
for conformance to this Chapter by the
Director of Community Development
before being scheduled on the agenda
of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Director of
Community Development will submit
the preliminary plans for comment to
the City Engineer, the Fire Chief, and
the City building official at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the scheduled
meeting before the Planning and
Zoning Commission. City staff
comments will be provided within ten
(10) days from the date they are
provided copies of the development
plans. If the plans are in conformance
with this Chapter, they will be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission along with comments
from City staff. The Planning and
Zoning Commission will review the
plans and will approve or disapprove
the plans, approve the plans
conditionally or request modification
of the plans within sixty (60) days after
the first meeting at which they are
considered. Plans recommended for
approval will be forwarded to the
Council for their review.
Sec. 2-6. Final Plans.
A. The final plans will include detailed
drawings on all physical developments
of the park development and any other
requirements determined during the
approval process of the preliminary
plans. Within a year after the Planning
and Zoning Commission approval of
the preliminary plans, the applicant
shall submit five (5) copies of the final
plans to the Director of Community
Development twenty (20) days before
the scheduled meeting of the Planning
and Zoning Commission. The Director
of Community Development shall
submit copies of the final plans to the
City Engineer, the Fire Chief and the
building officials fifteen (15) days prior
to consideration before the Planning
and Zoning Commission, allowing ten
(10) days for staff review. Final plans
will be checked for conformance with
the concepts presented and approved in
§ 2-6 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-9
the preliminary plans, the requirements
of this Chapter and City standards
before submitting the final plans to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for
its approval. If the Planning and
Zoning Commission finds the final
plans to be in conformance with the
approved preliminary plans, the plans
will be approved and forwarded to the
Council. The final plan shall include:
1. A survey by a licensed surveyor
indicating exterior boundary, public
rights-of-way, lot sizes, easements,
recreation area and any other
information required by the City
Engineer;
2. Construction plans prepared by a
licensed engineer indicating alignment
and grade for water, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer and streets;
3. Parking location and layout;
4. Street lighting layout;
5. Space numbering;
6. Fire protection plan; content
determined by the Director of
Community Development;
7. Landscaping plan (including
species and placement of planted
materials):
a. At least one (1) tree per every
mobile home unit.
b. Trees and other plantings
shall conform to size standards
established in the "American Standards
for Nursery Stock."
c. All common areas and lots
not utilized for structures, parking or
other landscaping shall be covered by
turf or other vegetative ground cover.
B. Before occupancy permits are issued,
record built drawings of all
construction prepared by a licensed
engineer will be submitted to the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 2-7. Permits.
The following permits shall be required
for mobile home parks:
A. Construction Permit: Issued by the
Director of Community Development
upon approval of all final plans by the
Council or authorized the Director of
Community Development to start
construction on a mobile home park.
B. Park Operator's Permit: To be issued
by the Director of Community
Development upon approval of
satisfactory completion of development
and after final inspection is made and
approved before occupancy is allowed
on any completed phase of
development.
C. Space Occupancy Permit: Issued to
park owner before the siting or re-siting
of mobile home on specific lot and
mobile home stand in mobile home
park. Used to determine that mobile
home locating on a given site meets all
required codes; approved site and
mobile home will be issued a certificate
of occupancy.
D. Plumbing Permit: Issued to owner of
mobile home to cover connection of
unit into park water and sewer system.
E. Electrical Permit: Issued to owner of
mobile home to cover connection of
unit to park electrical system.
F. Gas Permit: Issued to owner of mobile
home to cover connection of gas to
mobile home unit.
G. Building Permit: Issued to cover
construction of any structure within the
park and is issued to the owner of the
structure.
Sec. 2-8. Fees.
Fees for permits will be established by
resolution of the Council.
Sec. 2-9. Standards for Mobile Home
Park Development; Size,
Lot Size and Setbacks.
A. Minimum site size: 5 acres.
B. Lot size (min.): 3,600 sq. ft.
C. Setbacks (min.):
Front: 10 ft.
Sides and rear: 5 ft.
Side unit with main entrance: 10 ft.
§ 2-9 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-14
D. Minimum space between units,
including accessory structures: 10 ft.
E. Lot coverage (including awnings)
(max.): 70%.
F. Unwalled carports may be located
within a required front setback if
located not closer than four (4) feet to
the curb or edge of the street; however,
no fencing, screening, wall or plantings
shall be permitted in the setback which
might interfere with a driver's view of
the street.
(Ord. 90-23, 12/17/90)
Sec. 2-10. Phase Development.
If the developer wishes to phase the
construction of the development, at least
one half (1/2) of the required thirty-five (35)
units or five (5) acres, whichever is less, and
the required accessory facilities shall be
completed prior to being issued an
operator's permit. The City may require
bonding for the remaining portions of the
phased development. Bonding would cover
the cost of providing roads, sidewalks, street
lighting, accessory structures and other parts
of the unfinished portion of the mobile
home park.
Sec. 2-11. Recreation Area.
A common recreation area(s) shall be
provided in each mobile home park
consisting of no less than four percent (4%)
or ten thousand (10,000) square feet,
whichever is greater, or the gross land area.
This area shall be exclusive of all lot and
buffer areas and shall be developed with turf
and trees to accommodate both active and
passive recreation. If this requirement is to
be met by several separate areas, one area
must be ten thousand (10,000) square feet in
size and the remaining recreation areas shall
be left to the discretion of the developer.
Sec. 2-12. Buffer Area.
All mobile home lot lines and all
structures within a mobile home park shall
be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet
from the property line of the development.
The need for a buffer area shall be
determined by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. If the Planning and Zoning
Commission determines a need for a buffer
area, a sight obscuring fence or evergreen
hedge at least six (6) feet in height shall be
maintained within the rear and side buffer
areas. Such fence or hedge across the front
of the development shall be set back at least
ten (10) feet from the front property line.
The remainder of the buffer area will be
landscaped as determined in the
development plan submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
Sec. 2-13. Streets and Roads.
The general layout of a mobile home
development shall provide not only
adequate circulation space within its
confines, but shall also integrate with any
existing or planned street pattern in the
general area of the development. Public
street dedication may be required if needed
to provide proper integration with existing
or planned streets. All dedicated streets
shall be constructed to City width and
construction standards. The developer of a
mobile home park may be required to
improve any right-of-way to which the
development is adjacent, to City standards.
All street names shall be approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
Sec. 2-14. Private Streets.
Private streets within a mobile home
park shall be constructed to a minimum of
four (4) inch aggregate base and a minimum
of three (3) inches of bituminous pavement
with curbs on both sides and sidewalk on
one side. Plans for traffic circulation within
the area and the size of the development
shall be considered before the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Private streets shall be
a minimum of forty (40) feet in width with
parking on both sides, thirty-two (32) feet
with parking on one side and twenty-seven
(27) feet when no parking is provided.
Dead end streets shall be limited to a length
of six hundred and sixty (660) feet and the
cul-de-sac shall have a minimum radius of
forty (40) feet.
§ 2-15 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-21
Sec. 2-15. Walkways.
Pedestrian walkways four (4) feet in
width shall be provided along one side
of street frontage in mobile home parks and
shall be constructed to City standards.
Walkways connecting interior facilities in
the mobile home park shall also be
constructed to City standards of four (4) feet
in width. Walkways will be provided from
the mobile home unit to the street or interior
walkway system and shall be built to a
minimum of two (2) feet or wider.
Sec. 2-16. Lighting.
Street lighting shall be provided by the
developers of all mobile home
developments affected by this Chapter.
Such lighting shall utilize a mercury vapor
or high pressure sodium light or another
lighting system approved by the City
Engineer. Lighting shall be provided at a
minimum intensity of one-half (1/2) candle
foot at all places along the private streets.
Along public streets, the street light
requirements shall meet the standards set
forth in the Code.
(Ord. 2005-07, 02/07/2005)
Sec. 2-17. Parking.
A. A minimum of two (2) off-street
parking spaces per unit shall be
required within a mobile home park
and parking spaces shall be located
adjacent to the mobile home site where
possible, but not further than one
hundred fifty (150) feet from the
identified site. A parking space shall
consist of three hundred (300) gross
square feet of area and shall be paved.
B. A minimum of one (1) additional space
beyond the two (2) required spaces
shall be required and shall be provided
for mobile home parks on adjacent
streets or in a parking lot.
C. An accessory parking and storage area
for recreation vehicles, boats and
similar equipment shall be provided at
a rate of one (1) space per fifteen (15)
mobile home spaces in mobile home
parks. This accessory parking area
shall be enclosed by a fence six (6) feet
in height and with security lighting
provided at one-half (1/2) candle foot
for this accessory parking area.
Sec. 2-18. Utilities.
All mobile home developments shall be
served by City water and sewer and shall be
developed and constructed to City
standards. The water, sewer and electrical
systems within the development and all
individual hookups shall be installed in
accordance to City standards.
Sec. 2-19. Refuse Handling.
A. The storage, collection and disposal of
refuse in mobile home parks shall be
conducted as to create no health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accident or fire hazards
or air pollution.
B. All refuse shall be stored in flytight,
watertight, rodent proof containers,
which shall be located not more than
one hundred fifty (150) feet from any
mobile home lot. Containers shall be
provided in sufficient number and
capacity to properly store all refuse.
C. Refuse collection stands shall be
provided for all refuse containers.
Such container stands shall be so
designed as to prevent the containers
from being tipped, to minimize spillage
and container deterioration and to
facilitate cleaning around them.
Sec. 2-20. Space Numbering.
Each lot in a mobile home development
shall be conspicuously marked with the
proper lot number that will provide
identification of that site. Such numbering
shall be subject to approval of the Director
of Community Development.
Sec. 2-21. Skirting.
All mobile homes placed within the
City shall, within sixty (60) days of their
installation, except in cases of inclement
weather be completely skirted between the
bottom of the unit and the ground with a
§ 2-21 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-24
material harmonious in color and texture
with the exterior of the mobile home.
Sec. 2-22. Responsibilities of Park
Management.
A. The operator of a mobile home park
shall operate the park in compliance
with this Chapter and regulations
issued hereunder and shall provide
adequate supervision to maintain the
park, its facilities and equipment in
good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition.
B. The park management shall notify park
occupants of all applicable provisions
of this Chapter and inform them of
their duties and responsibilities under
this Chapter and regulations issued
hereunder.
C. The park management shall be
responsible for obtaining all necessary
permits required by this Chapter for
placement and replacement of each
mobile home on its stand and the
installation of all utility connections.
An occupancy certificate for the mobile
home will not be issued until proper
inspections have been made by the
Director of Community Development.
A mobile home shall not be occupied
for dwelling purposes until an
occupancy certificate has been issued
by the Director of Community
Development. An occupancy
certificate will not be issued for a
mobile home not meeting the standards
adopted by the State Code.
D. An office shall be maintained on all
mobile home park premises which
allows residents to contact the
management at least on a forty (40)
hour per week basis.
Sec. 2-23. Park Areas for
Nonresidential Uses.
A. No part of any park shall be used for
nonresidential purposes, except such
uses that are required for the direct
servicing and well being of park
residents and for the management and
maintenance of the park.
B. Nothing contained in this Section shall
be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a
mobile home located in and connected
to the pertinent utilities.
Sec. 2-24. Violation of Provisions;
Operations Suspension.
A. Whenever, upon inspection of any
mobile home park, the Director of
Community Development finds that
conditions or practices exist which are
in violation of any provision of this
Chapter, or the park operator's permit
for the development or any other
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the
Director of Community Development
shall give notice which shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Include a statement of the reason
for its issuance;
3. Allow a reasonable time for the
performance of any act it requires;
4. Be served upon the owner or
owner’s agent when a copy thereof has
been sent by certified or regular mail to
the owner or owner’s agent’s last
known address, or when the owner or
owner’s agent has been served with
such notice by any other method
authorized or required by the laws of
this state; and
5. Contain an outline of remedial
action, which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter and with regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
B. At the end of the specified time period,
the Director of Community
Development shall reinspect such
mobile home park and, if such
conditions or practices have not been
corrected, the Director of Community
Development shall take legal action to
have the mobile home park operator's
permit revoked and have the mobile
home park cease operation or have the
City hire or contract for remedial
action to correct the problem and bill
§ 2-24 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-27
the park operator for these costs or put
a lien on his property.
C. Any person whose mobile home park
has received notice their mobile home
park operator's permit will be revoked
unless certain conditions or practices at
the mobile home park are corrected,
may request a hearing on the matter
before the Council. The mobile home
park owner/operator has thirty (30)
days to appeal the ruling of the
Director of Community Development
and to file an appeal with the Council.
D. The filing of the request for a hearing
shall operate as a stay of notice of
suspension. Under receipt of such
petition, the Council shall set the time
and place for such a hearing and shall
give the petitioner notice thereof. At
such hearing, the petitioner shall be
given the opportunity to be heard, and
to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing
shall be commenced no later than thirty
(30) days after the day on which the
petition was filed; provided, upon
application of the petitioner, the date of
the hearing may be postponed for a
reasonable time beyond such thirty (30)
day period when it is felt that the
petitioner has submitted good and
sufficient reasons for postponement.
E. After such hearing, the Council shall
make findings as to compliance with
the provisions of this Chapter and
regulations issued thereunder and shall
issue orders in writing sustaining,
modifying or withdrawing the notice
which shall be served in a manner
prescribed in this Code. Upon a failure
to comply with the order sustaining or
modifying a notice, the operation of the
mobile home park affected by the order
shall be stopped or corrective action
taken by the City and charged to the
park operator. The proceedings at such
a hearing, including the findings and
decisions of the Council, together with
a copy of every notice and order related
thereto, shall be entered as a matter of
public record of the Council, but the
transcript of the proceedings need not
be transcribed unless judicial review of
the decision is sought as provided by
laws of this state.
F. When the Director of Community
Development finds an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, he or she
may, without notice of hearing, issue
an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such
action be taken as he or she may deem
necessary to meet the emergency,
including the suspension of operation
and the revoking of the park operator's
permit. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Chapter, such order
as directed shall comply therewith
immediately, but upon petition to the
Council, shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible.
(Ord. 2011-03, 05/16/2011)
Sec. 2-25. Variances.
Variances may be permitted as set forth
in the Zoning Code.
Sec. 2-26. Appeals.
Any person whose application for a
mobile home development under this
Chapter has been denied, may, within ten
(10) days after the date on which the
application was denied, appeal to the
Council under the procedure provided in
this Chapter. A hearing on the matter will
be scheduled within sixty (60) days of the
date of the appeal being filed.
Sec. 2-27. Violations; Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined pursuant
to this Code and the Idaho Code. Each day
such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such. The City
may also use any civil remedies available to
gain compliance with this Chapter.
§ 2-28 TITLE 6 - MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 2-30
Sec. 2-28. Nonconforming Uses.
Any existing park which does not meet
the standards of this Chapter shall be
considered a nonconforming use. Any
existing parks that become nonconforming
uses at the time this Chapter is adopted may
continue to operate unless the use shall be
terminated for a period of one hundred
eighty (180) days. If such use is terminated
for more than one hundred eighty (180)
days, the use cannot be reestablished unless
it is brought into conformance with this
Chapter. Any expansion of a
nonconforming mobile home park shall be
developed to the requirements and standards
of this Chapter.
Sec. 2-29. Parks Annexed Into the
City.
This Section shall apply to mobile
home parks in proximity to, or within the
area of City impact of the City.
A. Any mobile home park (or portion of
such park) developed after the effective
date of this Chapter shall be required to
comply with all standards and
requirements of this Chapter within
ninety (90) days after said park is
annexed into the City.
B. Any mobile home park developed prior
to the effective date of this Chapter
shall be required to comply with the
permit provisions of this Chapter and
the standards of Ordinance No. 1381,
within six (6) months after the date of
annexation.
Sec. 2-30. Other Regulations.
A. The standards contained in Ordinance
No. 1381 shall continue to apply to
mobile home parks (or portions
thereof) established prior to August 25,
1972.
B. The standards contained in Ordinance
No. 1221 shall continue to apply to
mobile home parks (or portions
thereof) developed between August 25,
1972 and the effective date of this
Chapter.
(Ords. 1221, 8/25/72; 1381, 5/21/79; 1450,
3/2/81; 90-23, 12/17/90)
§ 3-1 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 3-5
Chapter 3
CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE OF
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Sec. 3-1: Purpose
Sec. 3-2: Code Sections Adopted
Sec. 3-3: Required Separation
Between Mobile Homes
Sec. 3-4: Required Setbacks, Buffer
Strips and Screening
Sec. 3-5: Park Street System
Sec. 3-6: Walks
Sec. 3-7: Water Supply
Sec. 3-8: Water Distribution System
Sec. 3-9: Sewage Disposal
Sec. 3-10: Electrical Distribution
System
Sec. 3-11: General Requirements
Sec. 3-12: Fire Protection
Sec. 3-13: Responsibilities of Park
Owners and Occupants
Sec. 3-14: Fees
Sec. 3-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter shall be to
promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the older
mobile home parks in existence prior to
August 25, 1972, and to require the owners
to meet the standards set forth herein no
later than September 1, 1979.
Sec. 3-2. Code Sections Adopted.
Standards, definitions, and procedures
established in Title 6, Chapter 2, of this
Code shall apply to this Chapter except
where it is clear by context that such are
inapplicable.
Sec. 3-3. Required Separation
Between Mobile Homes.
A. Each mobile home stand shall not
cover more than one-third (1/3) of the
area of the mobile home lot. Every
mobile home space shall abut on a
driveway or public street or an
approved sidewalk system. Such
spaces shall be defined on the Park
Plan. Mobile home units shall be so
parked that the minimum space
distance between the nearest portion
of the mobile home unit and/or its
accessory building is not less than ten
feet (10') from an adjacent unit and/or
accessory building. There shall be an
open space of not less than five feet
(5') from the exterior boundary of the
mobile home park.
Sec. 3-4. Required Setbacks, Buffer
Strips and Screening.
A. All mobile home units shall be located
at least five feet (5') from any park
property boundary line abutting upon a
public street or highway and at least
five feet (5') from other property
boundary lines.
B. No part of any mobile home unit shall
encroach upon any part of a walkway
or park street.
C. All mobile home parks located
adjacent to industrial or commercial
land uses except farm land shall be
provided with at least six foot (6')
screening such as fences or evergreen
growth along the property boundary
line separating the park and such
adjacent nonresidential uses.
Sec. 3-5. Park Street System.
A. General Requirements: All mobile
home parks shall be provided with
safe and convenient vehicular access
from abutting streets or roads to each
mobile home lot. Alignment and
gradient shall be properly adapted to
topography.
B. Access, Street Parking and Internal
Streets: All mobile home parks shall
meet the standards of parking lot
requirements set forth in Code Section
5-1-5(E); each park owner shall
construct and maintain off-street
parking within the mobile home park
area a minimum of one and one-half
(1 1/2) parking spaces times the
number of mobile home units in the
park.
§ 3-5 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 3-14
C. Required Illumination of Park Street
Systems: All parks shall be furnished
with lighting units so spaced and
equipped with luminaries placed at
such mounting heights as will provide,
as approved by the City, levels of
illumination for the safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles at night. Such
systems must be shown on the mobile
home park plan.
D. Street Construction and Design
Standards: All streets shall be
maintained in an acceptable manner as
approved by the City.
Sec. 3-6. Walks.
A. General Requirements: All parks shall
be provided with safe, convenient, all
season pedestrian access of adequate
width for intended use, durable and
convenient to maintain, between the
individual homes, the park streets and
all community facilities provided for
park residents. Sudden changes in
alignment and gradient shall be
avoided.
B. Sidewalk System: Shall be subject to
the approval of the City and have the
capability of providing acceptable
emergency access.
Sec. 3-7. Water Supply.
General Requirements: An accessible,
adequate, safe and potable supply of water
shall be provided in each mobile home
park. Where a public supply of water is
available, connection shall be made thereto
and its supply used exclusively.
Sec. 3-8. Water Distribution
System.
The water supply system of the mobile
home park shall conform to the standards
required by the City as approved by the
Council.
Sec. 3-9. Sewage Disposal.
An adequate and safe sewerage system
shall be provided in all mobile home parks
for conveying and disposing of all sewage
in conformance to the standards required
by the City as approved by the Council.
Sec. 3-10. Electrical Distribution
System.
Every park shall contain an electrical
wiring system which complies to the
standards required by the City as approved
by the Council.
Sec. 3-11. General Requirements.
The requirements of this Section shall
apply to service buildings, recreation
buildings and other community service
facilities such as:
A. Management offices, repair shops, and
storage areas.
B. Sanitary facilities.
C. Laundry facilities.
D. Indoor recreation areas.
E. Commercial uses supply essential
goods and services for the exclusive
use of park occupants.
All of which must comply with all
Federal, State, City and local codes.
Sec. 3-12. Fire Protection.
The mobile home park area shall be
subject to the rules and regulations of the
City, as approved by the City and the Fire
Chief. Each owner of a mobile home park
shall provide on their mobile home park
plan a fire protection system, which must
be developed and submitted to the City and
the Fire Chief for approval.
Sec. 3-13. Responsibilities of Park
Owners and Occupants.
The park occupants shall comply with
all applicable requirements of this Chapter
and regulations issued hereunder and shall
maintain their mobile home lots, facilities
and equipment, in good repair and in a
clean and sanitary condition. The owner
shall develop a set of park rules and
regulations which shall be distributed to
each mobile home occupant.
Sec. 3-14. Fees.
The City shall establish certain fees
§ 3-14 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 3-14
for inspections which shall be effective
from and after approval by resolution duly
adopted at a regular meeting of the City
Council.
Said inspection fees shall include but
not be limited to:
A. Permit for installation and tie down
and occupancy inspection.
B. Plumbing.
C. Electrical.
All inspection and requirements shall
be made in accordance with this Code and
amendments thereto from time to time.
§ 4-1 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 4-3
Chapter 4
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Sec. 4-1: Title
Sec. 4-2: Statement of Purpose
Sec. 4-3: Definitions
Sec. 4-4: Principles for Development
Sec. 4-5: Preliminary Development
Plans
Sec. 4-6: Applications and
Preliminary Plans
Sec. 4-7: Final Plans
Sec. 4-8: Approvals
Sec. 4-9: Fees
Sec. 4-10: Standards for Recreational
Vehicle Parks and
Campgrounds
Sec. 4-11: Streets
Sec. 4-12: Setbacks and Buffer Yards
Sec. 4-13: Sewage Holding Tank
Sec. 4-14: Lighting
Sec. 4-15: Utilities
Sec. 4-16: Length of Stay in
Recreational Vehicle Park
Sec. 4-17: Responsibilities of the
Recreational Vehicle Park
Management
Sec. 4-18: Violation of Provisions;
Operations Suspension
Sec. 4-19: Waivers
Sec. 4-20: Appeals
Sec. 4-21: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 4-1. Title.
This Chapter shall be known and
designated the "Recreational Vehicle Park
and Campgrounds Chapter" of this Code,
and shall apply to all recreational vehicle
parks and campgrounds developed after the
adoption of this Chapter.
Sec. 4-2. Statement of Purpose.
Realizing that there is an identifiable
need to provide locations in the City for the
Traveling Public to park recreational
vehicles or the placement of tents, this
Chapter is provided to permit the
development of recreational parks and
campgrounds.
Sec. 4-3. Definitions.
A. Accessory Structure. A structure
intended as a permanent residence for
the park operator of such structures as
storage buildings, laundry, restrooms
and shower facilities, recreation halls,
maintenance shops, etc.
B. Application, Recreational Vehicle
(RV) Park. Standard form provided
by the City to be completed and
submitted to the City along with
accompanying maps, plans and other
information.
C. Buffer Zone. The area immediately
within the external property lines of
any recreational vehicle park which is
intended as an open transitional area
between the recreational vehicle
development and adjacent land uses.
D. Building. Any structure having a roof
built for the complete enclosure of
persons or property or any kind of real
property, but excluding all forms of
vehicles even though immobilized.
E. Construction Permit. An official
certificate issued by the City granting
permission after all final plans are
approved to start construction (roads,
utilities, site preparation, etc.) on the
development of a recreational vehicle
park.
F. Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle type
unit previously designed as temporary
living quarters for recreational,
camping or travel use, which either
has its own motor power or is
mounted on or drawn by another
vehicle. The basic entities are:
camping trailer, motor home, travel
trailer or fifth wheel camper, and truck
camper, and are defined as follows:
1. Camping Trailer: A vehicular
portable unit mounted on wheels and
constructed with collapsible partial
side walls which fold for towing by
another vehicle and unfold at the
campsite to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or
travel use.
§ 4-3 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 4-6
2. Motor Home: A vehicular unit
designed to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or
travel use built on or permanently
attached to a self propelled motor
vehicle chassis cab or van which is an
integral part of the completed vehicle.
3. Travel Trailer or Fifth Wheel
Camper: A vehicular unit, mounted
on wheels, designed to provide
temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel use
and of such size or weight as not to
require special highway movement
permits when drawn by a motorized
vehicle, and with a living area of less
than two hundred twenty (220) square
feet, excluding built in equipment and
bath and toilet rooms.
4. Truck Camper: A portable unit
constructed for recreational, camping
or travel use, consisting of a floor and
sides, designed to be loaded onto and
unloaded from the bed of a pickup
truck.
G. Tent. A collapsible structure,
primarily constructed of fabric, with a
floor area of no more than 200 square
feet designed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational,
camping or travel use.
H. Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park: Any
lot of land upon which two or more
recreational vehicle spaces are
located, established, or maintained for
occupancy by recreational vehicles of
the general public as temporary living
quarters.
Sec. 4-4. Principles for
Development.
A. Recreational vehicle parks and
campgrounds are permitted in the
Motor Business (MB) Zoning District
or the General Business Zoning
District as a permitted use; and in the
University (U) Zoning District, the
Multiple Family Residential (R-4)
Zoning District, and the
Agriculture/Forestry (AF) Zoning
District through the issuance of a
Special Use Permit.
B. In evaluating a proposal the Planning
and Zoning Commission may require
the applicant to demonstrate that the
recreational vehicle park will not
generate traffic conditions that would
be a hazard to pedestrians or motorists
in the neighborhood in which it is
located.
Sec. 4-5. Preliminary Development
Plans.
Any person wishing to make
application for a recreational vehicle park
and campground should contact the City to
determine the regulations and requirements
for such a development. A conference
between the applicant and the appropriate
staff will be scheduled:
A. To provide clarification of the
recreational vehicle park development
process;
B. To review adequacy of utilities for the
development; and
C. To clarify public utilities and other
development policies of the City.
Sec. 4-6. Applications and
Preliminary Plans.
The applicant shall submit an
application on the form prescribed by the
City and at least five (5) complete sets of
preliminary plans to the City for
consideration by the Planning and Zoning
Commission at least twenty-one (21) days
prior to the meeting at which such plans
will be considered. The application and
preliminary plans shall include at least the
following:
A. Application:
1. Name, address of developer and
names of principal professional
personnel involved in plan
preparation.
2. Legal description of development
site;
3. Area of proposed development
measured in acres and square feet;
§ 4-6 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 4-7
4. Percentage of total area to be set
aside for use in common or recreation;
5. Number of spaces or lots
intended for development; and
6. Any intentions for phasing the
project.
B. Preliminary Plans:
1. A drawing to scale of not less
than one inch (1") to fifty feet (50')
showing all land uses on the periphery
of the development and all public and
private roads within three hundred
feet (300') of the development
drawings;
2. A topographical map showing
existing and final contours and drain
systems through the development,
with maximum contour intervals of
five feet (5'), extending not less than
one hundred fifty feet (150') beyond
the boundaries of the development
area; this requirement may by waived
by the City Engineer.
3. Tentative patterns of streets,
bikeways and walkways, showing
width and separation of same, and
their relationship to similar facilities
outside the boundaries of the proposed
development, including sizing.
Proposed street names shall be shown;
4. Location and specific nature of
open areas and playground equipment,
if any;
5. Location of all existing and
proposed structures within the
development;
6. Location and precise nature of
buffer area and its contents;
7. A conceptual plan of landscaping,
indicating type (trees, shrubs, ground
cover) and general extent of plantings,
and a statement regarding the
proposed maintenance program;
8. Tentative location of lots or
spaces and location of major areas
intended for use in common; and
9. Any other details specifically
requested to be shown at the
preliminary conference.
The preliminary plans will be
submitted twenty-one (21) days prior to
consideration before the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The City will submit
the preliminary plans for comment to the
City Engineer, the Fire Chief and the City
Community Development Department at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the
scheduled meeting before the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Staff comments will
be provided within ten (10) days from the
date they are provided copies of the
development plans. The plans will be
forwarded along with comments from the
City staff to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Planning and Zoning
commission will review the plans and will
approve or disapprove the plans, within
forty-five (45) days after the first meeting
at which they are considered.
If the preliminary plans are found to
be in substantial compliance with
requirements for final plans, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may waive the
final plan review.
Sec. 4-7. Final Plans.
The final plan will include detailed
drawings on all physical developments of
the park development and any other
requirements determined during the
approval process of the preliminary plans.
Within a year after the Planning and
Zoning Commission approval of the
preliminary plans, the applicant shall
submit five (5) copies of the final plans to
the City, twenty (20) days before the
scheduled meeting of the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Final plans will be
checked for conformance with the concepts
presented and approved in the preliminary
plans, the requirements of this Chapter and
City standards before submitting the final
plans to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its approval. If the
Planning and Zoning Commission finds the
final plans to be in conformance with the
approved preliminary plans, the plans will
be approved. The decision of the Planning
and Zoning Commission may be appealed
§ 4-7 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 4-11
to the Council within seven (7) days of
adoption of findings of fact. An appeal
may be made by the applicant, by any
person affected by the proposal, or by any
member of the Council. The provisions of
Code Section 4-8-6 shall apply to appeals
to the Council of decisions by the Planning
and Zoning Commission on recreational
vehicle park applications. The final plans
shall include:
A. Construction plans prepared by a
licensed engineer indicating alignment
and grade for water, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer and streets; this
requirement may be waived or
modified by the City Engineer;
B. Parking location and layout;
C. Street lighting layout;
D. Space numbering;
E. Fire protection plan; content
determined by the City; and
F. Landscaping plan: The placement of
landscaping shall be left to the
discretion of the owner or operator of
the recreational vehicle park. In order
to create a park-like setting and
promote privacy for the users of the
recreational vehicle park, however,
the following standards shall apply:
1. At least one (1) canopy tree of 1.5
inch caliper and two shrubs a
minimum of 12 inches in height per
every two recreational vehicle sites;
2. All common areas and lots not
utilized for structures, parking or other
landscaping shall be covered by turf
or other vegetative ground cover.
Before occupancy is permitted, record
drawings prepared by a licensed engineer
of all public improvement construction will
be submitted to the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2009-04, 02/02/2009)
Sec. 4-8. Approvals.
Construction of recreational vehicle
park improvements shall not commence
until final plans have been approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. All
improvements shall be constructed in
accordance with approved final plans
before the recreational vehicle park may be
occupied.
Sec. 4-9. Fees.
Fees for permits will be established by
resolution from time to time by the
Council.
Sec. 4-10. Standards for Recreational
Vehicle Parks and
Campgrounds.
A. Minimum space size shall be 40' x 20';
however, up to forty percent (40%) of
the spaces may be a minimum of 25' x
20'.
B. Design of spaces shall be such that
minimum space between recreational
vehicles is ten feet (10').
C. Toilet facilities and potable water
shall be provided in all campgrounds
and in all recreational vehicle parks
that allow tents or recreational
vehicles which are not self-contained.
D. Common open space will be provided
for each space in the park. This area
shall be exclusive of all setback areas
and shall be developed with turf and
trees. The size of the open spaces
shall be left to the discretion of the
developer.
E. Trash receptacles shall be provided,
and shall be located no further than
one hundred fifty feet (150') away
from any recreational vehicle or
campground space.
Sec. 4-11. Streets.
Internal private streets shall be a
minimum of twenty-eight feet (28')
(including a 20 foot surface and 4 foot
shoulders) in width for two-way streets and
twenty feet (20') (including a 12 foot
surface and 4 foot shoulders) for one-way
streets, with a minimum of three-quarters
inch (3/4") processed rock, six inches (6")
in depth. Minimum outside radius of all
curves in streets shall be forty feet (40').
§ 4-12 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 4-17
Sec. 4-12. Setbacks and Buffer
Yards.
Setbacks and buffer yards shall be
required to provide a physical and/or visual
buffer to eliminate potential land use
conflicts. Setbacks or buffer yards shall be
required as follows:
A. Adjoining Public Streets: Portions of
a recreational vehicle park that adjoin
public streets shall have a B buffer yard, as
defined in Code Section 4—6—9, except in
such areas required for access and/or a
vision clearance triangle. Portions of a
public right-of-way may be used as a part
of the buffer yard at the discretion of the
City;
B. Adjacent to Residential and Industrial
Uses: Portions of a recreational vehicle
park that adjoin a residential or industrial
use shall have a minimum setback of ten
feet (10’) from the property line and shall
have a six foot (6’) high, sight-obscuring
fence located within the setback area.
Utility lines and outlets may be located
within the setback area.
C. Adjoining Undeveloped Land:
Portions of a recreational vehicle park that
adjoin undeveloped land shall have an A
buffer yard, as defined in Code Section 4-6-
9, except in such areas required for access
and/or a vision clearance triangle.
Sec. 4-13. Sewage Holding Tank.
A sewage holding tank for selfcontained
recreational vehicles shall be
provided within the recreational vehicle
park or the park operator shall provide or
have provided a pumping service from the
recreational vehicles into a sewage tank
truck.
Sec. 4-14. Lighting.
Street lights along the public right-ofway
shall be provided by the developers of
the recreational vehicle park as required by
the City Engineer and the Code. Lighting
of RV park and campground internal roads
and/or pedestrian paths may be required by
the Planning and Zoning Commission as
dictated by the size, layout and scale of the
development and in accordance with the
Code.
(Ord. 2005-07, 02/07/2005)
Sec. 4-15. Utilities.
All recreational vehicle parks and
campgrounds with access to City sewer
and/or water shall be served by such. In
recreational vehicle parks and
campgrounds served by private streets, a
utility easement may be required by the
City. In those that have no access to City
sewer and water, septic systems and wells
are permissible subject to Idaho State
Health District approval.
Sec. 4-16. Length of Stay in
Recreational Vehicle Park.
Maximum length of occupancy of
spaces within the RV park shall be as
follows:
A. Persons occupying vehicles with total
hookups, including sewer, water and
electricity, shall not occupy any RV
park space for a period exceeding one
hundred eighty (180) days in any 12-
month period, nor shall the cumulative
occupancy by such persons of
different RV park spaces anywhere in
the facility exceed a total of one
hundred eighty (180) days in any 12-
month period.
B. Persons occupying tents or vehicles
with less than total hookup capacity
shall not occupy any RV park space
for a period exceeding fourteen (14)
days in any 12-month period, nor shall
the cumulative occupancy by such
persons of different RV park spaces
anywhere in the facility exceed a total
of fourteen (14) days in any 12-month
period.
Sec. 4-17. Responsibilities of the
Recreational Vehicle Park
Management.
A. The operator of a recreational vehicle
park shall operate in compliance with
this Chapter and regulations issued
hereunder and shall provide adequate
§ 4-17 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 4-18
supervision to maintain the park, its
facilities and equipment in good repair
and a clean and sanitary condition.
B. The park management shall notify
park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this Chapter and inform
them of their duties and
responsibilities under this Chapter and
regulations issued hereunder as
applicable.
Sec. 4-18. Violation of Provisions;
Operations Suspension.
Whenever, upon inspection of any
recreational vehicle park, the City finds
that conditions or practices exist which are
in violation of any provision of this
Chapter, or the park operator's permit for
the development, or any other regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, the City shall
give notice which shall:
A. Be in writing;
B. Include a statement of reasons for its
issuance;
C. Allow a reasonable time for the
performance of any act it requires;
D. Be served upon the owner or owner’s
agent when a copy thereof has been
sent by certified or regular mail to
owner’s last known address or when
owner has been served with such
notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this State;
and
E. Contain an outline of remedial action,
which, if taken, will effect compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter
and with regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
At the end of the specified period of
time, the City shall reinspect such
recreational vehicle park and, if such
conditions or practices have not been
corrected, take legal action to have the
recreational vehicle park operator's permit
revoked and the recreational vehicle park
cease operation, or have City take remedial
action to correct the problem and bill the
park operator for these costs or put a lien
on operator’s property.
Any person whose recreational vehicle
park has received notice that their
recreational vehicle park operator's permit
will be revoked unless certain conditions or
practices at the recreational vehicle park
are corrected, may request a hearing on the
matter before the Council. The recreational
vehicle park owner/operator has thirty (30)
days to appeal the ruling of the City and to
file an appeal with the Council. The filing
of the request for a hearing shall operate as
a stay of notice and of suspension. Under
receipt of such petition, the Council shall
set a time and place for such hearing and
shall give the petitioner notice thereof. At
such hearing, the petitioner shall be given
the opportunity to be heard and to show
why such notice should be modified or
withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced no later than thirty (30) days
after the day on which the petition was
filed; provided that upon application of the
petitioner, the date of the hearing may be
postponed for a reasonable time beyond
such thirty (30) days period when it is felt
that the petitioner has submitted good and
sufficient reasons for postponement.
After such hearing, the Council shall
make findings as to compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter and regulations
issued thereunder, shall issue orders in
writing sustaining, modifying or
withdrawing the notice which shall be
served in a manner prescribed in this Code.
Upon failure to comply with the order
sustaining or modifying a notice, the
operation of the recreational vehicle park
affected by the order shall be stopped or
corrective action taken by the City and
charged to the park operator. The
proceedings at such hearing, including the
findings and decisions of the Council,
together with a copy of every notice and
order related thereto, shall be entered as a
matter of public record of the Council, but
the transcript of the proceedings need not
be transcribed unless judicial review of the
decision is sought as provided by the laws
of this State.
§ 4-18 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 4-21
When the City finds an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, it may, without
notice of hearing, issue an order reciting
the existence of such emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as
deemed necessary to meet the emergency,
including the suspension of operation and
the revoking of the park operator's permit.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this Chapter, such order as directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but upon
petition to the Council, shall be afforded a
hearing as soon as possible. The provisions
of this Section shall be applicable to such
hearing and order issued thereafter.
(Ord. 2011-03, 05/16/2011)
Sec. 4-19. Waivers.
The applicant may petition the
Planning and Zoning Commission to waive
or modify requirements of these
regulations. The applicant must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of such
Commission that there are special or
extraordinary circumstances particular to
his/her proposal such that strict application
of these regulations would impose undue
hardship or not meet with the intent of this
Chapter. The applicant must further
demonstrate that the waiver or modification
will not result in any adverse impacts on
the users of the development, adjacent
properties, nor the general public.
Sec. 4-20. Appeals.
Any person whose application for a
recreational vehicle park development
under this Chapter has been denied may,
within ten (10) days after the date on which
the application was denied, appeal to the
Council under the procedure provided in
Code Section 6-4-18 herein. A hearing on
the matter will be scheduled within sixty
(60) days of the date of the appeal being
filed.
Sec. 4-21. Violations; Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined pursuant to this Code and the
Idaho Code. Each day such violation is
permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as
such. The City may also use any civil
remedies available to gain compliance with
this Chapter.
§ 5-1 TITLE 6 — MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS § 5-4
Chapter 5
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOMES
INSTALLATION CODE
Sec. 5-1: Short Title
Sec. 5-2: Adoption of
Mobile/Manufactured
Homes Installation Code
Sec. 5-3: Permits Required
Sec. 5-4: Fees
Sec. 5-1. Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known as the
“Mobile/Manufactured Homes Installation
Code.”
Sec. 5-2. Adoption of
Mobile/Manufactured
Homes Installation Code.
All mobile/manufactured homes must
be installed in accordance with the
requirements of Idaho Code Title 44,
Chapter 22.
Sec. 5-3. Permits Required.
The owner or the installer of a
mobile/manufactured home must obtain an
installation permit from the City before
installing a mobile/ manufactured home
that will be used as a residence on a
building site or in a park. The installer's
state license must be in effect at the time of
the application for the installation permit.
Sec. 5-4. Fees.
The Council shall, from time to time,
adopt and amend mobile/ manufactured
homes installation permit fees by
resolution.
§ 1-2 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 1-2
Chapter 1
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
Sec. 1-1: Adoption of International
Building Code
Sec. 1-2: Amendments to International
Building Code
Sec. 1-3: Adoption of Appendix
Chapter 33 of the 1997
Uniform Building Code –
Excavation and Grading
Sec. 1-4: Amendments to Appendix
Chapter 33 of the 1997
Uniform Building Code
Sec. 1-5: Adoption of Manufactured
Home Installation Standard
Sec. 1-1. Adoption of International
Building Code.
The International Building Code, 2015
Edition, published by the International
Code Council is hereby adopted as the
official building code of the City, and shall
apply to the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving,
removal, conversion, demolition,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area
and maintenance of buildings and
structures in the City.
The Clerk shall keep one (1) certified
copy of the current adopted editions of the
International Building Codes on file.
(Ord. 97-31, 9/27/97; 99-29, 8/16/99; 2001-17,
09/17/2001; 2002-22; 12/02/02; 2005-01,
01/18/2005; 2007-18, 12/17/2007; 2010-25,
12/20/2010; 2014-01, 01/21/2014; 2017-17,
12/18/2017)
Sec. 1-2. Amendments to
International Building
Code.
The following amendments to the
adopted sections of the International
Building Code, 2015 Edition, are hereby
made:
Sections 102.6 shall be amended to
read:
The legal occupancy of any structure
existing on the date of adoption of this
Code shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as is specifically covered by
this Code or as deemed necessary by the
Building Official for the general safety and
welfare of the occupants and the public.
Section 103 is amended to read as
follows:
Creation of Enforcement Agency
Section 103.1. There is hereby established
in this jurisdiction a code enforcement
agency which shall be under the
administrative and operational control of
the Building Official. The Building
Official shall develop such rules,
regulations and standards as are necessary
for the efficient administration of this
chapter.
Section 103.2 shall be amended to
read as follows:
The Building Official, if any, shall be
appointed by the chief appointing authority
of the jurisdiction.
Section 103.3 shall be amended as
follows:
The last sentence of this section is
hereby deleted.
Section 105.2(4) shall be amended to
read as follows:
Retaining walls retaining less than
forty eight inches (48”) of earth, unless
supporting a structure, a slope greater than
3:1 or impounding Class I, II, or III – A
liquids.
Section 107.1 shall be amended as
follows:
Section 107.1 Exception: The
building official is authorized to waive the
submission of construction documents and
other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional, if it is found
that the nature of the work applied for is
such that it does not affect structural
components, life, and fire safety
requirements, or accessibility requirements,
and that review of construction documents
is not necessary to obtain compliance with
this Code.
Section 111 All references to the
Building Official in this section shall be
§ 1-2 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 1-2
amended to the ‘authority having
jurisdiction’.
Section 308.3.4 Five or Fewer
Persons Receiving Care. A facility such as
the above with five (5) or fewer persons
receiving care shall be classified as Group
R-3 or shall comply with the International
Residential Code provided an automatic
sprinkler system is installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.3 or installation of a
NFPA 13R sprinkler system.
Section 308.4 shall be amended with
the deletion of “Foster Care Facilities”.
Section 308.4.1 shall be deleted.
Section 901.8 shall be amended as
follows:
Section 901.8 Pump and Riser Room
Size. Fire pump and automatic sprinkler
system riser rooms shall be designed with
adequate space for all equipment necessary
for the installation, as defined by the
manufacturer, with sufficient working room
around the stationary equipment.
Clearances around the equipment to
elements of permanent construction,
including other installed equipment and
appliances shall have a minimum of thirty
inches (30”) of clearance to allow
inspection, service, repair, or replacement
without removing such elements of
permanent construction or disabling the
function of a required fire resistance rated
assembly. Fire pump and automatic
sprinkler system riser rooms shall be
provided with a door(s) and unobstructed
passageway large enough to allow removal
of the largest piece of equipment.
Section 903.2.8 shall be amended to
read as follows:
Exception: An automatic fire
sprinkler is not required in Group R
containing two (2) units or less.
Section 915.1 shall be amended as
follows:
Section 915.1 Carbon Monoxide
Alarms. New and existing group I or R
occupancies located in a building
containing a fuel-burning appliance or a
building which has an attached garage,
where a permit is required for additions,
remodels, and/or gas mechanical work,
shall be equipped with single station carbon
monoxide alarms.
Section 1019.2.1 Exit Access in an
Ambulatory Care Facility with a ramp, the
ramp landing at the egress door will be
eighty inches (80”) wide by sixty four
inches (64”) long, to allow for stretcher
access to and from the building.
Exception: Alternate means to gain
access to the facility with a stretcher, shall
be approved by the authority having
jurisdiction of the Fire Department.
Section 1503.4 Roof Drainage shall
read as follows:
Design and installation of roof
drainage systems shall comply with the
Idaho State Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition.
Roof drainage shall terminate on the
same property as the building or be
connected with tight joint pipe to an
approved storm collection system, or other
approved drainage system.
Section 1602.1 shall be amended to
include the following definitions:
Balcony, exterior: An exterior floor
projecting from and supported by a
structure without additional independent
supports.
Table 1607.1 shall be amended as follows:
. . .
5. Balconies (exterior) and decksh
Unsupported balconies shall have
a minimum live load of one hundred
pounds (100 lbs.) per foot2.
. . .
Section 1607.12 shall have added:
All roofs shall be designed to carry a
minimum of forty (40) pounds per square
foot (psf), unit live load, plus all required
unit dead load. Potential accumulation of
snow at valleys, parapets, roof structures
and offsets in roofs of uneven configuration
shall be considered.
Section 3002.4 shall be amended as
follows:
Section 3002.4 Where elevators are
provided in buildings three (3) or more
stories above, or three (3) or more stories
§ 1-2 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 1-4
below, grade plane, not fewer than one (1)
elevator shall be provided for fire
department emergency access to all floors.
The elevator car shall be of such a size and
arrangement to accommodate an
ambulance stretcher twenty four inches by
eighty four inches (24” x 84”) with not less
than five inch (5”) radius corners, in the
horizontal, open position, and shall be
identified by the international symbol for
emergency medical services. The symbol
shall not be less than three inches (3”) in
height and shall be placed inside on both
sides of the hoist way door frame.
Section 3002.4.1 shall be amended as
follows:
Section 3002.4.1 In health care
facilities, two (2) stories or more with an
elevator, at least one (1) elevator will meet
the criteria of 3002.4
(Ord. 2002-22, 12/02/02; 2005-01, 01/15/2005;
2007-18, 12/17/2007; 2010-25, 12/20/2010;
2014-01, 01/21/2014; 2017-14, 12/18/2017; 2017-
17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 1-3. Adoption of Appendix
Chapter 33 of the 1997
Uniform Building Code –
Excavation and Grading.
Appendix Chapter 33 of the 1997
Uniform Building Code is hereby adopted
to control excavation, grading, earthwork
construction including fills and
embankments; to establish the
administrative procedure for issuance of
related permits; and to provide for approval
of plans and inspection of grading
construction.
(Ord. 2002-22, 12/02/02)
Sec. 1-4. Amendments to Appendix
Chapter 33 of the 1997
Uniform Building Code.
The following language shall be added
to Appendix Chapter 33 of the 1997
Uniform Building Code, as adopted herein:
3306.2.10 When the total area planned
for disturbance is less than ten thousand
square feet (10,000).
Section 3309.10 is added to Appendix
Chapter 33 of the 1997 Uniform Building
Code as adopted herein as follows:
3309.10: ADMINISTRATIVE
AUTHORITY. The Community
Development Department shall have
authority on projects that require approval
by the Community Development
Department prior to site disturbance and
excavation, such as single-family and
multiple-family dwellings, commercial and
industrial buildings or parking areas. The
City Engineer shall have authority on
projects that require approval by the
Engineering Department prior to site
disturbance and excavation, such as
subdivisions, platted developments,
commercial projects, and any projects
which impact the City’s public right-ofway.
3316.3.0 Provisions of this Section
are in addition to other portions of the
Uniform Building Code, as adopted, and
are in addition to all applicable federal and
state regulations pertaining to erosion and
sediment control and to storm-water
pollution prevention during site grading,
excavation, or other activities that may
accelerate soil erosion.
3316.3.1: DEFINITIONS: For the
purpose of this Chapter, the following
terms are defined:
A. ACCELERATED EROSION: Erosion
induced by human activity, which
exceeds natural (geologic) erosion
rates.
B. EROSION: The wearing away of the
ground surface as a result of the
movement of wind, water, or ice.
C. EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL (ESC) PLAN: The
document and plan of action approved
by the City and prepared in
accordance with the Moscow Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook,
pursuant to which erosion and
sediment control must be implemented
and executed by the permit holder,
§ 1-4 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 1-4
responsible party, and/or the permit
holder’s contractor(s), subcontractor(
s), agents and representatives.
D. EROSION CONTROL PRACTICE:
An activity, device, structure, or land
treatment reasonably designed to
minimize erosion potentially by
protecting in-place soil from being
dislodged and mobilized.
E. EROSION RISK CATEGORY: The
classification of an area of land
subject to this Chapter pursuant to
Section 3316.3.4. The Erosion Risk
Category determines the appropriate
erosion and sediment control action to
be taken at the site.
F. GRADING: Any excavating or
filling, or combination thereof.
G. MOSCOW EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL HANDBOOK:
Guidelines, suggested
practices, and techniques which are
related to erosion and sediment control
adopted and modified from time to
time by Resolution of the Council.
H. NORMAL AND ACCEPTED FARMING
PRACTICE: An overall
management strategy and practice for
farming that complies with widely
accepted standards for conservation
/stewardship of agricultural land.
I. RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any
person, individual, group of
individuals, association, firm, partnership,
corporation, governmental
agency, municipality, or contractor(s)
granted a Grading Permit by the City.
As the grading permit holder, the
responsible party shall ensure
compliance with this Chapter.
J. ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OR
ALTERATIONS: Practices conducted
on a regular, periodic basis to maintain
the integrity of transportation routes,
rights-of-way, easements, public
works, and the like.
K. SEDIMENT: Soil particles transported
by water or wind or a
combination of both which is often
subsequently deposited on the ground
surface or in low-energy surface-water
systems.
L. SEDIMENT CONTROL PRACTICE:
An activity, device, structure, or land
treatment reasonably designed to
inhibit the transport of sediment by
inducing conditions to trap, settle, or
otherwise remove sediment from the
transporting media.
M. SIGNIFICANT QUANTITIES OF
SEDIMENT: Amounts of sediment
that exceed thirty cubic feet (30)
(0.85m3) or cover a ground surface
area of at least six hundred square feet
(600) (56m2) when deposited.
N. SITE: Any lot or parcel of land or
contiguous combination thereof, under
the same ownership, where grading is
performed or permitted.
O. SITE DISTURBANCE: The act of
destroying and/or removing vegetation
and/or breaking the ground surface so
as to expose bare soil and potentially
induce accelerated erosion.
P. SLOPE (GRADIENT): The
mathematical ratio of horizontal
distance to vertical distance, expressed
as a percentage.
Q. SOIL: Naturally occurring, superficial
deposits overlying bedrock.
R. SPECIAL CONDITIONS: As used in
the assignment of an Erosion Risk
Category, special conditions means
those factors which increase the
likelihood that sediments will not
remain on site during soil disturbance.
S. STORM DRAIN INLETS: Inlets or
grates located along City streets and
easements that receive surface water
runoff and pass it into the public storm
water drainage system.
T. STORM-WATER RUNOFF: Water
that flows along the ground surface in
direct response to rain and/or
snowmelt events.
U. SURFACE WATERS: Ponds, lakes,
streams (perennial and intermittent),
as well as wetlands that support
vegetation typically adapted for life in
persistently wet soil conditions.
§ 1-4 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 1-4
V. TRACKING OF SEDIMENT: The
process whereby the tires, wheels, or
tracks of vehicles or construction
equipment carry sediment to and then
deposit it onto properties or public
roadways adjacent to the construction
site.
3316.3.2: EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL REQUIRED.
A. SITE PRACTICES: Grading,
excavation, or other activities that
accelerate soil erosion shall include
industry-standard practices and shall
be conducted in such a manner as to
minimize soil erosion and contain
sediment on the site. These site
practices shall be implemented and
maintained during site disturbance
activities until the final-graded soils
are vegetated or treated with long-term
surface protection. Erosion and
sediment control practices shall be at
the discretion of the responsible party
for the site, but shall not allow
significant quantities of sediment to be
delivered off-site.
B. TRACKING AND DUMPING:
1. If any person tracks, dumps,
drops, or otherwise permits to be
deposited, any soil, mud, rock (except
within the public right-of-way when
crushed aggregate is to be used for
routine maintenance or alterations of
public works), or other such debris
onto adjacent property, surface waters,
public right-of-ways, or into any part
of the public surface water (storm
water) drainage system, then such
deposits shall be removed by the end
of the work day or immediately if a
safety hazard results or if there is a
reasonable likelihood of causing
irreparable harm to the site or to
adjacent property. If washing is used
to remove the material, then generally
accepted sediment control practices
shall be utilized to limit the amount of
sediment being flushed or carried into
natural surface waters or the public
storm water drainage system.
2. The temporary storage of soil or
rock materials not otherwise addressed
by the applicable grading permit for
the associated construction activities is
permitted for a period of time not to
exceed forty-eight (48) hours
immediately following the time the
City gives notice requiring removal of
such materials to the responsible party,
unless such temporary storage
constitutes a reasonable likelihood of
causing irreparable harm to the site or
adjacent property or a loss of such
materials into natural surface water or
the public storm water drainage
system. Where there is a reasonable
likelihood that such materials cannot
be stored temporarily without causing
such harm or loss, such temporary
storage is not permitted and the City
shall order the immediate removal of
the materials upon notice to the
responsible party. Failure to remove
temporary earth materials pursuant to
this subsection is a violation of this
Chapter.
C. DUST CONTROL: All disturbed
sites with exposed soil surfaces or soil
stockpiles shall implement practices
designed to minimize wind erosion
and dust.
3316.3.3: PERMIT EXEMPTIONS:
A grading permit that addresses
erosion and sediment control is not
required for the following activities
(however, all persons are subject to
the requirements of Section 3316.3.2):
1. Routine maintenance or
alterations of:
a) Railroads within the
established railroad right-of-way;
b) State roadways within the
State-owned right-of-way;
c) City streets or utilities within
the public right-of-way when work is
done by the City.
2. Work conducted by employees of
the U.S. Government or the State of
Idaho for the explicit purposes of that
entity.
§ 1-4 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 1-4
3. Landscaping or gardening by the
property owner, provided that the
work provides benefits for the owner’s
personal use and not for sale.
4. Work related directly to vegetable
and flower gardens, orchards, lawns,
or similar projects.
5. Activities that constitute normal
and accepted farming practices.
3316.3.4: EROSION RISK
CATEGORIES
A. Factors to be Considered.
Assignment of an Erosion Risk
Category to the site shall be based
upon information provided in the
permit application and obtained by the
City. Factors which shall be
considered in determining the
appropriate Erosion Risk Category:
1. The total site area to be disturbed
during grading and construction
exceeds eighteen thousand square feet
(18,000) (1,670 sq.m).
2. The steepest portion of the site
that constitutes at least twenty five
percent (25%) of the proposed area of
disturbance exceeds a gradient of
twenty percent (20%) (5:1, horizontal
to vertical).
3. The effects of site disturbance
will persist into the time period from
November 15 through April 15.
4. Steep slopes adjacent to the site.
5. Significant run-on water from
upslope areas.
6. Significant stockpiles of soil to be
stored on site.
7. Other special conditions deemed
critical by City officials.
B. Categories.
1. LOW-RISK SITE (A site with
less than four (4) of the above Factors,
ESC Plan not required.): Low-risk
sites do not require a written ESC
Plan, but measures shall be taken by
the responsible party to contain any
eroded sediment on site.
2. HIGH-RISK SITE (A site with
four (4) or more of the above Factors,
ESC Plan required.): High-risk sites
require a written ESC Plan prepared in
accordance with the Moscow Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook or
other methods approved pursuant to
3309.10 of this Chapter.
3316.3.5: SITE INSPECTION
AND MAINTENANCE OF
CONTROLS.
A. The written ESC Plan shall address
the issues of inspection and
maintenance of installed controls at
the site. The responsible party shall
conduct field inspections and shall
perform any maintenance work needed
to preserve the integrity of erosion and
sediment controls. Field inspections
shall occur at bi-weekly intervals and
immediately after any significant
surface-water runoff event which
induces potential for erosion and
sedimentation.
B. The responsible party shall follow
acceptable procedures for the handling
and storage of hazardous materials on
the site to prevent contamination of
sediment and storm water runoff
leaving the site. Such procedures shall
be described in the written ESC Plan.
3316.3.6: SECURITY POSTED.
For any site with a proposed disturbed
area that exceeds forty thousand
(40,000) square feet (3,730 sq.m), no
grading, excavation, or other site
disturbance activity shall commence
without the responsible party first
submitting to the City proof of deposit
of security to provide funds for
rehabilitating the disturbed area. A
performance bond, irrevocable letter
of credit, cash escrow, or other
security acceptable to the City, and
naming the City as the protected party,
shall be required from the responsible
party until such security is released by
the City. The amount of the security
shall be no less than three percent
(3%) of the estimated total cost of
grading and excavation.
§ 1-4 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 1-5
3316.3.7: FAILURE TO
COMPLY WITH ESC PLAN. Failure
to comply with the conditions of the
permit may result in issuance of stop
work orders; non-issuance of building
permits; holding of certificates of
occupancy for residential, commercial,
and industrial sites or similar action by
the City until compliance is reached.
3317.9: MODIFICATIONS TO
ESC PLAN. Any proposed changes or
modifications to the ESC Plan shall be
submitted in writing to the City for
approval.
3318.2: COMPLETION OF WORK.
A. Upon completion of all grading work
specified in the grading permit, the
permit holder shall notify the City that
conditions of the permit have been met
and that the site is ready for final
inspection. Final approval shall not be
given until all work specified in the
permit has been completed to the
satisfaction of the City.
B. In cases where a site has received final
approval and then is sold in a semideveloped
condition to a subsequent
purchaser, the subsequent purchaser
shall assume responsibility for the site
as the responsible party. If the
subsequent purchaser intends to
conduct grading or other soil
disturbing activity on the site other
than that contained within the original
permit for the site, then application
must be made for a new permit which
encompasses the additional activity on
the site, unless otherwise exempted.
Appropriate security under Section
3316.3.6 must be submitted for
approval by the responsible party,
unless otherwise exempted.
Regardless of ownership or condition
of a site, practices shall be
implemented to prevent the delivery of
significant quantities of sediment offsite.
(Ord. 2002-22, 12/02/02; 2010-25,
12/20/2010)
Sec. 1-5. Adoption of Manufactured
Home Installation
Standard.
A. The Idaho Manufactured Home
Installation Standard, 2004 Edition,
published by the Idaho Division of
Building Safety, is hereby adopted as
the official manufactured installation
standard of the City of Moscow,
Idaho, and shall apply to the erection,
construction, enlargement, and
alteration of manufactured homes in
the City.
B. The City Clerk shall keep one (1)
copy of the current adopted edition of
the Idaho Manufactured Home
Installation Standard on file.
(Ord. 2000-24, 10/2/2000; 2002-22,
12/02/02; 2010-25, 12/20/2010)
§ 2-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 2-4
Chapter 2
UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE
Sec. 2-1: Adoption of the Uniform
Plumbing Code
Sec. 2-2: Amendment to Uniform
Plumbing Code
Sec. 2-3: Department Having
Jurisdiction
Sec. 2-4: Dangerous and Unsanitary
Construction
Sec. 2-5: Permit Required
Sec. 2-6: To Whom Permits May be
Issued
Sec. 2-7: Application for Permit
Sec. 2-8: Cost of Permit
Sec. 2-9: All Work to be Inspected
Sec. 2-10: Notification
Sec. 2-11: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 2-1. Adoption of the Uniform
Plumbing Code.
From and after the taking effect of this
Chapter, all plumbing in new construction,
relocated buildings and any alterations,
repairs or reconstruction of plumbing within
City, except as hereinafter provided, shall be
made in substantial accord with the Uniform
Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, and
Appendix A, B, E, G, H, I, and L and all
other future additions as amended, deleted
and added to as edited, copyrighted and
published adopted by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials. Such Uniform Plumbing Code,
and Appendix A, B, E, G, H, I and L as
amended by this Chapter, is hereby adopted
as the Plumbing Code of the City. The
Clerk is hereby directed to certify the one
(1) copy of said Uniform Plumbing Code,
and Appendix A, B, E, G, H, I, and L. from
time to time, as the same shall be complied
and published.
(Ord. 99-35, 11/1/99; 2001-17, 09/17/2001;2002-22,
12/02/02; 2004-23, 05/03/04; 2014-20, 12/01/2014;
2017-17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 2-2. Amendment to Uniform
Plumbing Code
Table 4-1 of the UPC shall be replaced
with IDAPA 07, Title 02, Chapter 6, Table
412.1.
IDAPA 07, Title 02, Chapter 06,
Section 604.1 shall be amended by replacing
the language “within a building (above
ground and below ground) with one (1)
joint” with “a maximum of 24 inches
exposed within a crawlspace”.4. 5.
Section 610.2 shall be amended by
replacing the words “all new”, with “if a
water softener loop is installed in a”.
(Ord. 2004-23, 05/03/04; 2014-20, 12/01/2014;
2017-17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 2-3. Department Having
Jurisdiction.
Unless otherwise provided for by law,
the department having jurisdiction and City
of this Code shall be the City Community
Development Department.
(Ord. 2004-23, 05/03/04)
Sec. 2-4. Dangerous and Unsanitary
Construction.
A. Any portion of a plumbing system
found by the City to be unsanitary as
defined herein is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.
B. Whenever brought to the attention of
the City that any unsanitary condition
exists or that any construction or work
regulated by this Code, is dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary, a nuisance or
menace to life, health or property or
otherwise in violation of this Code, the
said City may institute an investigation
and, upon determining such
information to be fact, shall order any
person using or maintaining any such
condition or responsible for the use or
maintenance thereof or to repair, alter
________________________________________________________
4. For each urinal added in excess of the minimum required,
one (1) water closet shall be permitted to be deducted. The
number of water closets shall not be reduced to less than two
thirds (2/3 of the minimum requirement.
5. Drinking fountains are not required for an occupancy load
of thirty (30) or less.
§ 2-4 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 2-6
change, remove or demolish same as it
may consider necessary for the proper
protection of life, health and property
and in the case of any gas piping or gas
appliance may order any person
supplying gas to such piping or
appliance to discontinue supplying gas
thereto until such piping or appliance is
made safe to life, health and property.
Every such order shall be in writing,
addressed to the owner, agent or person
responsible for the premises in which
such condition exists and shall specify
the date or time for compliance with
such order.
C. Refusal, failure or neglect to comply
with any such notice or order shall
be considered a violation of this
Code.
D. When any plumbing system is
maintained in violation of this Code
and in violation of any notice issued
pursuant to the provisions of this
Section or where a nuisance exists in
any building or on a lot on which a
building is situated, the City shall
institute any appropriate action or
proceeding in any court of competent
jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, correct
or abate the violation or nuisance.
(Ord. 2004-23, 05/03/04)
Sec. 2-5. Permit Required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
install, remove, alter, repair or replace
or cause to be installed, removed,
altered, repaired or replaced any
plumbing, gas or drainage piping work
or any fixture or water heating or
treating equipment in a building or
premises without first obtaining a
permit to do such work from the City.
B. A separate permit shall be obtained for
each building or structure.
C. No person for whom a state license is
required shall allow any other person to
do or cause to be done any work under
a permit secured by a permittee except
persons in such person’s employ. No
person for whom a state license is not
required shall allow any other nonlicensed
person to do or cause to be
done any work under a permit required
by this Chapter unless such nonlicensed
person is also exempt from
state licensure.
D. All permits required within the City
relative to sewer installation located
outside buildings and structures shall
be required within certain areas set
forth on the map designated Exhibit 'A',
South East Sewer District, and dated
June 7, 1982, which is hereby adopted
and incorporated as part of this
subsection. Three (3) copies of said
map shall remain on file in the office of
the Clerk. The Council may, from time
to time, amend the boundaries of such
areas through resolution and adopting
an updated map.
All fees required within the City shall
be required within the area designated
Exhibit 'A'. Additional fees may, from
time to time, be required by resolution.
(Ord. 2004-23, 05/03/04; 2017-17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 2-6. To Whom Permits May be
Issued.
A. No permit shall be issued to do or
cause to be done any work regulated by
this Chapter except to a person holding
a valid and unrevoked plumbing
contractor's certificate of qualification
or registration as provided in Section
7-2-14 of this Chapter, except when the
applicant is exempt from such licensing
requirements by the Idaho Code.
B. The City may refuse to issue such a
permit to any person who is acting in
violation of this Code or the Idaho
Code.
C. Permits for the purpose of extension,
removal, alteration, repair or
replacement of any plumbing, gas or
drainage piping or any fixture or water
heating or treating equipment in a
building or premise may be issued to
any qualified regularly employed
maintenance plumber working on the
§ 2-6 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 2-8
premises of his or her employer;
provided, that said maintenance
plumber shall personally purchase all
materials and shall personally perform
all labor in connection therewith.
D. The person issued a permit required by
this Chapter shall remain responsible
for compliance with all applicable
Code sections and for the quality of
workmanship; the City accepts no
responsibility or liability for defects,
performance or quality of
workmanship.
E. Upon completion of plumbing or
portions of plumbing systems, the
licensed plumber or exempt installer
shall request an inspection regardless
of whose name appears on the permit.
((Idaho Code § 54-2602; Ord. 2004-23,
05/03/04)
Sec. 2-7. Application for Permit.
Any person legally required to apply
for and receive a permit shall make such
application on forms provided for that
purpose. The applicant shall file a
description of the character of the work
proposed to be done, and the location,
ownership, occupancy and use of the
premises in connection therewith. The City
may require plans, specifications or
drawings and such other information as may
be deemed necessary by the City.
If the City determines that the plans,
specifications, drawings, descriptions or
information furnished by the applicant is in
compliance with this Code, the City shall
issue the permit applied for upon payment
of the required fee as set by Resolution
adopted by the Council.
(Ord. 2004-23, 05/03/04)
Sec. 2-8. Cost of Permit.
Every applicant for a permit to do work
regulated by this Code shall state in writing
on the application form provided for that
purpose, the character of work proposed to
be done and the amount and kind in
connection therewith, together with such
information, pertinent thereto, as may be
required.
Such applicant shall pay for each
permit, at the time of making application, a
fee in accordance with the schedule of fees
as established from time to time by
resolution duly adopted by the City Council,
and at the rate provided for each
classification shown herein.
Any person who shall commence any
work for which a permit is required by this
Code without first having obtained a permit
therefor shall, if subsequently permitted to
obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee
fixed for such work; provided, however, that
this provision shall not apply to emergency
work when it shall be proved to the
satisfaction of the City that such work was
urgently necessary and that it was not
practical to obtain a permit therefor before
the commencement of such work. In all
such cases a permit must be obtained "as
soon as it is practical to do so", and if there
be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such
a permit, a double fee as herein provided,
shall be charged.
For the purpose of this Section, a
sanitary plumbing outlet on or to which a
plumbing fixture or appliance may be set or
attached, shall be constructed to be a fixture.
Fees for reconstruction and retest of existing
plumbing systems in relocated buildings
shall be based on the number of plumbing
fixtures, gas systems, water heaters, etc.,
involved.
When interceptor traps or house trailer
site traps are installed at the same time as a
building sewer on any lot, no sewer permit
shall be required for the connection of any
such trap to an appropriate outlet fitting
provided in the building sewer by the
permittee constructing such sewer.
When a permit has been obtained to
connect an existing building or existing
work to the public sewer or to connect to a
new private disposal facility, backfilling or
private sewage disposal facilities abandoned
consequent to such connection is included
in the building sewer permit.
§ 2-8 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 2-11
Classifications for issuing each permit;
in addition:
A. For each plumbing fixture or trap or set
of fixtures on one trap (including
water, drainage piping and back flow
protection therefor).
B. For each building sewer and each
trailer park sewer.
C. For each gas water heater and/or vent.
D. For each industrial waste pretreatment
interceptor, including its trap and vent,
excepting kitchen type grease
interceptors functioning as fixture
traps.
E. For installation, alteration or repair of
water piping and/or water treating
equipment.
F. For repair or alteration of drainage or
vent piping.
G. For each lawn sprinkler system on any
one meter including backflow
protection devices therefor.
H. For vacuum breakers or backflow
protective devices on tanks, vats, etc.,
or for installation on unprotected
plumbing fixtures including necessary
water piping
I. Special inspections.
J. Reinspection.
The schedule of fees above may be
changed from time to time by resolution of
the Council.
A food waste disposer installed at the
time of the original sink installation shall be
considered as part of the sink. Dishwashers
discharging into a food waste disposer or a
separate trap shall require a separate fee.
(Ord. 2002-22, 12/02/02; Ord. 2004-23, 05/03/04)
Sec. 2-9. All Work to be Inspected.
All plumbing and drainage systems
shall be inspected by the City to insure
compliance with all the requirements of this
Code.
(Ord. 2004-23, 05/03/04)
Sec. 2-10. Notification.
It shall be the duty of the person doing
the work authorized by the permit to notify
the City orally or in writing, that said work
is ready for inspection. Such notification
shall be given not less than twenty four (24)
hours before the work is to be inspected.
It shall be the duty of the person doing
the work authorized by the permit to make
certain that the work will stand the tests
prescribed elsewhere in this Code, prior to
giving the above referenced notification.
(Ord. 2004-23, 05/03/04)
Sec. 2-11. Violations; Penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful to violate any
provisions of this Chapter. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter, in addition to the penalties
provided herein, shall be subject to all
remedies available to the City under
State and Federal law, including
recovery of costs to the City resulting
from such violation.
B. Any person violating any provision of
this Chapter shall be subject to the
following: It is an infraction
punishable by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100) plus court costs for any
person to violate provisions of this
Chapter for the first time. A second
violation within five (5) years in an
infraction punishable by a fine of three
hundred dollars ($300) plus court costs.
A third violation within five (5) years
shall be a misdemeanor as defined by
the Idaho Code and shall subject such
person up to the maximum
misdemeanor penalties as provided in
the Idaho Code.
Each separate day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of
this Chapter occurs or continues, shall
be deemed to constitute a separate
offense, and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable as stated herein.
C. The issuance or granting of a permit or
approval of plans and specifications
shall not be deemed or construed to be
a permit for, or an approval of, any
violation of any of the provisions of
this Code. No permit presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this Code shall be valid,
§ 2-11 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 2-11
except insofar as the work or use which
it authorized is lawful.
D. The issuance or granting of a permit or
approval of plans shall not prevent the
City from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in said plans and
specifications or from preventing
construction operations being carried
on thereunder when in violation of this
Code or of any other ordinance or from
revoking any certificate of approval
when issued in error.
E. Every permit issued by the City under
the provisions of this Code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void,
if the work authorized by such permit is
not commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) days from date of such
permit, or if the work authorized by
such permit is suspended or abandoned
at any time after the work is
commenced for a period of one
hundred eighty (180) days. Before
such work can be recommended, a new
permit shall be first obtained to do so,
and the fee therefor shall be one-half
(1/2) the amount required for a new
permit for such work, provided no
changes have been made, or will be
made in the original plans and
specifications for such work; and
provided, further, that such suspension
or abandonment has not exceeded one
(1) year.
(Ord. 2002-22, 12/02/02; Ord. 2004-23,
05/03/04; 2017-17, 12/18/2017)
§ 3-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 3-5
Chapter 3
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
Sec. 3-1: Adoption of National
Electrical Code
Sec. 3-2: Amendments to the National
Electrical Code
Sec. 3-3 Fees
Sec. 3-4 Exceptions
Sec. 3-5 City Not Liable
Sec. 3-6 Technical Changes to the
National Electrical Code
Sec. 3-7 Violation; Penalties
Sec. 3-1. Adoption of National
Electrical Code.
From and after the taking effect of this
Chapter, all installations in the City of
wires and equipment to convey electric
current, and installations of apparatus to be
operated by such current except as
hereinafter provided, shall be made in
substantial accord with the National
Electrical Code, 2014 Edition as published
by the National Fire Protection
Association. Such National Electrical
Code as amended by this Chapter, is hereby
adopted as an official Code of the City.
The Clerk is hereby directed to certify the
one (1) copy of said National Electrical
Code from time to time as the same shall be
compiled and published.
(Ord. 2001-17; 09/17/2001; 2002-22; 12/02/02;
2010-26, 12/20/2010; 2014-20, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 3-2. Amendments to the
National Electrical Code
A. Article 210.52(E)(3). Delete article
210.52(E)(3) and replace with the
following: Balconies, Decks, and
Porches. Balconies, decks, and
porches having an overall area of
twenty (20) square feet or more that
are accessible from inside the dwelling
unit shall have at least one (1)
receptacle outlet installed within the
perimeter of the balcony, deck, or
porch. The receptacle shall not be
located more than two (2.0) meters
(six and one half feet [6½’]) above the
balcony, deck, or porch surface.
B. Article 422.31(B). For permanently
connected appliances rated over three
hundred (300) volt-amperes, the
branch-circuit switch or circuit breaker
shall be permitted to serve as the
disconnection means where the switch
or circuit breaker is within sight from
the appliance or is lockable in
accordance with 110.25. When a
single disconnect is serving more than
one (1) piece of equipment, each piece
of equipment shall have its own
disconnect within site of the
equipment. Single family homes are
exempt from this Section.
(Ord. 2014-20, 12/01/2014; 2017-17,
12/18/2017)
Sec. 3-3. Fees.
Fees shall be established from time to
time by Resolution of the Council, for the
issuance of applicable electrical inspection
permits.
(Ord. 2010-26, 12/20/2010; 2014-20, 12/01/2014;
2017-17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 3-4. Exceptions.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be
deemed to apply to the installation and
maintenance of communication circuits,
wires, and apparatus; nor to any electric
public utility or its employees in the
installation and maintenance of electrical
wiring, circuits, apparatus and equipment
by and for such public utility, or
comprising a part of its plants, lines or
systems; provided that such person shall
comply with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations in regard to electric wiring
installation.
(Ord. 2014-20, 12/01/2014; 2017-17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 3-5. City Not Liable.
This Chapter is not to be construed to
relieve from or lessen responsibility or
liability of any person owning, operating,
controlling or installing any electrical
wiring, electrical device, or electric motor
§ 3-5 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 3-7
for damages to person or property caused
by any defects therein, nor shall the City be
held as assuming any such liability by
reason of the inspection required herein or
the certificate of inspection herein provided
for.
(Ord. 2017-17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 3-6. Technical Changes to the
National Electrical Code.
In addition to the requirements of the
National Electrical Code (NEC) the
following requirements shall be met:
Service Entrance Raceway: With the
approval of the inspecting authority,
unfused conductors within a building or
structure shall be installed in the service
disconnecting means. The service
disconnecting means shall be installed at a
readily accessible location either outside a
building or structure, or inside nearest the
point of entrance of the service conductors
but not to exceed fifteen feet (15’) of
raceway inside the building or structure.
Service entrance conductors, where
potential damage by means of impact, shall
be encased in galvanized rigid conduit
(GRC) or rigid non-metallic conduit
Schedule 80, all other locations Schedule
40 conduit, when located inside of a
building or structure.
(Ord. 2002-22, 12/02/02; 2010-26, 12/20/2010;
2014-20, 12/01/2014; 2017-17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 3-7. Violations; Penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful to violate any
provisions of this Chapter. Any
person violating any of the provisions
of this Chapter, in addition to the
penalties provided herein, shall be
subject to all remedies available to the
City under State and Federal law,
including recovery of costs to the City
resulting from such violation.
B. Any person violating any provision of
this Chapter shall be subject to the
following:
It is an infraction punishable by a fine
of one hundred dollars ($100) plus
court costs for any person to violate
provisions of this Chapter for the first
time. A second violation within five
(5) years is an infraction punishable by
a fine of three hundred dollars ($300)
plus court costs. A third violation
within five (5) years shall be a
misdemeanor as defined by the Idaho
Code and shall subject such person up
to the maximum misdemeanor
penalties as provided in the Idaho
Code.
Each separate day during which any
violation of this Chapter occurs or
continues, shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense, and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as stated herein.
(Ord. 2014-20, 12/01/2014; 2017-17,
12/18/2017)
§ 4-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 4-3
Chapter 4
INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE
Sec. 4-1: Adoption of Code
Sec. 4-2: Amendments to the
International Fuel Gas Code
Sec. 4-3: City Not Liable
Sec. 4.1. Adoption of Code.
A certain document, one (1) certified
copy of which is kept on file by the Clerk,
being marked and designated as the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition,
as edited, copyrighted and published by the
International Code Council is hereby
adopted.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2007-18, 12/17/2007;
2010-26, 12/20/2010; 2014-20, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 4-2. Amendments to the
International Fuel Gas
Code.
Section 103.2 shall be amended as
follows:
The Building Official, if any, shall be
appointed by the chief appointing authority
of the jurisdiction.
Section 303.3 shall be amended by the
deletion of exceptions 3 and 4.
Section 406.4.1 shall be amended to
read: Test Pressure and Duration. Low
pressure gas piping systems shall be tested
at twenty (20) psi for a duration of twenty
(20) minutes. High pressure gas piping
systems shall be tested at thirty (30) psi for
a duration of sixty (60) minutes.
Section 406.4.2 shall be deleted.
Section 503.4.1.1.2 shall be added:
Section 503.4.1.1.2 Testing: All
plastic pipe located within a structure used
for venting flue gases shall be tested at five
(5) psi for fifteen (15) minutes duration.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2010-26, 12/20/2010)
Sec. 4-3. City Not Liable.
Adoption by the City of the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition,
shall not relieve the owner or contractor of
any responsibility or liability for
compliance with said Code, nor shall the
City assume such liability through the
issuance of any permit or certificate of
inspection or by reason of inspection.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2007-18, 12/17/2007;
2010-26, 12/20/2010; 2014-20, 12/01/2014)
§ 5-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 5-5
Chapter 5
STREET AND HOUSE NUMBERING
Sec. 5-1: Numbers Required
Sec. 5-2: System of Numbering
Sec. 5-3: Records Required
Sec. 5-4: Designation of Even and
Odd Numbers
Sec. 5-5: Numbering of Blocks
Sec. 5-1. Numbers Required.
All dwelling, tenement or business
houses or buildings, whether occupied or
vacant, situated within the City shall be
numbered as hereinafter provided.
Sec. 5-2. System of Numbering.
All numbers on streets running north
and south shall commence at First Street
and be numbered from thence north and
south respectively and all numbers on
streets running east and west shall
commence at Main Street and be numbered
from thence east and west respectively.
Sec. 5-3. Records Required.
All numbering indicated shall be
under the direction of the City, who shall
keep on file with the office of the Clerk a
map of the said City showing the complete
system of block numbering. The City shall
also keep a complete record of all numbers
assigned to each dwelling located within
said blocks.
Any person who desires information
relative to numbers previously assigned or
who desires numbers for new buildings
shall apply to the City for the same. No
charges will be made for this service.
Sec. 5-4. Designation of Even and
Odd Numbers.
On all streets running east and west
even numbers shall be placed on the north
side of the street and odd numbers on the
south side thereof, and on all streets
running north and south even numbers shall
be placed on the east side of the street and
odd numbers on the west side thereof.
Sec. 5-5. Numbering of Blocks.
All blocks shall be numbered by
hundreds beginning with one hundred (100)
on such streets at point herein designated as
the commencement point thereof, a second
block being numbered two hundred (200)
and so on; such system to apply to all
streets running either north, south or east
and west.
§ 6-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 6-4
Chapter 6
SIGNS
Sec. 6-1: Adoption of Code
Sec. 6-2: Amendments to the Uniform
Sign Code
Sec. 6-3: City not Liable
Sec. 6-4: Violation and Penalty
Sec. 6-1. Adoption of Code.
The Uniform Sign Code, 1997,
Edition, is hereby adopted as the official
code regarding signs in the City for those
matters made the subject of such Code.
Three (3) certified copies of the currently
adopted Code shall remain on file with the
Clerk.
(Ord. 99-33, 10/18/99; 99-37, 12/6/99)
Sec. 6-2. Amendments to the
Uniform Sign Code.
The following amendments to the
Uniform Sign Code, 1997 Edition, are
hereby made:
Chapters 5 through 12 are hereby
deleted.
Sec. 6-3. City not Liable.
Adoption by the City of the Uniform
Sign Code, 1997 Edition, shall not relieve
any person of any responsibility or liability
for compliance with said Code nor shall the
City assume such liability through the
issuance of any permit or certificate of
inspection or by reason of inspection.
Sec. 6-4. Violation and Penalty.
The violation of any provision of this
Chapter or the failure or omission to
perform any duty imposed by the
provisions of this Chapter is hereby
declared unlawful and a misdemeanor
punishable pursuant to this Code and the
Idaho Code.
§ 7-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 7-2
Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION
Sec. 7-1: Declaration of Intent
Sec. 7-2: Codes Adopted and/or
Amended
Sec. 7-3: Amendments, Deletions and
Additions
Sec. 7-4: Establishment of Bureau of
Fire Prevention
Sec. 7-5: Terms
Sec. 7-6: Appointment and Duties of
Fire Chief
Sec. 7-7: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 7-8: Fire Lanes on Private
Property, Devoted to Public
Use
Sec. 7-9: Safety Inspections
Sec. 7-10: Refusal of Entry; Appeals
Sec. 7-1. Declaration of Intent.
A. It is the intent of the Council by the
passage of this Chapter to adopt
minimum standards necessary to
safeguard life or limb, health, property
and public welfare by regulating:
1. The storage, use and handling of
dangerous and hazardous materials,
substances, devices and processes.
2. The maintenance of buildings,
premises and certain equipment, and
3. The maintenance of adequate
egress facilities.
B. It is further the intent of the Council
not to duplicate, overlap or conflict
with codes adopted by the Council
heretofore, and as said codes are
hereafter amended, which provide
minimum standards necessary to
safeguard life or limb, health, property
and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction,
quality of materials, use, occupancy,
and location of buildings and certain
equipment required for the
construction and operation of
buildings.
C. 1. It is the intent of the Council by
this Chapter to correlate the activities
and enforcement of fire related codes
in the City with the edition of the
International Fire Code adopted by the
State Fire Marshal pursuant to
authority provided in Title 41, Chapter
2 of the Idaho Code with revisions,
additions, deletions, and/or appendices
adopted by the State Fire Marshal and
with any further revisions, additions,
deletions and/or appendices as
contained in this Chapter.
2. The International Fire Code
published by the International Code
Council with any revisions, additions,
deletions, and/or appendices adopted
by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to
the Idaho Code, shall be referred to in
this Chapter as the “International Fire
Code” or as the “IFC”.
(Ords. 2003–11; 05/19/03; 2005-02,
01/18/2005; 2008-21, 09/15/2008; 2011-17,
10/03/2011)
Sec. 7-2. Codes Adopted and/or
Amended.
A. 1. The International Fire Code,
adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to authority provided in Title
41, Chapter 2 of the Idaho Code with
revisions, additions, deletions, and/or
appendices adopted by the State Fire
Marshal and with any further
revisions, additions, deletions, and/or
appendices as contained in this
Chapter, shall be the rules, regulations
and ordinances governing and
regulating (a) the storage, use and
handling of dangerous and hazardous
materials, substances, devices and
processes; (b) the maintenance of
buildings, premises and equipment; (c)
the maintenance of adequate egress
facilities; and (d) fire safety measures
for minimizing losses of life and
property.
2. The Clerk shall keep one (1)
certified copy of the 2015 Edition of
§ 7-2 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 7-3
the IFC on file. The Clerk shall also
keep one (1) copy of the IDAPA
18.01.50 (State Fire Marshal’s
adoption of the International Fire Code
2015 Edition, with amendments) on
file. The City shall have on file for
inspection the various publications of
the National Fire Protection
Association (International) that are
referenced by the IFC.
B. In addition to appendices adopted by
the State Fire Marshal, the following
appendices to the IFC are adopted as
part of the IFC:
1. Appendix H. Hazardous
Materials Management Plan (HMMP)
and Hazardous Materials Inventory
Statement (HMIS) instruction;
2. Appendix I. Fire Protection
Systems – Noncompliant Conditions;
3. Appendix K. Construction
Requirements for existing Ambulatory
Care facilities.
(Ords. 99-36, 12/6/99; 2001-17; 09/17/2001;
2003-11; 05/19/03; 2005-02, 01/18/2005; 2008-
21, 09/15/2008; 2011-17, 10/03/2011; 2014-11,
07/07/2014; 2018-06)
Sec. 7-3. Amendments, Deletions
and Additions.
The IFC is hereby amended as
follows:
A. Section 105.1.1 Permits shall be
amended as follows:
It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, or corporation to use a building
or premises or to engage in any
activities for which a permit is
required by the authority having
jurisdiction without first having
obtained such permit. Permits may be
required from the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
A permit from the Bureau of Fire
Prevention shall be required at all
times for the following activities,
operations, practices or functions:
1. Carnivals and Fairs;
2. Explosives (Fireworks);
3. Open Burning (delete the
exception); and
4. Pyrotechnic Special Effects
Material.
B. Section 505.1 Address Identification.
New and existing buildings shall be
provided with approved address
numbers or letters. Each character
shall not be less than four inches (4”)
in height and not less than one half
inch (1/2”) in width. They shall be
installed on a contrasting background
and be plainly visible from the street
or road fronting the property. When
required by the Fire Code Official,
address numbers shall be provided in
additional approved locations to
facilitate emergency response and
shall be not less than four inches (4”)
in height and not less than one half
inch (1/2”) in width and shall be
reflective. Where access is by means
of a private road, if the building
address cannot be viewed from the
public way, a monument, pole or other
approved sign or means shall be used
to identify the structure. Address
numbers shall be maintained.
C. Section 507.5 Fire Hydrants shall have
added:
Five inch (5”) storz fittings shall be
installed on all new hydrants.
D. Section 507.5.4 Obstruction shall have
added:
1. No vehicle shall be placed in
front thereof or within fifteen feet
(15’) of either side of said fire hydrant,
distance to be measured along curb in
each direction from a line drawn from
the center of the fire hydrant
perpendicular to the curb, except when
the Fire Code Official determines and
approves a distance less than fifteen
feet (15’).
2. Except, that an emergency fire,
police or ambulance shall be allowed
to park in the above designated area
for emergency or inspection purposes
only.
§ 7-3 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 7-3
E. Section 703.2.4 Hold Open Devices.
Where the International Building Code
requires self-closing doors, the Fire
Code Official may require magnetic
hold open devices that release upon
activation of a fire alarm.
F. Section 903.2.8 shall be amended as
follows:
Exception: An automatic fire sprinkler
is not required in Group R containing
two (2) units or less.
G. Section 903.3.6 Hose Threads shall
have added:
Fire hose threads for Fire Department
connections shall be two point five
inches (2.5”).
H. Section 907.1 Fire Alarm and
Detection Systems shall have added:
Partial or Limited Detection systems
are Allowed. If notification devices
are provided, they shall meet
requirements of Subsection 7.3.G.1
herein.
I. Section 915.1 shall be amended as
follows:
Section 915.1 Carbon Monoxide
Alarms. New and existing group I or
R occupancies located in a building
containing a fuel-burning appliance or
a building which has an attached
garage, where a permit is required for
additions, remodels, and/or gas
mechanical work, shall be equipped
with single station carbon monoxide
alarms.
J. Section 2305.1.1 Delivery Vehicle
Location shall have added:
In making a delivery of Class I liquids
to a bulk plant and to a service station,
the tank vehicle shall be completely
off the street and sidewalk area.
K. Section 5706.1.1 Special Operations is
amended to read as follows:
3. (a) Any person, firm, or
corporation desiring to install a
bulk plant for the handling or
storage of flammable liquids
within the corporate limits of the
City, shall make application to the
Bureau of Fire Prevention for a
permit to do so. Such application
shall include a plat or sketch
showing the proposed location, a
full description of the proposed
installation to include the size and
character of tanks proposed to be
installed, a statement as to
whether the tanks are to be
located above or underground,
and proposed measures for fire
protection.
(b) This application shall be
submitted to the Council, together
with a recommendation of said
Bureau of Fire Prevention as to
the action to be taken.
(c) The Council shall act on said
application at the earliest possible
date by accepting or rejecting
same, and its decision shall be
final.
(d) The Clerk shall notify the
Bureau of Fire Prevention in
writing of the action taken by the
Council on the application. If the
action of the Council is
favorable, the Bureau of Fire
Prevention will issue the permit.
If not, the permit shall be denied.
L. Section 604.2.2.7 Treatment Systems
shall have added:
Exception: Upon approval of the
Fire Chief, emergency response kits
recommended by the Chlorine Institute
may be used for chlorine gas product
leaks in lieu of the treatment system
requirements of this section as long as
there are an adequate number of
responders immediately available who
are trained in their use and who are
acceptable to the Fire Chief.
M. Chapter 80, Referenced Standards,
shall have added: Beginning on page
463 of the NFPA Referenced
Standards, the most current NFPA
standards shall be considered part of
the requirements of the IFC to the
prescribed extent of each such
reference.
§ 7-3 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 7-7
(Ords. 2003-11; 05/19/03; 2005-02,
01/18/2005; 2008-21, 09/15/2008; 2008-24,
12/01/2008; 2011-17, 09/19/2011; 2014-11,
07/07/2014; 2018-06, 04/16/2018)
Sec. 7-4. Establishment of Bureau of
Fire Prevention.
A. The IFC as amended, deleted and
added to shall be enforced by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire
Department of the City, which is
hereby established and which will be
operated under the supervision of the
Chief of the Fire Department.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department
may detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as shall
from time to time be necessary.
(Ord. 2003-11; 05/19/03; Ord. 2005-02,
01/18/2005; 2008-21, 09/15/2008)
Sec. 7-5. Terms.
A. Wherever the word "Municipality" is
used in the IFC, as amended, deleted
or added to, it shall be held to mean
"City.”
B. Whenever the words "Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention" are used
in the IFC, as amended, deleted or
added to, they shall be held to mean
"Fire Chief of the City of Moscow".
(Ord. 2005-02, 01/18/2005, 2008-21,
09/15/2008)
Sec. 7-6. Appointment and Duties of
Fire Chief.
The head of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention shall be the Fire Chief appointed
by the Mayor by and with the advice and
consent of the Council and the Moscow
Volunteer Fire Department Board of
Directors. The Fire Chief shall be charged
with:
A. The general supervision and
administration of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention (Fire Department) and of
all officers and employees of said
Department;
B. The prevention of fires and the
protection of life and property against
fire; and
C. The responsibility for the maintenance
and care of all property, fire apparatus
and equipment used by the
Department.
(Ord. 2003-11; 05/19/03; 2018-06, 04/16/2018)
Sec. 7-7. Violations; Penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any provision of the IFC or this
Title, as amended, deleted or added to,
by the City.
B. Giving false fire alarms; tampering
with a fire alarm, fire-detection or fire
extinguishing system. It shall be
unlawful for any person to wantonly
and willfully give or cause to be given,
or to advise, counsel, or aid and abet
anyone in giving a false alarm of fire,
or break the glass key protector, or to
pull the slide, arm, or lever of any
station or signal box of any fire-alarm
system, except in case of fire, or
willfully misuse or damage a portable
fire extinguisher or in any way to
willfully interfere with, damage,
deface, molest, or injure any part or
portion of any fire alarm, fire
detection, smoke detection or fire
extinguishing system.
C. Any person violating any provision of
this Chapter shall be subject to the
following:
It is an infraction punishable by a
fine of one hundred dollars ($100) plus
court costs for any person to violate
provisions of this Chapter for the first
time. A second violation within five
(5) years is an infraction punishable by
a fine of three hundred dollars ($300)
plus court costs. A third violation
within five (5) years shall be a
misdemeanor as defined by the Idaho
Code and shall subject such
person up to the maximum
misdemeanor penalties as provided in
the Idaho Code.
Each separate day during which
any violation of this Chapter occurs or
continues shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense, and upon
§ 7-7 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 7-10
conviction thereof shall be punishable
as stated herein.
(Ord. 2003-11; 05/19/03; 2005-02, 01/18/2005;
2008-21, 09/15/2008; 2014-11, 07/07/2014;
2018-06, 04/16/2018)
Sec. 7-8. Fire Lanes on Private
Property, Devoted to
Public Use.
A. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention with the Chief of Police
shall have the power to designate fire
lanes and access roads and their
markings on private property devoted
to public use.
B. Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise
obstructing fire lanes shall be
prohibited at all times.
Sec. 7-9. Safety Inspections.
A. No inspection shall take place during
the nighttime hours unless the
inspector has probable cause to believe
that life-threatening circumstances
exist on the premises or the owner or a
resident consents to the inspection.
B. All commercial buildings, including
buildings of three (3) or more units
used for residential uses, shall be
subject to inspection during daylight
hours. Owners or residents may
demand twenty-four (24) hours' notice
of such inspection.
C. Single family or duplex dwellings may
not be inspected unless such inspection
has been requested by the owner or a
resident, or the inspector has cause to
believe that a dangerous situation
exists or that a law, code, or ordinance
related to the safe and proper use of
the premises exists.
D. When violations are noted by the Fire
Marshal’s office, the owner/and
occupants shall be given at least thirty
(30) days to correct the noted
violations, unless the violations are life
threatening. If the violations are life
threatening, a shorter time period may
be given or the property may be
ordered vacated. After expiration of
the period given for correction, the
premises may be reinspected.
E. Inspection Fee. A fee, as set from
time to time by Resolution of the
Council, shall be assessed for
reinspection of premises at which
violations have been noted. The fee
for an inspection may be waived if it is
found that all necessary corrections
have been completed. If, after the
original inspection and three (3)
reinspections of the premises, the
owner or occupant has failed to correct
the safety violations the Fire Marshal
may order the premises to be vacated
and that the premises not be utilized
until all corrections have been made
and inspected. The owner of the
premises shall be responsible for all
fees charged pursuant to this section.
The Council may, from time to time,
amend the fees charged under this
section by resolution.
(Ord. 2003-11; 05/19/03; Ord. 2005-02,
01/18/2005; 2008-21, 09/15/2008; 2018-06,
04/16/2018)
Sec. 7-10. Refusal of Entry; Appeals.
A. Should entry to any building,
structure or premises be refused the
Fire Chief or a fire prevention
inspector having a right of entry
under any adopted City Code, the
Fire Chief may utilize any remedy
available under the IFC, this Code, or
the Idaho Code. Such refusal of
entry shall also be grounds for
revoking the Certificate of
Occupancy for the premises.
B. Termination of a Certificate of
Occupancy by the Fire Chief may be
appealed to the Board of Appeals for
a hearing on the issue. Appeal to this
Board must be made in writing by
the property owner. If made within
ten (10) days of the date that the
termination notice is served, such
§ 7-10 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 7-10
appeal shall stay termination until the
matter can be heard by the Board.
(Ord. 2003-11; 05/19/03; Ord. 2005-02,
01/18/2005; 2008-21, 09/15/2008)
§ 9-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 9-3
Chapter 9
CROSS-CONNECTIONS;
WATER SUPPLY
Sec. 9-1: Purpose and Scope
Sec. 9-2: Definitions
Sec. 9-3: Cross-Connections
Sec. 9-4: Use of Backflow Prevention
Assembly
Sec. 9-5: Cross-Connection Inspection
Sec. 9-6: Installation Permits and
Installation
Sec. 9-7: Additional Remedies
Sec. 9-8: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 9-1. Purpose and Scope.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
protect the public health of water
consumers by the control of actual and/or
potential cross-connections.
An additional purpose of this Chapter
is to acknowledge the City’s authority
granted by Article XII, Section 2 of the
Idaho Constitution and by Title 50, Chapter
3 of the Idaho Code, to promote and
maintain the peace, good government and
welfare of the City in a manner not
inconsistent with the laws of the State of
Idaho.
(Ord. 2004-05; 01/05/04)
Sec. 9-2. Definitions.
A. Backflow. The flow, other than the
intended direction of flow of any
foreign liquids, gases, or substances
into the distribution of a public water
supply.
B. Backflow Assembly Tester (BAT) -
Licensed. A person who tests
backflow assemblies and possesses a
valid Backflow Assembly License
issued by the State of Idaho Bureau of
Occupational Licenses.
C. Backflow Prevention Assembly –
Approved. A backflow preventer
which is designed to be in-line tested
and repaired. An "assembly" shall
consist of the backflow prevention
unit, two (2) resilient seated shutoff
valves and test cocks. Approval of
backflow assemblies by the City shall
be on the basis of a favorable
laboratory and field evaluation by an
approved testing laboratory and the
State of Idaho Rules for Public
Drinking Water Systems, IDAPA
58.01.08.
D. Backflow Prevention Device. A
backflow preventer that is not
designed for in-line testing and repair.
E. Contaminant. Any physical, chemical,
biological, or radiological substance or
matter in water.
F. Cross Connection. Any actual or
potential connection or piping
arrangement between a public or a
consumer’s potable water system and
any other source or system through
which it is possible to introduce into
any part of the potable water system
used water, water from any source
other than an approved public water
system, industrial fluid, gas or
substance other than the intended
potable water with which the system is
supplied. Cross connections include
bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections,
swivel or change-over devices and
other temporary or permanent devices
which, or because of which,
“backflow” can or may occur.
G. Public Water Supply. Any system or
water supply intended or used for
human consumption or other domestic
uses, including source, treatment
storage, transmission and distribution
facilities, where water is furnished to
any collection or number of
individuals, or is made available to the
public for human consumption or
domestic use.
(Ord. 2014-03, 03/03/2014)
Sec. 9-3. Cross-Connections.
A. The City shall have the authority to
establish requirements more stringent
than the Idaho Department of
Environmental Quality (IDEQ) Rules,
Idaho Administrative Procedure Act
§ 9-3 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 9-4
(IDAPA) Section 58.01.08, “Idaho
Rules for Public Drinking Water
Systems”, if it is deemed that
conditions so mandate. The control or
elimination of cross-connections shall
be in accordance with this Chapter
together with the latest editions of the
Pacific Northwest Section of the
American Water Works Association
“Cross Connection Control Manual
Accepted Procedure and Practice” and
the Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research
“Manual of Cross-Connection
Control.” The Public Works Director
or designee shall adopt rules and
regulations as necessary to carry out
the provisions of this Chapter.
B. No water service connection to any
premises shall be installed or
continued in use unless the water
supply is protected by a backflow
prevention assembly or a backflow
prevention device as may be required
by this Chapter. The installation or
maintenance of a cross-connection
which may endanger the water quality
of the potable water supply of the City
shall be unlawful and is prohibited.
Any cross-connection now existing or
hereafter installed which endangers
such water quality is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and the same
shall be abated.
(Ord. 2004-05; 01/05/04; 2014-03,
03/03/2014)
Sec. 9-4. Use of a Backflow
Prevention Assembly.
A. A backflow prevention assembly shall
be installed on any premises where, in
the judgment of the Public Works
Director or designee, the nature and
extent of the activities undertaken, or
the materials stored on the premises,
would present an immediate and
dangerous hazard to health and/or be
deleterious to the quality of the water
should a cross-connection occur. The
installation of the backflow prevention
assembly shall occur even though a
cross-connection may not exist at the
time the backflow prevention
assembly is installed. The Public
Works Director or designee shall
determine the need for a backflow
prevention assembly after considering
conditions that include, but are not
limited to, the following:
1. Premises having an auxiliary
water supply.
2. Premises having internal crossconnections
that are not correctable, or
intricate plumbing arrangements
which make it impracticable to
ascertain whether or not crossconnections
exist.
3. Premises where entry is restricted
so that inspections for crossconnections
cannot be made with
sufficient frequency or at sufficiently
short notice to assure that crossconnections
do not exist.
4. Premises having a repeated
history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
5. Premises on which any substance
is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water
supply, or where a cross-connection
could reasonably be expected to occur.
This shall include the handling of
process waters and cooling waters.
6. Premises where materials of a
toxic or hazardous nature are handled
in such a way that if back siphonage
should occur, a serious health hazard
might result.
7. The following types of facilities
will fall into one (1) of the above
categories where a backflow
prevention assembly is required to
protect the public water supply. A
backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed at such facilities unless the
Public Works Director or designee
determines that no hazard exists:
a. Hospitals, mortuaries,
clinics, dental clinics, veterinarian
clinics, and the like.
§ 9-4 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 9-4
b. Laboratories.
c. Metal plating industries.
d. Piers and docks.
e. Sewage treatment plants.
f. Food or beverage processing
plants.
g. Restaurants.
h. Chemical or other industrial
plants.
i. Petroleum processing or
storage plants.
j. Radioactive material
processing plants or nuclear reactors.
k. Where a single water service
is used to supply three (3) or more
businesses.
l. Where the meter serving the
property is one and one-half inches (1
1/2") or larger.
m. Any building on a hill or any
building having any plumbing fixture
that is thirty feet (30') or higher above
the water meter face.
n. Agricultural chemical
storage, formulation and distribution
facilities.
o. Tank truck fill stations.
p. Car washes.
q. Fire sprinkler systems.
r. Underground irrigation
systems.
s. Any other agricultural,
commercial, and industrial facility that
has the potential to introduce
contaminants into the public water
system.
8. Other premises, as specified by
the Public Works Director or designee,
where backflow prevention assemblies
are required to protect the public water
supply.
B. The type of protective assembly
required shall depend on the degree of
hazard which exists:
1. An Air-Gap separation or a
Reduced Pressure Backflow Assembly
shall be installed where the public
water supply may be contaminated
with sewage, industrial waste of a
toxic nature, or other contaminant
which could cause a health or system
hazard.
2. In the case of a substance which
may be objectionable but not
hazardous to health, a Double Check
Valve Assembly, Pressure Vacuum
Breaker Air-Gap separation, or a
Reduced Pressure Backflow Assembly
shall be installed.
3. All fire sprinkler systems shall
have as a minimum level of protection,
an approved Double Check Valve
Assembly. If it is determined that a
potential health hazard exists, an
approved Reduced Pressure Backflow
Assembly shall be required by the
City.
4. All premises with an auxiliary
water supply shall have, as a minimum
level of protection, an approved
Reduced Pressure Backflow
Assembly.
C. A backflow prevention assembly
required by this Chapter shall be
installed at the meter, at the property
line of the premises when meters are
not used, or at a location designated by
the Public Works Director or designee.
The assembly shall be located so as to
be readily accessible for maintenance
and testing.
D. A backflow prevention assembly
required by this Chapter shall be
installed under the supervision of, and
with the approval of, the Public Works
Director or designee.
E. Any protective assembly required by
this Chapter shall be a model approved
by the Public Works Director or
designee. A Double Check Valve
Assembly, Pressure Vacuum Breaker,
or a Reduced Pressure Backflow
Assembly will be approved if it has
successfully passed performance tests
of the University of Southern
California Engineering Center or other
testing laboratories satisfactory to the
Public Works Director or designee.
Every assembly required in this
Chapter shall be furnished and
§ 9-4 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 9-6
installed by, and at the expense of, the
customer.
F. A backflow prevention assembly
required by this Chapter shall pass an
initial test performed by a licensed
BAT at the expense of the customer,
and shall have a tag attached to the
assembly by the BAT who performed
said test and shall indicate the date of
said test, prior to inspection and
delivery of water service.
G. A backflow prevention assembly
installed pursuant to this Chapter,
shall be inspected, tested, and tagged
annually, or more often if necessary.
Inspections, tests and maintenance
shall be at the customer's expense.
Inspections, tests, repairs and records
thereof shall be accomplished under
the Public Works Director’s or
designee's supervision by a licensed
BAT.
H. All installed assemblies protecting
underground irrigation systems shall
be tested within ten (10) business days
of annual recharge (start-up), and no
later than the 30th day of June, each
year.
I. All other installed assemblies shall be
tested no later than the 30th day of
September, each year.
J. The Public Works Director or
designee shall have the authority to set
and modify due dates by which
backflow assembly test(s) required by
this Chapter must be completed.
K. Whenever an assembly fails testing, it
shall be repaired, replaced, or isolated
at the customer’s expense in
accordance with IDAPA Section
58.01.08.
L. Whenever an assembly fails testing,
the BAT performing the test shall
notify both the Public Works Director
or designee and the owner and user of
the assembly within one (1) business
day.
M. Failure of the customer to cooperate in
the installation, maintenance, testing
or inspection of a backflow prevention
assembly required by this Chapter
shall be grounds for the termination of
water service to the premises, or, in
the alternative, the installation of an
air-gap separation at the customer's
expense.
(Ord. 2004-05, 01/05/04; 2014-03, 03/03/2014;
2015-02, 02/17/2015)
Sec. 9-5. Cross-Connection
Inspection.
A. No water shall be delivered to any
structure hereafter built within the
City or within areas served by City
water until the same shall have been
inspected by the Public Works
Director or designee for possible
cross-connections and has been
approved as being free of same.
B. Any construction for industrial or
other purposes which is classified as a
hazardous facility pursuant to this
Chapter, where it is reasonable to
anticipate intermittent crossconnections,
or as determined by the
Public Works Director or designee,
shall be protected by the installation of
one or more backflow prevention
assemblies at the point of service
from the public water supply or any
other location designated by the Public
Works Director or designee.
C. Inspections shall be made periodically
of all buildings, structures, or
improvements of any nature now
receiving water through the City's
system, for the purpose of ascertaining
whether cross-connections exist. Such
inspections shall be made by the
Public Works Director or designee.
Sec. 9-6. Installation Permits and
Installation.
If a backflow prevention device, or a
backflow prevention assembly is found to
be necessary, the owner of the property
served must apply to the Public Works
Director or designee for a permit as
specified in Title 5, Chapter 4, of this
Code. The device or assembly shall be
§ 9-6 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 9-8
installed per the latest edition of the
Uniform Plumbing Code or per the Public
Works Director’s direction.
(Ord. 2014-03, 03/03/2014)
Sec. 9-7. Additional Remedies.
In the event an improper crossconnection
is not corrected within the time
limit set by the City, or, in the event the
Public Works Director or designee is
refused access to any property for the
purpose of determining whether or not
cross-connections exist, delivery of water
to the property shall cease until the
deficiency is corrected to the Public Works
Director’s or designee's satisfaction. In
addition, the Public Works Director or
designee may effect the necessary repairs
or modifications at the expense of the
property owner and refuse delivery of
water to the property until the cost thereof
shall have been paid.
Sec. 9-8. Violations; Penalties.
Any person who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or
resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter or the rules and
regulations as adopted by the Public Works
Director or designee, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished
pursuant to this Code and the Idaho Code
unless otherwise specifically provided for
in this Chapter.
§ 10-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 10-3
Chapter 10
INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL
CODE
Sec. 10-1: Adoption Of Code
Sec. 10-2: Amendments to the International
Mechanical Code
Sec. 10-3: City Not Liable
Sec. 10-1. Adoption of Code.
A certain document, one (1) certified
copy of which is kept on file by the Clerk,
being marked and designated as the
International Mechanical Code, 2012
Edition, as edited, copyrighted and
published by the International Code
Council is hereby adopted.
(Ord. 2001-17; 09/17/2001; 2005-01, 01/18/2005;
2007-18, 12/17/2007; 2010-26, 12/20/2010; 2014-
20, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 10-2. Amendments to the
International Mechanical
Code
Section 507.2.1.1 shall be amended by
deleting the language “A method of
interlock between an exhaust hood system
and appliances equipped with standing
pilot burners shall not cause the pilot
burners to be extinguished. A method of
interlock between an exhausted system and
cooking appliances shall not involve or
depend upon any component of a fire
extinguishing system.”
Section 507.2.1.2 shall be amended by
adding the language “Exception. This
section only pertains to foods manufactured
one year past the date of adoption of this
code by the City of Moscow.”
Section 850.3 shall be amended by
adding the language “or approved as per
manufacturer’s specifications.”
(Ord. 2014-20, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 10-3. City Not Liable.
Adoption by the City of the
International Mechanical Code, 2012
Edition, shall not relieve the owner or
contractor of any responsibility or liability
for compliance with said code, nor shall the
City assume such liability through the
issuance of any permit or certificate of
inspection or by reason of inspection.
(Ords. 89-15, 7/10/89; 92-17, 8/3/92; 97-31, 9/25/97;
99-29, 8/16/99; 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2007-18,
12/17/2007; 2010-26, 12/20/2010; 2014-20,
12/01/2014)
§ 11-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 11-4
Chapter 11
BUILDING RELOCATION
Sec. 11-1: Purpose and Scope
Sec. 11-2: Definitions
Sec. 11-3: Requirements for Relocation
Sec. 11-4: Plans Required
Sec. 11-5: Conditions of Permit
Sec. 11-6: Proposed Route
Sec. 11-7: Public Utilities Affected
Sec. 11-8: Moving Security Required
Sec. 11-9: Conditions of Security
Sec. 11-10: Default in Performance of
Conditions; Notice
Sec. 11-11: Duty of Surety and Principal
Sec. 11-12: Authority of the Code
Official in Event of Default
Sec. 11-13: When Building or Structure
May be Demolished
Sec. 11-14: Termination of Security
Sec. 11-15: Right to Enter Premises
Sec. 11-1. Purpose and Scope.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
provide minimum standards and provisions
for the safe relocation of buildings and
structures within or to the City, and to
provide for performance security of said
structures.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-2. Definitions.
The following definitions are provided
for the sole purpose of proper interpretation
and administration of this Chapter.
A. Approved Moving Contractor. A
person who, upon satisfactory proof of
liability insurance, coverage and
qualifications, is approved as a mover
by the Code Official.
B. Code Official. The Building
Inspector or Building Official of the
City, or the Community Development
Director or designee.
C. Moving Permit. An official document
issued to an approved moving
contractor authorizing a structure to be
relocated within, to or from the City.
D. Relocation Compliance Inspection.
An official document issued to the
owner of the structure and/or agent,
authorizing the Code Official to
perform inspections on the structure
for compliance with current adopted
Codes, or determine if the structure is
unsafe for relocation or occupation.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-3. Requirements for
Relocation.
A. Any building or structure relocated
within the City limits shall have a final
appraised evaluation of not less than
the average appraised evaluation of
the surrounding buildings or
structures, said appraised evaluation to
be determined by the Latah County
Assessor, or a certified land appraiser.
B. No moving permit shall be issued to
relocate any building or structure
which is so constructed, or in such
condition as to be dangerous or unsafe
or which if it is to be a dwelling, is
unfit for human habitation, or which is
dilapidated or defective or in such a
state of deterioration that its relocation
at the proposed site would create a
safety or health hazard or other
condition prohibited by this Code or
the Idaho Code.
C. No masonry fireplace or chimney shall
be moved or relocated within the City.
Where a building or structure is to be
relocated, masonry chimneys and
fireplaces shall be removed prior to
transportation and shall be
reconstructed in accordance with this
Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 83-6, 6/20/83; Ord. 84-16, 8/6/84; Ord.
2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-4. Plans Required.
No moving permit shall be issued until
A. Plans and specifications as required by
this Code for all alterations, additions,
changes and repairs proposed to be
made to the building or structure when
completed at its proposed location
have been filed with and approved by
the Code Official;
§ 11-4 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 11-7
B. Required building, plumbing,
electrical, gas/mechanical, sewer, and
water permits have been issued;
C. Related fees have been paid; and
D. The Code Official has conducted a
relocation compliance inspection.
Nor shall such permit be issued if the
building or structure when completed in
accordance with such plans would violate
this Code or the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-5. Conditions of Permit.
All issued permits shall be conditioned
upon the relocation of the building or
structure in accordance with the plans and
specifications filed and approved by the
Code Official and compliance with time
limits established by the adopted Codes.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-6. Proposed Route.
A. Before a moving permit is granted, the
mover shall deliver to the City proof
of liability insurance in an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of actual
moving and related expenses occurred,
said amount to be determined and
approved by the Code Official, and to
hold harmless the City against any loss
or damages arising out of or incident
to the moving of the building or
structure.
B. The applicant for a moving permit
shall state in writing the public streets
proposed to be used, if any, and
approximate time schedule of the
move along the proposed route. The
City Engineer shall have the proposed
route examined and shall approve the
same if the proposed use of the streets
can be made without causing
permanent damage to the pavements,
fixtures and/or street trees along the
route and will not unduly disrupt
pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. If
required by the City Engineer, the
applicant shall furnish separate
security on any workmanship or
materials involved in removal and
replacement activities. Such security
shall be returned to the permittee upon
satisfaction of the City Engineer that
no damage to City property or extra
costs were incurred while the structure
was being moved.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-7. Public Utilities Affected.
A. No moving permit shall be issued until
the applicant presents written evidence
from the City and each public utility
whose property fixtures or equipment
will be affected, endangered or
disturbed by the proposed move which
establishes that the applicant has made
a sufficient deposit to pay or has
otherwise secured the payment of the
estimated cost of the temporary
removal and replacement, restoration
or protection of such property, fixtures
and equipment and established the
estimated expense of the Police
Department and Public Works
Department of the City in connection
with such move. Said notice shall be
served to the person or entity
determined by the Code Official to
require notice of an action necessary
to assist in the removal and/or
relocation of the structure forty-eight
(48) hours before the proposed start
time of the move.
B. Upon receipt of such notice, it shall be
the duty of those notified to move,
raise or otherwise dispose of its wires
or other instrumentalities in such time
and manner as will not cause
unreasonable delay to the holder of the
permit, all of which shall be done at
the expense of the applicant.
C. Before any building or structure is
moved over or on any public street,
the Police Department and the City
Engineer shall be notified and they
may direct the moving at a time and
route agreed upon.
(Ord. 83-6, 6/20/83; Ord. 2005-01,
01/18/2005)
§ 11-8 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 11-12
Sec. 11-8. Moving Security Required.
No moving permit shall be issued
unless the applicant therefor shall first post
with the Code Official a bond security
acceptable to the Code Official executed by
the owner of the premises where the
building or structure is to be relocated.
Such security shall name the City as
Obligee and shall be in an amount equal to
the entire cost plus twenty-five percent
(25%) of the building or structure to be
moved, all work required to be performed,
and all required fees and permits in order to
remove the structure from its present
location and to relocate the same in its
proposed location together with all
proposed alteration, additions, changes and
required repairs proposed to be made, as
indicated by the plans therefor, said cost to
be estimated by the Code Official.
(Ord. 86-01, 1/6/86; Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-9. Conditions of Security.
Every relocation bond or security filed
shall be conditioned as follows:
A. The building or structure shall be
relocated in compliance with this
Code, in accordance with the plans
and specifications for such relocation,
alterations, additions, changes and
required repairs filed with and
approved by the Code Official and in
compliance with the conditions of the
issued permits.
B. The work required to be done pursuant
to the conditions of the moving permit
shall be fully performed and
completed within the time limits
specified in this Code and all
applicable permits. Any of said time
limits may be extended for good and
sufficient cause by the Code Official,
but no such extension shall be valid
unless in writing and such extension
shall not release the surety of the
relocation bond or security.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-10. Default in Performance of
Conditions; Notice.
Whenever the Code Official shall find
that a default has occurred in the
performance of any of the undertakings of
the applicant for any of the issued permits
in connection with the work contemplated
thereby, or of the conditions of the permit
therefor, written notice thereof, shall be
given to the principal and to the surety of
the bond or security. Such notice shall
state the nature of the default, and in case
of work to be done, shall specify the work
to be done, and the period of time within
which work must be completed. Failure to
comply with the notice of the Code Official
shall constitute a default of the undertaking
of said security or surety bond.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-11. Duty of Surety and
Principal.
Upon receipt of such notice of default
from the City, the surety shall, within the
time specified therein, correct such default
and in the case of work required to be
performed, cause said work to be done
within the time specified in said notice and
upon its failure to do so, must forthwith
pay to the City the face amount of its bond
or security.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-12. Authority of the Code
Official in Event of
Default.
A. Upon receipt by the City of the face
amount of said bond from said surety,
the Code Official shall proceed as
deemed expedient to cause the
required work to be performed and
completed. Upon the completion of
such work, the balance, if any, of the
money paid to the City by said surety
shall be returned to such surety, after
deducting the cost of the work plus the
City's cost of overhead and
supervision. Neither the City nor the
Code Official shall incur liability other
§ 11-12 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 11-15
than for the expenditure of funds
delivered to the City for completion of
the work.
B. In case security other than a bond has
been filed and said notice has not been
complied with, the Code Official is
authorized to use the security deposit
to cause the required work to be done
by contract or otherwise. The balance,
if any, of such security shall, upon
completion of the work, be returned to
the permittee after deducting the cost
of the work plus all costs incurred by
the City in connection, therewith.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-13. When Building or
Structure May Be
Demolished.
When notice has been given and a
default has occurred either on the part of
the principal or the surety, the Code
Official shall have the option, in lieu of
completing the work required to cause the
building or structure to be demolished and
the site cleared, cleaned and restored; the
cost thereof to be defrayed in the same
manner as cost of completion of the
building structure.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-14. Termination of Security.
The term of each form of security
pursuant to this Chapter shall begin upon
the date of execution thereof and shall
terminate upon the completion to the
satisfaction of the Code Official of the
performance of all terms and conditions of
the issued permits. Such completion shall
be evidenced by a statement thereof signed
by the Code Official. The Code Official
may issue release of a portion of the
security deposit or bond if a substantial
portion of the permitted work has been
completed. Upon issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy for the moved
structure, the full amount of the security
must be released to the permittee.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 11-15. Right to Enter Premises.
A. In the event of any default in the
performance of any term or condition
of the relocation permits, the surety
and/or the Code Official shall have the
right to go upon the premises to
complete the required work or to
remove or demolish the building or
structure.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner,
owner’s agents or any other person,
after default has occurred in the
performance of the terms, conditions
or undertaking of the permittee in
connection with the issued permits, to
interfere with or obstruct the ingress
or egress to or from any such premises
of any authorized representative or
agent of the surety or of the City
engaged in the work completing,
demolishing, or removing any building
or structure for which a moving permit
has been issued.
(Ords. 83-6, 6/20/83; 94-02, 1/3/94; Ord. 2005-
01, 01/18/2005)
§ 12-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 12-3
Chapter 12
INTERNATIONAL EXISTING
BUILDING CODE
Sec. 12-1: Adoption of Code
Sec. 12-2: Amendments to International
Existing Building Code
Sec. 12-3: City Not Liable
Sec. 12-1. Adoption of Code.
The International Existing Building
Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as an official Code of the City.
One (1) certified copy of this Code shall be
kept on file by the Clerk for public use.
(Ord. 2001-17; 09/17/2001; 2005-01, 01/18/2005;
2007-18, 12/17/2007; 2010-26, 12/20/2010;
2014-01, 01/21/2014)
Sec. 12-2. Amendments to
International Existing
Building Code.
Section 101.1 shall be amended to
insert “City of Moscow, Idaho” as the name
of the jurisdiction.
Section 103.2 shall be amended as
follows:
The Building Official, if any, shall be
appointed by the chief appointing authority
of the jurisdiction.
Section 1301.2 shall be amended to
insert the date “June 20, 1983”.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2010-26, 12/20/2010)
Sec. 12-3. City Not Liable.
Adoption by the City of the
International Existing Building Code, 2012
Edition, shall not relieve the owner or
contractor of any responsibility or liability
for compliance with said Code, nor shall
the City assume such liability through the
issuance of any permit or certificate of
inspection or by reason of inspection.
(Ords. 89-15, 7/10/89; 92-18, 8/3/92; 97-31, 9/25/97;
99-29, 8/16/99; 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2007-18,
12/17/2007; 2010-26, 12/20/2010; 2014-01,
01/21/2014)
§ 13-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 13-2
Chapter 13
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY
MAINTENANCE CODE
Sec. 13-1: Adoption of Code
Sec. 13-2: City Not Liable
Sec. 13-1. Adoption of Code.
The International Property
Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition,
published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the official
Code for administering the various uniform
codes. One (1) certified copy of this Code
shall be kept on file by the Clerk for use by
the public.
(Ords. 97-31, 9/25/97; 2001-17; 09/17/2001; 2005-
01, 01/18/2005; 2005-14, 05/02/2005; 2008-17,
12/17/2007; 2010-26, 12/20/2010; 2014-20,
12/01/2014)
Sec. 13-2. City Not Liable.
Adoption by the City of the
International Property Maintenance Code,
2012 Edition, shall not relieve the owner or
contractor of any responsibility or liability
for compliance with said Code, nor shall
the City assume such liability through the
issuance of any permit or certificate of
inspection or by reason of inspection.
(Ords. 89-15, 7/10/89; 92-14, 7/20/92; 97-31,
9/25/97; 99-29, 8/16/99; 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2005-
14, 05/02/2005; 2007-18, 12/27/2007; 2010-26,
12/20/2010; 2014-20, 12/01/2014)
§ 14-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 14-3
Chapter 14
SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCES
Sec. 14-1: Purpose
Sec. 14-2: Definitions
Sec. 14-3: Air Quality Designations
and Alert Criteria
Sec. 14-4: Public Notification
Sec. 14-5: Burning Solid Fuel or
Refuse
Sec. 14-6: Air Quality Alert
Exemptions
Sec. 14-7: Solid Fuel Heating
Appliance Permits
Sec. 14-8: Permit Denial and Appeal
Sec. 14-9: Minimum Standards for
Clean Burning Appliances
Sec. 14-10: Civil Nuisance
Sec. 14-11: Violation; Penalties
Sec. 14-1. Purpose.
To protect air quality resources vital to
public health, safety, and the economic
future of Moscow by controlling emissions
from solid fuel and refuse burning.
Sec. 14-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter the
following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory, not merely directory.
A. Air Pollution. The presence in the
outdoor atmosphere of any
contaminant or combinations thereof
in such quantity or of such nature and
duration and under such conditions as
would be injurious to human health or
welfare, to animal or plant life, or to
property, or to interfere unreasonably
with the enjoyment of life or property.
B. Building. Any structure, dwelling,
office, industrial plant, garage, or
barn, whether public or privately
owned or any other structure as
defined by the Uniform Building Code
as adopted by the City.
C. Clean Burning Appliance. A solid
fuel heating appliance that the
Inspector has determined to meet
emission performance standards.
D. Economic Hardship. The hardship
which exists when the income of the
applicant/resident is fifty percent
(50%) or less of Moscow's median
income as established by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD).
E. Inspector. The Building Inspector of
the City or the Building Inspector's
designee.
F. Open Burning. The combustion of
any material not contained in a heating
appliance or incinerator.
G. Particulate Matter. Gas-borne
particles resulting from incomplete
combustion, consisting predominantly,
but not exclusively, of carbon and
other combustible matter.
H. Refuse. All solid wastes, garbage and
rubbish, including but not limited to,
cardboard, plastic, rubber, Styrofoam,
petroleum products, food stuff,
Christmas trees, yard debris, or
chemically treated wood.
I. Refuse Incinerator. Any device
designed or operated to reduce the
volume of refuse. Natural gas fired
pathological incinerators are excluded.
J. Solid Fuel. Any form of wood or coal
used for fuel.
K. Solid Fuel Heating Appliance. A
device designed for solid fuel
combustion so that usable heat is
derived for the interior of a building,
including, but not limited to solid fuelfired
cooking stoves, pot-bellied
stoves, Franklin stoves, air-tight
stoves, fireplace inserts, or
combination fuel furnaces or boilers
which burn solid fuel. Fireplaces with
air-to-fuel ratios that exceed thirty to
one (30:1) air-to-fuel ratios are
exempt.
Sec. 14-3. Air Quality Designations
and Alert Criteria.
A. The quality of the City’s air shall be
determined by monitoring pollutant
§ 14-3 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 14-7
levels with equipment and methods
approved by the Idaho State Air
Quality Bureau.
B. The quality of the City’s air shall be
designated according to the following
table:
Health effect
designation
PM10 levels during 24-
hour period, measured
in micrograms per
cubic meter
Good 0 - 75
Moderate 76 - 150
Unhealthful 151 -350
Very Unhealthful 351 - 420
Hazardous Above 420
C. In order to prevent the existence of air
quality that is unhealthful, an air
pollution alert will be declared
whenever levels of PM10 particulate
exceed one hundred ten (110)
micrograms per cubic meter (ug/m3)
for at least a twenty-four (24) hour
period.
D. Any air pollution alert shall continue
until particulate levels fall below one
hundred ten (110) micrograms per
cubic meter (ug/3) for twenty-four
(24) hours and until air stagnation
conditions cease to exist. Air
pollution alerts and "alert"
terminations shall be issued by the
City agency or agencies designated to
monitor the air conditions and issue
alerts.
E. Except as exempted below in Code
Section 7-14-6, during an air pollution
alert no person or entity shall operate
fireplaces, a solid fuel heating
appliance, refuse incinerator, or
conduct open burning.
Sec. 14-4. Public Notification.
Whenever air pollution alert
conditions are met, local print, radio, and
television news media will be notified. It
will be requested that announcements of
the existence of an air pollution alert be
made by the news media during regularly
scheduled broadcasts and in all editions of
the official newspaper of the City. Similar
announcements shall be made upon
termination of an air pollution alert.
Sec. 14-5. Burning Solid Fuel or
Refuse.
A. It shall be unlawful to cause or allow
refuse or coal to be burned in a solid
fuel heating appliance designed for
wood fuel.
B. It shall be unlawful to cause or allow a
refuse incinerator or solid fuel heating
appliance to be operated contrary to
design specifications and
manufacturers' instructions.
Sec. 14-6. Air Quality Alert
Exemptions.
A. The Inspector shall grant exemptions
from this Chapter if it is determined
by the Inspector that:
1. A solid fuel heating appliance is
the sole source of heat for the building
in which it is situated; and the solid
fuel heating appliance user suffers
from economic hardship as defined in
this Chapter; or
2. The solid fuel heating appliance
is listed by the Building Department as
a clean burning appliance. The clean
burning appliance exception shall be
valid only so long as the clean burning
appliance is maintained in good
condition and continues to operate in
conformance with the standards for a
clean burning appliance.
B. Any person denied an exemption
under this chapter shall be provided, at
the option of the applicant for
exemption, a hearing before the Board
of Appeals as provided for in this
Chapter.
C. Any building constructed after the
effective date of this Chapter shall not
be eligible for an exemption under
Code Subsection (A)(1) above.
Sec. 14-7. Solid Fuel Heating
Appliance Permits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in
the City to install a solid fuel heating
§ 14-7 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 14-9
appliance in any new or existing
structure until first procuring from the
City a solid fuel heating appliance
permit.
B. It shall be unlawful on or after the
effective date of this Chapter for any
person in the City to: offer to sell or
sell, for installation in any new or
existing building, a solid fuel heating
appliance which has not been certified
as clean burning by the Inspector. The
Inspector may require such proof as
the Inspector deems necessary to
demonstrate that the appliance
complies with the City standards.
Sec. 14-8. Permit Denial and Appeal.
A. Upon a showing of sufficient cause to
believe that grounds exist for denial of
a permit or request for exemption from
the rules and regulations of the
Inspector, as provided for in this
Chapter, the Inspector may deny said
permit or request for exemption by:
1. Notifying the applicant by
certified mail, or personal service, or
service at the premises where the
permit is sought, of the grounds for
said denial and of the applicant’s
opportunity to appeal said denial to
the Board of Appeals.
2. Failure of a person to actually
receive a notice sent or served, shall
not invalidate the denial.
3. The applicant, after notice of the
denial, may appeal said denial by
making application for a hearing
before the Board of Appeals within ten
(10) working days of the date of the
above notice.
B. Denial Hearing and Determination by
the Board: The hearing shall be
before the Board of Appeals. At such
hearing the applicant may present
evidence, call witnesses, direct
questions to witnesses called by the
City, and be represented by counsel.
A recorded transcript shall be
maintained by the Board of Appeals.
Within ten (10) working days after the
date of the hearing, the Board of
Appeals shall either:
1. Approve the denial by the
Inspector, or
2. Allow the issuance of the permit
or exemption with modifications or
conditions as the Inspector may
impose, such modifications or
conditions to be reasonably related to
the use of the permit or exemption.
C. Appeal of Decision of Board of
Appeals: The decision of the Board of
Appeals on a denial shall be final and
conclusive. Appeal from a decision of
the Board of Appeals must be made to
the District Court for Latah County in
accordance with the Idaho
Administrative Procedures Act.
D. Powers and Duties: The Board of
Appeals shall hear and decide all
appeals from a denial by the Inspector
of a solid fuel heating appliance
permit as is required by this Chapter.
The Board of Appeals shall
recommend to the Inspector inspection
and enforcement criteria associated
with this Chapter.
Sec. 14-9. Minimum Standards for
Clean Burning Appliances.
A. In no event shall the standards for
clean burning solid fuel heating
appliances as adopted by rule and
regulation by the Building Department
allow a weighted average particulate
emission greater than:
1. For a new clean burning solid
fuel heating appliance with a
minimum heat output of less than forty
thousand (40,000) BTU/hr.
a. Eight and one-half (8.5)
grams per hour for a non-catalytic
solid fuel heating appliance.
b. Five and one-half (5.5)
grams per hour for a catalyst-equipped
solid fuel heating appliance.
2. Clean burning solid heating
appliances with a minimum heat
output of greater than forty thousand
(40,000) BTU/hr. shall not exceed an
§ 14-9 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 14-11
average particulate emission standard
equal to the sum of eight (8.0) grams
per hour plus two-tenths (0.2) grams
per hour for each one thousand (1,000)
BTU per hour heat output.
B. Any person denied a clean burning
solid fuel heating appliance permit
shall have a right to a hearing pursuant
to this Chapter.
C. The City shall maintain a list of
appliances certified to be clean
burning by the Inspector.
Sec. 14-10. Civil Nuisance.
The operation of heating appliance or
incinerator in a manner which causes "air
pollution" having a harmful effect upon any
adjacent property owner or resident is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
even if the appliance complies with this
Chapter and is being properly operated. An
affected person shall have the right to bring
a civil action in the district to have such
offending use declared a nuisance. The
court may take such action as it deems
necessary to abate such nuisance, including
the use of a restraining order or injunction,
the payment of damages to the injured
party, and/or a requirement that a bond be
posted which would be forfeited should the
offending party fail to abate the nuisance.
For purposes of this Section the harmful
effect must be more than a trivial or an
aesthetic effect.
Sec. 14-11. Violation; Penalties.
A. The violation of any provision of this
Chapter, or the failure or omission to
perform any duty imposed by the
provisions of this Chapter is hereby
declared unlawful and a misdemeanor.
B. Any person convicted of a violation of
this Chapter shall be fined pursuant to
this Code and the Idaho Code.
§ 15-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 15-3
Chapter 15
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY
CONSERVATION CODE
Sec. 15-1: Adoption of Code
Sec. 15-2: Amendments to the
International Energy
Conservation Code
Sec. 15-3: City Not Liable
Sec. 15-1. Adoption of Code.
The International Energy Conservation
Code, 2015 Edition, with 2009
Amendments for Residential, published by
International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as an official Code of the City
applicable to all occupancies within the
City.
The Clerk shall keep one (1) certified
copy of the current adopted Edition of the
International Energy Conservation Code on
file.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2007-18, 12/17/2007;
2010-25, 12/20/2010; 2017-17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 15-2. Amendments to the
International Energy
Conservation Code.
The following Section 403.5.1 shall be
amended as follows:
Section 403.5.1, 2009 International
Energy Conservation Code. Whole House
Fan Ventilation. All dwelling units shall
have a whole house fan installed rated at
one hundred (100) cubic feet per minute
(cfm) or more. The whole house fan shall
be activated by a twenty four (24) hour
timer set to run the exhaust fan. A
humidistat may be installed in place of a
timer.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2007-18, 12/17/2007;
2010-25, 12/20/2010; 2017-17, 12/18/2017)
Sec. 15-3. City Not Liable.
Adoption by the City of the
International Energy Conservation Code,
2015 Edition, with 2009 Amendments for
Residential, shall not relieve the owner or
contractor of any responsibility or liability
for compliance with said Code, nor shall
the City assume such liability through the
issuance of any permit or certificate of
inspection or by reason of inspection.
(Ord. 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2007-18, 12/17/2007;
2010-25, 12/20/2010; 2017-17, 12/18/2017)
§ 16-1 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 16-2
Chapter 16
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL
CODE
Sec. 16-1: Adoption of Code
Sec. 16-2: Amendments to the
International Residential
Code
Sec. 16-3: City Not Liable.
Sec. 16-1. Adoption of Code.
Parts I-VI, and IX, and Appendix
Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, M, and
Q of the International Residential Code,
2012 Edition, published by the
International Code Council are hereby
adopted as the official building code of the
City for one (1) and two (2) family
dwellings, townhouses and twinhomes, as
defined by this Code, and shall apply to the
erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal
conversion, demolition, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area and
maintenance of one (1) and two (2) family
dwellings, townhouses and twinhomes, in
the City.
The Clerk shall keep one (1) certified
copy of the current adopted edition of the
International Residential Code on file.
(Ords. 2002-22, 12/2/02; 2005-01, 01/18/2005;
2007-18, 12/17/2007; 2010-25, 12/20/2010; 2014-
20, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 16-2. Amendments to the
International Residential
Code.
The following amendments to the
adopted portions of the 2012 Edition of the
International Residential Code are hereby
made:
Section G2406.2 shall be amended by
the deletion of exceptions 3 and 4.
Section G2408.2 shall be amended by
the deletion of the exception.
Section G2427.4.3 shall be added and
shall read as follows: Testing: All plastic
pipe located within a dwelling used for
venting flue gases shall be tested at five (5)
psi for fifteen (15) minutes duration.
Section M1502.4.2 shall be amended
by deleting the words “not to exceed twelve
feet (12’)” and inserting the words “not to
exceed four feet (4’) or every joint”.
Section M2101.10 shall be amended
by replacing the words “fifteen (15
minutes” with the words “thirty (30)
minutes”.
Creation of Enforcement Agency
Section R103.1. There is hereby
established in this jurisdiction a code
enforcement agency which shall be under
the administrative and operational control
of the Building Official. The Building
Official shall develop such rules,
regulations and standards as are necessary
for the efficient administration of this
Chapter.
Section R302.5.4 shall be added:
Openings between the garage and the
residence shall be equipped with a
minimum of two (2) self closing hinges.
Section R302.6 shall be replaced with
the following language: The garage shall
be separated from the residence and its attic
area by not less than five eighths inch
(5/8”) gypsum board applied to the garage
side. Where the separation is a floorceiling
assembly, the structure supporting
the separation and the ceiling shall be
protected by not less than five eighths inch
(5/8”) gypsum board or equivalent.
Table R302.6, “Dwelling/garage Fire
Separation” shall be amended to require
that all gypsum board shall be five-eighths
inch (5/8”) gypsum board or the equivalent
and not one-half inch (1/2”) gypsum board.
Section R303.4 shall be replaced with
the following language:
R303.4 Mechanical Ventilation.
Dwelling units shall be provided with
whole house mechanical ventilation in
accordance with Section M1507.3.
Exception: Where the air infiltration
rate of a dwelling unit is equal to five (5)
air changes per hour or greater when tested
with a blower door at a pressure of zero
§ 16-2 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 16-2
point two inch (0.2) w.c. (50 Pa) in
accordance with Section N1102.4.1.2.
Section R308.4 “Hazardous locations”
For Glazing shall be amended by the
deletion of exception 2 in R308.4.3.
Section R308.4.5 shall be amended by
inserting the words “and horizontally” after
the word “vertically” and before the word
“above” and by the deletion of the
exception in R308.4.7.
Section R311.3 shall have the
following sentence deleted: “The width of
each landing shall not be less than the door
served.” The following sentence shall be
added to Section R311.3: “All landings
shall have minimum width of thirty six
inches (36”).”
Section R311.3.1. shall be amended by
deleting the Exception.
Section R315.2 shall be amended by
inserting the words ‘for additions, remodels,
and/or gas/mechanical work’ after
the word “permit” and before the word
“occurs”, with deletions of exceptions 1
and 2 of 312.1.2.
Table R403.1 to be amended as
follows:
When one (1) floor is supported by the
foundation, thickness of the foundation
wall shall be six inches (6”) if concrete,
and eight inches (8”) if unit masonry when
the foundation wall is forty eight inches
(48”) or less in height. When the
foundation wall is forty eight inches (48”)
or more in height and one (1) floor is
supported by the foundation, thickness of
the foundation shall be eight inches (8”) if
concrete, and eight inches (8”) if unit
masonry; width of footing shall be sixteen
inches (16”); thickness of footing shall be
eight inches (8”); depth below undisturbed
ground surface shall be thirty inches (30”).
When two (2) floors are supported by
the foundation, thickness of the foundation
wall shall be eight inches (8”) if concrete,
and eight inches (8”) if unit masonry; width
of footing shall be sixteen inches (16”);
thickness of footing shall be eight inches
(8”); depth below undisturbed ground
surface shall be thirty inches (30”)
When three (3) floors are supported by
the foundation, thickness of the foundation
wall shall be ten inches (10”) if concrete;
and ten inches (10”) if unit masonry; width
of footing shall be twenty inches (20”);
thickness of footing shall be ten inches
(10”); depth below undisturbed ground
surface shall be thirty inches (30”).
1. Where unusual conditions or frost
conditions are found, footings and
foundations shall be required to be
engineered.
2. The ground under the floor may
be excavated to the elevation of the top of
the footing.
3. Foundations may support a roof
in addition to the stipulated number of
floors. Foundations supporting roofs only
shall be as required for supporting one (1)
floor.
Amend table 404.1.2(2), 404.1.2.(3) to
say all foundation walls four feet (4’) or
less #4 bar twenty four inch (24”) on center
vertical and horizontal. Foundation walls
more than four feet (4’) but less than ten
feet ((10’) #4 bar eighteen inch (18”) on
center vertical and horizontal. More than
ten feet (10’) wall shall be designed by a
design professional.
Section R406.1 shall be amended by
deletion, in the first sentence, of the words
“that retain earth and enclose interior
spaces and floors below grade”.
Section R408.2 shall be amended by
the deletion of exceptions 1, 2, 3, and 5.
Section R501.3 Fire Protection of
Floors, shall be deleted in its entirety.
Table R602.3.1 of the 2012 IRC shall
be replaced with Table 602.3.1 of the 2009
IRC.
Section R602.3.2 Top Plates shall be
amended by deletion of the sentence
“Joints in plates need not occur over
studs.” and replacing that sentence with
“Joints in plates shall occur over studs.”
Section R703.2 shall be amended by
the deletion of exceptions 2 and 3.
Section M2101.10 shall be amended
by replacing the words “fifteen (15)
§ 16-2 TITLE 7 — CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS § 16-3
minutes” with the words “thirty (30)
minutes”.
Appendix M shall be amended at
Section AM103.1.3.1 by deletion in the
first sentence of the words “…and be at
least six feet (6’) (1,529 mm) tall...”; and
by deletion in the second sentence of the
words “…to be installed at a minimum of
five feet (5’) (1,528 mm) above the
ground”.
Appendix R of the International
Residential Code, 2012 Edition, titled
“Tiny Homes”, shall be added.
Section AR104.1.1 shall be amended
to say “ . . . Lofts shall have a floor area of
not less than thirty-five (35) square feet
(3.25 m), and a maximum of two hundred
(200) square feet.”
Section AR104.1.3 shall be amended
by the deletion of the exception: “Under
gable roofs with a minimum slope of 6:12,
portions of a loft with a sloping ceiling
measuring less than sixteen inches (16”)
(406 mm) from the finished floor to the
finished ceiling shall not be considered as
contributing to the minimum required area
for the loft.”
(Ords. 2002-22, 12/2/02; 2004-24, 05/03/04; 2005-
01, 01/18/2005; 2007-18, 12/17/2007; 2010-25,
12/20/2010; 2014-20, 12/01/2014; 2017-17,
12/18/2017; 2019-05, 06/03/2019)
Sec. 16-3. City Not Liable.
Adoption by the City of the
International Residential Code, 2012
Edition, shall not relieve the owner or
contractor of any responsibility or liability
for compliance with said Code, nor shall
the City assume such liability through the
issuance of any permit or certificate of
inspection or by reason of inspection.
(Ords. 2005-01, 01/18/2005; 2007-18, 12/17/2007;
2010-25, 12/20/2010; 2014-20, 12/01/2014)
§ 1-1 TITLE 8 — FRANCHISES AND PRIVATE UTILITY REGULATIONS § 1-1
Chapter 1
FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
Sec. 1-1: Franchise Agreements
Sec. 1-1. Franchise Agreements.
Each and every franchise agreement
entered into by City shall remain on file
with the Clerk for review and use by the
public during the term of such franchise
agreement and during regular business
hours of the City.
§ 1-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 1-5
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSES
Sec. 1-1: License Required
Sec. 1-2: Application for License
Sec. 1-3: Contents of License
Sec. 1-4: Exception
Sec. 1-5: Type of Business Requiring
License
Sec. 1-6: License Fees
Sec. 1-7: Appeals
Sec. 1-1. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry on, engage in or prosecute any trade,
business or profession within the City prior
to obtaining a license required by this
Chapter.
Sec. 1-2. Application for License.
Every person required by any law to
obtain a license to engage in any trade,
business or profession shall, except as
herein otherwise provided for the procuring
of permits and licenses for conducting of
circuses or merry-go-rounds, apply to the
City for an order to pay the sum required
for such license, who, upon the payment
thereof, shall execute to such person a
receipt which shall set forth the kind of
business for which such license is required
and thereupon said person shall file such
receipt with the City which shall then grant
to such person a license therefor.
Any person desiring to procure a
license for the purpose of conducting
circuses or merry-go-rounds, within the
corporate limits, shall make application in
writing to the City which shall have the
right to grant or reject such license, but on
granting such license shall have the power
to designate the place within the City
where such circus or merry-go-round shall
exhibit or carry on its place of amusement
or entertainment and in case said person
shall fail or refuse to comply with the
orders of the City, such license shall at
once be revoked, and all money theretofore
received from such licensee shall be
retained by the City and no refund shall be
made.
Sec. 1-3. Contents of License.
In every license required to be taken
out, the license shall set forth the purpose,
trade, business or profession for which
such license is granted, the name and
address of the person taking out the same,
and said license shall not authorize the
carrying on of said business in any other
place unless the place licensed shall be
closed and in such case the City shall be
notified of the change and shall note the
same in the register of licenses.
Sec. 1-4. Exception.
The fees listed herein shall not apply
to those entertainments given by companies
composed of residents of the City nor to
scientific nor literary lectures or
entertainments.
Sec. 1-5. Type of Business
Requiring License.
The following types of business
require obtaining a license:
A. Circuses, First Class: Circuses shall be
classified as follows: every circus
capable of seating or entertaining two
thousand (2,000) people or more at
any one time shall be classed as first
class.
B. Circuses, Second Class: Circuses
capable of seating not to exceed two
thousand (2,000) people at any one
time, shall be classed as second class.
C. Tent Shows Classed as Circuses:
Every tent, space or area where feats
of horsemanship or acrobatic sports
are exhibited shall be classed as a
circus under this Chapter.
D. Merry-Go-Rounds or Mechanical
Rides: The proprietor, agent or
manager having charge or running or
conducting, within the corporate limits
of the City, any amusement known as
a merry-go-round or any other
mechanical ride shall pay a license fee
as set forth in this Chapter.
E. Amusement and Other Concessions:
The proprietor or agent running any
exhibit, place of amusement,
entertainment or any other concession
not heretofore enumerated, within the
§ 1-5 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 1-7
City, shall pay a license fee as set
forth in this Chapter.
Sec. 1-6. License Fees.
A license fee, as established by
resolution duly adopted by the Council
from time to time, shall be paid to the City
at the time application is made.
Sec. 1-7. Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of
denial, suspension or revocation of the
license by the Clerk shall have the
right of appeal to the Council.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Clerk written notice thereof
within ten (10) business days after the
denial or the entry of the order of
suspension or revocation. The notice
of appeal shall specify an address at
which the person appealing may be
given notice of hearing on the appeal.
C. At the appeal hearing before the
Council, the applicant or person
appealing shall be entitled to appear in
person and offer evidence pertinent to
the denial, suspension or revocation or
may appear through legal counsel.
City staff shall likewise be entitled to
appear at the hearing and offer
evidence in support of the denial,
order of suspension or revocation.
Failure by applicant, person appealing,
or their representative to appear before
Council at the time scheduled to hear
such an appeal shall result in the
automatic denial of such appeal.
D. The Council shall determine whether
the denial, suspension or revocation
shall be sustained and shall make a
final reasoned statement in writing
within fifteen (15) business days
following the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2009-06, 02-17-2009)
§ 3-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 3-5
Chapter 3
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND
CANVASSERS
Sec. 3-1: Purpose
Sec. 3-2: Definitions
Sec. 3-3: Registration Required
Sec. 3-4: Registration Application,
Fees, Term and Limitations
Sec. 3-5: Proof of Registration
Application, Contents
Sec. 3-6: Background Check Required
Sec. 3-7: Renewal of Proof of
Registration
Sec. 3-8: Denial of License
Sec. 3-9: Revocation
Sec. 3-10: Notice
Sec. 3-11: Appeal
Sec. 3-12: Carrying Proof of
Registration Required
Sec. 3-13: Hours of Operation
Sec. 3-14: Exemptions
Sec. 3-15: Unlawful Conduct
Sec. 3-16: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 3-1. Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to
provide the citizens of the City with
information by registering and identifying
persons who peddle, solicit, or canvass
within the City; to protect citizens from
deceptive or dishonest practices and to aid
in law enforcement.
(Ord. 2012-02, 01/03/2012)
Sec. 3-2. Definitions.
Peddler, Solicitor, or Canvasser. Any
person, either as a principal or agent, who
goes from place to place within the City
and who:
A. Sells, takes orders for, or offers to sell,
any goods, wares, merchandise, or
services, whether collecting in
advance for such goods, wares,
merchandise, or services or not; or
B. Seeks contributions or donations in
goods or legal tender.
Sec. 3-3. Proof of Registration
Required.
It is unlawful for any person to act as a
Peddler, Solicitor, or Canvasser within the
City without first having Proof of
Registration with the City obtained
pursuant to this Chapter. Every person
going place to place within the City must
have his or her own Proof of Registration.
(Ord. 2012-02, 01/03/2012)
Sec. 3-4. Registration Application,
Fees, Term and
Limitations.
A. Every person seeking Proof of
Registration under this Chapter shall
file a written application for such
Proof of Registration with the Clerk
on the form provided by the City.
B. Proof of Registration provided for in
this Chapter shall be issued for a
period of one (1) year.
C. Every applicant for Proof of
Registration shall pay a fee for Proof
of Registration in the amount
established by the Council from time
to time by resolution.
D. Proof of Registration may be issued,
denied, or revoked by the Clerk
pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2012-02, 01/03/2012)
Sec. 3-5. Proof of Registration
Application, Contents.
Application for Proof of Registration
for Peddler, Solicitor, or Canvasser, as
required by this Chapter, shall be in writing
upon a form to be furnished by the City and
made to the City through the City Clerk.
Every applicant shall supply a full set of
fingerprints with every application, except
that fingerprints will not be required for
any renewal that occurs within five (5)
years of the latest submittal of fingerprints
by the applicant.
The application for Proof of
Registration shall contain the following
information:
A. Name, description, copy of valid
driver's license or other DMV
approved identification, and date and
place of birth of the applicant;
§ 3-5 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 3-7
B. Permanent home address, telephone
number, and local address and
telephone number for the applicant;
C. A brief description of the nature of the
business, the goods to be sold, and/or
services to be performed;
D. If employed by another, the current
address, name of the employer,
telephone number and facsimile
number or email address;
E. The place of manufacture or
production of goods being offered for
sale, the present location of such
goods and the proposed method of
delivery;
F. A photograph of each applicant
seeking Proof of Registration, taken
within sixty (60) days immediately
prior to filing of the application. Said
picture shall be approximately two
inches by two inches (2” x 2”) and
shall show the head and shoulders of
the applicant in a clear manner;
G. A complete set of fingerprints of each
applicant in a form approved by the
Chief of Police;
H. A sworn statement disclosing all
convictions of crimes, including, but
not limited to, misdemeanors and
violations of City ordinances, the date,
the nature of the offense and the
penalty assessed therefor;
I. A statement that Proof of Registration,
if granted, shall not be used or
represented as an endorsement by the
City for activities thereunder;
J. The application shall be sworn to by
each applicant and shall be
accompanied by the fee for each
person to be covered by such Proof of
Registration.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2012-02,
01/03/2012; 2014-13, 08/18/2014)
Sec. 3-6. Background Check
Required
A. Requirements. To determine the
suitability of prospective applicants
for Peddlers, Solicitors, or Canvassers
License, the City Police Department
and/or City Clerk for the City of
Moscow shall require an applicant to
provide information and fingerprints
necessary to obtain criminal history
information from the Idaho State
Police (ISP) and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI). Pursuant to Idaho
Code Section 67-3008, and
congressional enactment Public
Law 92-544, the City Police
Department and/or City Clerk for the
City of Moscow shall submit the
required fees and a set of fingerprints
obtained from the applicant, to the
ISP, Bureau of Criminal Identification,
for a criminal records check of State
and National databases per Public
Law 92-544. The submission of
fingerprints and information required
by this Section shall be on forms
prescribed by the ISP. The City Police
Department and/or City Clerk for the
City of Moscow is authorized to
receive criminal history information
from the ISP and from the FBI for the
purpose of evaluating the fitness of
applicants for Peddlers, Solicitors, or
Canvassers License. As required by
State and Federal law, further
dissemination or other use of the
criminal history information if
prohibited. The applicant authorizes
the use of FBI records for the
screening process.
B. Background Check Guidelines. All
background checks require a complete
set of fingerprints, a signed statement
that contains the applicant’s name,
address, and date of birth appearing on
a valid identification document issued
by a governmental entity, as well as
furnishing if such applicant has or has
not been convicted of a crime, and the
particulars and description of the
same.
(Ord. 2011-16, 09/19/2011; 2012-02,
01/03/2012; 2019-06, 07/01/2019)
Sec. 3-7. Renewal of Proof of
Registration.
The City Clerk may renew a Proof of
Registration from year to year by
appropriate endorsement thereon. An
application for renewal of the Proof of
Registration shall be made in writing on a
§ 3-7 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 3-8
form provided by the City. The application
shall be filled out with the full name and
current address of the applicant along with
the statement of the date upon which the
original Proof of Registration was granted.
A copy of applicant’s valid driver’s license
or other DMV approved identification shall
be provided. The Proof of registration fee,
in an amount as set from time to time by
Resolution of the City Council, shall be
paid to the City for Proof of Registration.
(Ord. 2014-13, 08/18/2014)
Sec. 3-8. Denial of License
No Proof of Registration under this
Chapter shall be issued or maintained:
A. Where the applicant for Proof of
Registration has:
1. Been found guilty of, plead guilty
to, received a withheld judgment, or
admitted to the elements of any of the
following enumerated crimes, or any
substantially similar provision of
foreign criminal violations,
notwithstanding the form of
judgment(s) or admitted that sufficient
evidence exists which could be likely
to convince a judge or jury to find the
applicant or person issued the Proof of
Registration to be guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt of such a crime:
a. Any felony as defined by
Idaho Code, Sections 18-111 and
18-111A, within five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of
application for license or renewal;
b. Any violation of the
Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 27, Title 37, Idaho Code,
similar provisions in any other
jurisdiction, within the past five (5)
years immediately preceding the date
of application;
c. Any crime of physical
violence against persons, including but
not limited to battery and domestic
battery within the past five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of
application;
d. Any offense involving
neglect or any physical injury to, or
other abuse of, a Child, including any
sex crime as defined in Chapter 66,
Title 18, Idaho Code;
e. Rape as defined in Chapter
61, Title 18, Idaho Code;
f. Injury to a Child as defined
in Idaho Code, Section 18-1501;
g. Trespassing as defined in
Idaho Code Section 18-7008(A)(8) or
(9) and/or Moscow City Code 10-1-5
within five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of application for
license;
h. Sexually abusing or
exploiting a Child as defined in Idaho
Code, Sections 18-1506 through 18-
1508;
i. Stalking as defined in Idaho
Code Section 18-7905 within five (5)
years immediately preceding the date
of application for license;
j. Murder as defined in Idaho
Code, Sections 18-4001 and 18-4003;
k. Voluntary manslaughter as
defined in Idaho Code, Section 18-
4006;
l. Kidnapping as defined in
Idaho Code, Section 18-4501;
m. Arson as defined in Idaho
Code, Sections 18-801 through
18-803;
n. Poisoning as defined in
Idaho Code, Section 18-4014;
o. Mayhem as defined in Idaho
Code, Section 18-5001; or
p. Any felony punishable by
death or imprisonment for life.
2 Received a withheld judgment
entered for any of the above offenses
within five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of application for
Proof of Registration.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2011-16,
09/19/2011; 2012-02, 01/03/2012; 2016-09,
08/01/2016)
§ 3-9 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 3-13
Sec. 3-9. Revocation.
Proof of Registration under this
Chapter may be denied, suspended or
revoked for any of the following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false
statement contained in the application
for Proof of Registration;
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false
statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of being a
Peddler, Solicitor, or Canvasser;
C. Any violation of this Chapter;
D. Conducting the business of peddling,
soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful
manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or so
as to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the public;
E. Where any applicant or holder of
Proof of Registration for Peddler,
Solicitor, and/or Canvasser has been
found guilty of, pled guilty to,
received a withheld judgment, or
admitted to the elements of any felony,
theft, possession of stolen property, or
a crime including moral turpitude, or
admitted that sufficient evidence
exists which could be likely to
convince a judge or jury to find
applicant or holder of Proof of
Registration for Peddler, Solicitor,
and/or Canvasser to be guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2011-16,
09/19/2011; 2014-13, 08/18/2014)
Sec. 3-10. Notice.
Notice of denial, suspension or
revocation of Proof of Registration shall be
in writing and mailed to the applicant or
person issued the Proof of Registration at
the address of record on the original
application.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2011-16, 09/19/2011;
2012-02, 01/03/2012)
Sec. 3-11. Appeal.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action in
denial, suspension or revocation of
Proof of Registration by the City shall
have the right of appeal to the Council.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Clerk written notice thereof
within five (5) business days after the
denial or the entry of the order of
suspension or revocation. The notice
of appeal shall specify an address at
which the person appealing may be
given notice of hearing on the appeal.
C. At the appeal hearing before the
Council, the applicant or person
appealing shall be entitled to appear in
person and offer evidence pertinent to
the denial, suspension or revocation or
may appear through legal counsel.
The Clerk, Chief of Police, and/or
legal counsel for the City shall
likewise be entitled to appear at the
hearing and offer evidence in support
of the denial, order of suspension or
revocation. Failure by applicant,
person appealing, or their legal
counsel to appear before Council at
the time scheduled to hear such an
appeal shall result in the automatic
denial of such appeal.
D. The Council shall determine whether
the denial, suspension or revocation
shall be sustained and shall make a
final reasoned statement in writing
within fifteen (15) business days
following the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2011-16,
09/19/2011; 2012-02, 01/03/2012)
Sec. 3-12. Carrying Proof of
Registration Required.
Proof of Registration issued under this
Chapter shall be carried at all times by the
person to whom it is issued when such
person is peddling, soliciting or canvassing
in the City and shall be exhibited by said
Peddler, Solicitor, or Canvasser whenever
requested to do so by a peace officer or any
person peddled to, solicited or canvassed.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2011-16, 09/19/2011;
2012-02, 01/03/2012)
Sec. 3-13. Hours of Operation.
Peddlers, Solicitors, and Canvassers
who conduct their business by going door
§ 3-13 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 3-16
to door to residences or telephoning
residences shall do so only between the
hours of nine (9:00) o'clock a.m. and eight
(8:00) o'clock p.m., local time.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2011-16, 09/19/2011;
2012-02, 01/03/2012)
Sec. 3-14. Exemptions.
The requirements of this Chapter shall
not apply to:
A. Newspaper carriers, whether
subscriptions are taken or not;
B. Any person licensed or registered to
do such business by the State of Idaho;
C. Any person under the age of eighteen
(18) unless employed by another
person or organization;
D. Any political activity protected by the
First Amendment of the United States
Constitution, political canvassing, and
census taking;
E. Any person who attempts to enlist
support for or against a particular
religion, philosophy, ideology,
political party, issue, or candidate,
even if, incidental to such purpose,
such person accepts a donation of
money for or against such cause;
F. Occasional sales or fund-raising
efforts by local schools, university
student groups, local service clubs,
representatives of any charitable or
nonprofit organization, and the like;
G. Any person distributing a newspaper,
handbill or flyer advertising a noncommercial
or commercial event,
activity, good, or service;
H. Any person who solicits sales or
orders for purchase as long as such
sales occur in a location where such
sales are not prohibited by the Zoning
Code;
I. Any solicitation for the relief of any
individual specified by name at the
time of the solicitation where the
solicitor truthfully represents, in each
case, that the entire amount collected
shall be turned over to the named
beneficiary.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2011-16,
09/19/2011; 2012-02, 01/03/2012)
Sec. 3-15. Unlawful Conduct.
No person issued Proof of Registration
hereunder shall:
A. Make physical contact with a person
being peddled to, solicited or
canvassed unless such person's prior
permission is obtained;
B. Misrepresent the purpose of the
peddling, solicitation or canvass;
C. Misrepresent the affiliation of any
person engaged in the peddling,
solicitation or canvassing;
D. Continue efforts to solicit or canvass a
person once that person informs the
Peddler, Solicitor, or Canvasser that
he or she does not wish to give
anything or to buy anything from that
Peddler, Solicitor, or Canvasser;
E. Represent the issuance of Proof of
Registration under this Chapter as an
endorsement or recommendation of
the peddling, solicitation or
canvassing;
F. Enter upon any premises when the
same is posted with a sign stating "No
Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitation
Allowed" or other words to such
effect;
G. Knowingly make any false statement
on an application for Proof of
Registration hereunder;
H. Engage in any fraud,
misrepresentation or false statement in
the course of carrying on the business
for which Proof of Registration is
required hereunder.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2011-16,
09/19/2011; 2012-02, 01/03/2012)
Sec. 3-16. Violations; Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction,
shall be punished pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2004-04; 01/05/04; 2011-16, 09/19/2011)
§ 4-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 4-1
Chapter 4
SECONDHAND DEALERS
AND PAWNBROKERS
Sec. 4-1: Definitions
Sec. 4-2: License Required
Sec. 4-3: Application
Sec. 4-4: Denial
Sec. 4-5. Background Check Required
Sec. 4-6: License Fee
Sec. 4-7. Renewal of License
Sec. 4-8. Revocation
Sec. 4-9: Records to be Kept
Sec. 4-10: Pawn Ticket to be Furnished
Sec. 4-11: Report Required of Property
Acquired
Sec. 4-12: Report
Sec. 4-13: Storage of Personal Property
or Secondhand Property
Sec. 4-14: Personal Property or
Secondhand Property to be
Retained
Sec. 4-15: Appeals
Sec. 4-16: Exemptions
Sec. 4-17: Penalties
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the
following definitions will apply:
A. Chief Of Police. Chief of the Moscow
Police Department.
B. Licensee. Any person operating a
business required to be licensed under
the provisions of this Chapter. Where
such person is a business, Licensee
shall mean the individual(s) in the City
with direct supervisory authority
and/or responsibility over sales,
purchases, and/or pledges (such as a
manager, franchisee, or department
head). Persons dealing exclusively in
property exempted in this Chapter
need not be licensed.
C. Pawnbroker. Any person who:
1. loans money on deposits of
personal property or Secondhand
Property or deals in the purchase or
possession of personal property or
Secondhand Property on condition of
selling the same back again to the
pledger; or
2. loans or advances money on
personal property or Secondhand
Property by taking chattel mortgage
security thereon and takes or receives
such personal property or Secondhand
Property into his or her possession.
D. Pledger. A person who deposits
personal property or Secondhand
Property with a Pawnbroker as
security against repayment of a
Pawnbroker’s loan.
E. Recycling Center. Any person who
accepts aluminum (or other nonprecious
metals), paper, glass, plastics,
wood products, and other materials to
be reprocessed for manufacture into
new goods using such materials.
F. Secondhand Dealer. Any person who,
wholly or in part, engages in or
operates the trade or business of
buying, selling, exchanging, trading,
or acquiring, permanently or
temporarily, any new or used personal
property or Secondhand Property or
other valuable personal property or
articles, except from a regularly
established wholesale dealer or as
otherwise exempted by this Chapter.
G. Secondhand Property. New and used
personal property and/or tangible
object(s) owned by a person that is not
affixed to or associated with the land,
including but not limited to, scrap
gold, old gold, coins, silver, platinum,
all other precious metals, jewelry,
clothing, home electronics/audio and
visual recording equipment, cameras,
televisions, DVDs, Blu-ray discs,
camcorders, musical instruments,
stereo equipment, electronic gaming
systems and their component parts
(including games); speakers, cellular
and landline telephones, smart phones
and their component parts, and
telephonic equipment and systems,
microwave ovens, scales, computers,
computer games, computer hardware
and software (including digital media
readers and players and tablet
computers) and their component parts,
keyboards, printers and controllers,
facsimile machines, word processors,
scanners, sporting goods of all kinds,
antiques, tools of all kinds (electronic,
§ 4-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 4-6
chain saws, construction equipment),
car stereos, firearms, weapons, or
other valuable articles.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 4-2. License Required.
No person shall carry on the business
of Secondhand Dealer or of Pawnbroker
without first having obtained a license to
do so, as provided by this Chapter and by
the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 4-3. Application.
Application for a Secondhand Dealer
or Pawnbroker license, as required by this
Chapter, shall be in writing upon a form to
be furnished by the City and made to the
City through the City Clerk. Every
applicant shall supply a full set of
fingerprints with every application, except
that fingerprints will not be required for
any renewal that occurs within five (5)
years of the latest submittal of fingerprints
by the applicant. Applicant shall submit a
copy of applicant’s valid driver’s license or
other DMV approved identification.
(Ord. 2014-13, 08/18/2014)
Sec. 4-4. Denial.
The City may refuse to grant a license
and/or may revoke a license where a
Licensee has been found guilty of, pled
guilty to, received a withheld judgment, or
admitted to the elements of any crime
involving any felony, a theft, or possession
of stolen property, or moral turpitude, or
admitted that sufficient evidence exists
which could be likely to convince a judge
or jury to find the applicant or Licensee to
be guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of
such a crime.
(Ord. 2001-18, 09/17/2001; 2011-05, 06/06/2011;
2011-16, 09/19/2011; 2014-13, 08/18/2014)
Sec. 4-5. Background Check
Required.
A. Requirements. To determine the
suitability of prospective applicants
for Secondhand Dealer or Pawnbroker
License, the City Police Department
and/or City Clerk for the City of
Moscow shall require an applicant to
provide information and fingerprints
necessary to obtain criminal history
information from the Idaho State
Police (ISP) and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI). Pursuant to Idaho
Code Section 67-3008, and
congressional enactment Public Law
92-544, the City Police Department
and/or City Clerk for the City of
Moscow shall submit the required fees
and a set of fingerprints obtained from
the applicant, to the ISP, Bureau of
Criminal Identification, for a criminal
records check of State and National
databases per Public Law 92-544. The
submission of fingerprints and
information required by this Section
shall be on forms prescribed by the
ISP. The City Police Department
and/or City Clerk for the City of
Moscow is authorized to receive
criminal history information from the
ISP and from the FBI for the purpose
of evaluating the fitness of applicants
for Secondhand Dealer or Pawnbroker
License. As required by State and
Federal law, further dissemination or
other use of the criminal history
information is prohibited. The
applicant authorizes the use of FBI
records for the screening process.
B. Background Check Guidelines.
All background checks require a
complete set of fingerprints, a signed
statement that contains the applicant’s
name, address, and date of birth
appearing on a valid identification
document issued by a governmental
entity, as well as furnishing if such
applicant has or has not been
convicted of a crime, and the
particulars and description of the
same.
(Ord. 2014-13, 08/18/2014; 2019-06,
07/01/2019)
Sec. 4-6. License Fee.
Council shall have the discretion to
require payment of a fee upon application.
Such fee may be established from time to
time by Resolution of the Council. All
licenses issued under the provisions of this
Chapter shall expire on December 31 of the
year in which they are issued.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
§ 4-7 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 4-9
Sec. 4-7. Renewal of License.
The City Clerk may renew a
Secondhand Dealer or Pawnbroker license
from year to year by appropriate
endorsement thereon. An application for
renewal of a Secondhand Dealer license or
a Pawnbroker license shall be in writing on
a form provided by the City. The
application shall be filled out with the full
name and current address of the applicant
along with the statement of the date upon
which the original Secondhand Dealer or
Pawnbroker license was granted. A copy
of applicant’s valid driver’s license or other
DMV approved identification shall be
provided. The Secondhand Dealer or
Pawnbroker license fee, in an amount as set
from time to time by Resolution of the City
Council, shall be paid to the City for a
Secondhand Dealer or Pawnbroker license.
(Ord. 2014-13, 08/18/2014)
Sec. 4-8. Revocation.
A Secondhand Dealer or Pawnbroker
license, under this Chapter, may be denied,
suspended, or revoked for any of the
following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false
statement contained in the application
for the license;
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false
statement made in the course of
carrying on the business operating as a
Secondhand Dealer and/or
Pawnbroker;
C. Conducting a Secondhand Dealer or
Pawnbroker business in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or
public nuisance or so as to constitute a
menace to the health, safety or welfare
of the public;
D. Where any applicant or Licensee has
been found guilty of, pled guilty to,
received a withheld judgment, or
admitted to the elements of any felony,
a theft, possession of stolen property,
or crime involving moral turpitude, or
admitted that sufficient evidence exists
which could be likely to convince a
judge or jury to find applicant or
Licensee to be guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt of such a crime; and
E. Any violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2014-13, 08/18/2014)
Sec. 4-9. Records to be Kept.
A. Every Licensee shall be required at all
times to keep a chronological, accurate
and complete record of all personal
property or Secondhand Property
purchased by or pledged with such
Licensee. The record book shall
contain the following information with
regard to each purchase or pledge: an
accurate account and description of
the personal property or Secondhand
Property bought or pledged (including
make, model and serial number); the
amount of money paid, loaned, or
advanced; the name, residence, age,
sex, physical description, and drivers
license or other official identification
number(s) of the person selling or
pledging the personal property or
Secondhand Property, as well as the
date of purchase or pledge; and, where
applicable, the number of the pawn
ticket or receipt number given to the
pledger and the time when the pledger
may redeem the pledged personal
property or Secondhand Property.
This record shall be available for
inspection by any law enforcement
officer at any reasonable time during
working hours for the business.
B. Personal Property or Secondhand
Property Purchased by Licensee Off
Premises of Business. If Personal
Property or Secondhand Property not
otherwise excluded in this Chapter is
purchased by a Licensee through yard
sales, garage sales, want ads, internet
site(s) or list(s), or at public auction,
records required by this Chapter need
only show an accurate account of the
articles purchased, the amount paid,
the name of the person from whom the
articles were purchased, the location
§ 4-9 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 4-11
where the articles were purchased, and
the nature of the sale (yard sale,
auction, etc.).
C. Sale of Personal Property or
Secondhand Property by Licensee.
Each Licensee shall record the name,
address and a drivers license number
for each purchaser of personal
property or Secondhand Property.
This provision shall not apply to
personal property or Secondhand
Property which has been retained more
than thirty (30) days after the report
required in Code Section 9-4-7 has
been filed.
D. Exempted personal property or
Secondhand Property. This Code
Section shall not apply to the
following property:
1. Personal property or Secondhand
Property having a value of less than
ten dollars ($10) unless otherwise
specified in this Chapter. Any
personal property or Secondhand
Property purchased for less than ten
dollars ($10) and offered for sale for
less than twenty-five dollars ($25)
shall be considered to have a value of
less than ten dollars ($10) for purposes
of this Section.
2. Furniture.
3. Major appliances, such as kitchen
stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers,
freezers, clothes washers and dryers,
and similar white goods.
4. Any used personal property or
Secondhand Property received as a
trade-in on a new item of a like nature.
E. Non-exempt Personal Property or
Secondhand Property. This Code
Section shall apply to the following
property or any combination of such
property, regardless of value:
1. Electronic items and small
appliances including, but not limited
to, home electronics/audio and visual
equipment players and systems and
their component parts, speakers, car
stereos, televisions, computer
hardware and software, word
processors, and computer systems
(including digital media readers and
players and tablet computers) and their
component parts, keyboards, printers,
facsimile machines, scanners,
controllers, electronic gaming systems
and their component parts (including
games), and microwave ovens.
2. Firearms, weapons, and sporting
goods of all kinds.
3. Chain saws.
4. Cameras; photographic, video
and audio recording, editing, and
playback equipment.
5. Coins, gold, silver, platinum, and
all precious metals and jewelry (no
matter what their form).
6. Hand tools, power tools,
electronic tools and construction
equipment.
7. Cellular and landline telephones
and telephonic equipment and
systems, smart phones, and their
component parts.
8. DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and
computer games.
9. Musical instruments.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 4-10. Pawn Ticket to be
Furnished.
Every Pawnbroker shall furnish to the
pledger a separate pawn ticket for each
item pledged showing the amount pledged,
a detailed description of the personal
property or Secondhand Property pawned,
the date for redemption thereof, the date of
receipt by the pawnbroker, and the name of
the pledgee. The pawn ticket shall also
state the payments to be made and their
allocation between principal and interest;
the date on which the personal property or
Secondhand Property will be forfeited by
the pledgee if the payments are not made;
and all information required by law.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 4-11. Report Required of
Property Acquired.
Not later than five (5:00) o'clock p.m..,
local time on Tuesday of each week, each
Licensee shall submit to the Chief of Police
a record of all Licensee’s purchases of
personal property or Secondhand Property
(not otherwise exempted in this Chapter)
during the preceding week, setting forth the
date of acquisition, a detailed description of
the personal property or Secondhand
§ 4-11 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 4-16
Property, the name and address of the
person making the sale or pledge, and all
other information required to be detailed in
the record book by this Chapter and by
Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 4-12. Report.
The Chief of Police may approve a
Licensee’s electronic or other method of
filing of information required by this
Chapter if the Chief of Police finds that
such filing method substantially meets the
reporting requirement of this Chapter and
of the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 4-13. Storage of Personal
Property or Secondhand
Property.
Each Licensee shall maintain his
business premises in an orderly fashion; all
personal property or Secondhand Property
received shall be kept or stored inside a
building or behind a sight-obscuring fenced
area.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 4-14. Personal Property or
Secondhand Property to be
Retained.
Any law enforcement officer may
require that personal property or
Secondhand Property in the possession of a
Licensee which is believed to be stolen
shall be retained by the Licensee for a
period of up to thirty (30) days. An order
to retain such personal property or
Secondhand Property need not be in
writing and may be appealed to the Chief
of Police.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 4-15. Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of
denial, suspension or revocation of a
license under this Chapter shall have
the right of appeal to the Council.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Clerk written notice thereof
within ten (10) business days after the
denial or the entry of the order of
suspension or revocation. Notice of
appeal shall specify an address at
which the person appealing may be
given notice of the hearing on the
appeal.
C. At the appeal hearing before the
Council, the applicant, person
appealing, or his/her legal
representative shall be entitled to
appear in person and offer evidence
relevant to the denial, suspension or
revocation. City staff shall likewise be
entitled to appear at the hearing and
offer evidence in support of the denial,
order of suspension or revocation.
Failure by applicant, person appealing,
or their representative to appear before
Council at the time scheduled to hear
such an appeal shall result in the
automatic denial of such appeal.
D. The Council shall determine whether
the denial, suspension or revocation
shall be sustained and shall make a
final reasoned statement in writing
within fifteen (15) business days
following the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2009-06, 02/17/2009; 2011-05,
06/20/2011)
Sec. 4-16. Exemptions.
This Chapter shall not apply to or
include the following:
A. Dealers in motor vehicles, as defined
by Idaho Code.
B. Yard sales, garage sales, or moving
sales where all of the following are
present:
1. The sale is held on land occupied
as a dwelling by the seller or owner, or
is rented or leased by a charitable or
political organization;
2. The personal property or
Secondhand Property offered for sale
is owned by the occupant or seller;
3. No more than three (3) sales are
held in any twelve (12) month period;
and
§ 4-16 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 4-17
4. None of the personal property or
Secondhand Property offered for sale
has been purchased for resale or
received on consignment for purpose
of resale.
C. Where the seller is a charitable, nonprofit,
recreational, fraternal, or
political entity or is exempt from
taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3)
of the Federal Internal Revenue Code
of 1954, as amended.
D. The sale of secondhand books or
magazines.
E. The sale of goods at an auction held
by a licensed auctioneer.
F. Recycling centers.
G. Personal property on consignment
from the owner of the personal
property.
H. A bulk sale of property from a
merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler
having an established place of
business or of goods sold at open sale
from bankrupt stock.
I. Goods sold at the Farmers Market.
J. Personal property or Secondhand
Property sold at a bonafide antique,
used furniture and/or used clothing
store (by a person or a business in
which seventy five percent (75%) of
the person’s or business’ revenue is
derived through the sale of antiques,
used furniture or used clothes).
K. The business of buying or selling only
personal property or Secondhand
Property taken as part of full payment
for new goods and where such
business is incident to and not the
primary business of a person.
L. Estate sales by an authorized
representative of the property owner.
(Ord. 2011-05, 06/06/2011)
Sec. 4-17. Penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of
this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished pursuant to this Code and the
Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2000-20, 09/18/2000; 2011-05, 06/20/2011)
§ 5-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 5-3
Chapter 5
TAXICABS
Sec. 5-1: Purpose
Sec. 5-2: Definitions
Sec. 5-3: Taxicab License Required
Sec. 5-4: Application
Sec. 5-5: Renewal of License
Sec. 5-6: License Fees
Sec. 5-7: Insurance Required
Sec. 5-8: Policies Subject to
Inspection
Sec. 5-9: Smoking Prohibited While
Taxicab Service is Being
Provided
Sec. 5-10: Fares to be Prominently
Displayed
Sec. 5-11. Miscellaneous
Sec. 5-12: Mandatory Drug Testing;
Denial or Revocation
Sec. 5-13: Background Check Required
Sec. 5-14: Denial of License
Sec. 5-15: Appeals
Sec. 5-16: Penalties
Sec. 5-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
regulate every person performing Taxicab
Service as herein defined.
(Ord. 99-02, 2/16/1999; 2008-19, 09/02/2008)
Sec. 5-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the
following terms, phrases, and words shall
have the following meanings:
Carriage. Any horse or other animaldrawn
cart, wagon, vehicle or attached
apparatus used for the purpose of
transporting persons for compensation.
Operation. The conducting of a
general Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
business including, but not limited to,
owning, contracting, or leasing the business
or an individual vehicle, cart, or wagon.
Operator or Driver. An individual,
including a Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
Owner, authorized to operate, drive, or
staff a Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage upon
and through the streets and alleys of the
City.
Pedicab. Any human-powered vehicle
that is able to be pedaled without any motor
assistance, used for the purpose of
transporting persons. A motor may be
permitted as long as it does not replace or
become the primary source of power in
moving the unit and is seven hundred fifty
(750) Watts or less, is one (1) horsepower
or less, and cannot exceed twenty (20)
miles per hour.
Taxicab. Any motor vehicle used for
the purpose of transporting persons for
compensation utilizing a Taxicab,
limousine, transport van, luxury town car,
stretch sport utility vehicle or other motor
vehicle utilized for Taxicab service by
mileage, hourly, daily or weekly rates as
agreed upon between the passenger and
Taxicab Operator or Owner, not operating
on a fixed route (such as Dial-A-Ride or
paratransit), providing the “Taxicab”, as
herein stated and defined, shall not include
school buses or other motor vehicles used
exclusively for the transportation of
children to and from school, nor a motor
bus with a seating capacity of over seven
(7) passengers operated on a regular
schedule over regularly designated streets.
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage Owner.
The persons, firm, partner, corporation,
individual or association securing a license
to operate a Taxicab(s), limousine(s),
Pedicab(s) or Carriage(s) upon and through
the streets and alleys of the City.
(Ord. 2008-19, 09/02/2008; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-3. Taxicab, Pedicab, and
Carriage License
Required.
Every person who performs a Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Service in the City
shall first obtain a Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage Operator’s License or a Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Owner’s License as
required by this Chapter.
(Ord. 99-02, 2/16/1999; 2008-19, 09/02/2008;
2011-09; 07/18/2011; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
§ 5-4 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 5-7
Sec. 5-4. Application.
Application for Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage Operator, or Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage Owner, as required by this
Chapter, shall be in writing upon a form to
be furnished by the City and made to the
City through the City Clerk. Every
applicant shall supply a full set of
fingerprints with every application, except
that fingerprints will not be required for
any renewal that occurs within five (5)
years of the latest submittal of fingerprints
by the applicant. Applicant shall submit a
copy of applicant’s valid driver’s license or
other DMV approved identification.
Every applicant for a Taxicab Owner
license shall supply a completed Idaho
Annual Driver Education Vehicle Check
form (as required by the Idaho Driver
Education Public and Commercial School
Standards and related Idaho State Board of
Education Administrative [IDAPA] Rules)
for each vehicle to be used for Taxicab
Services. The City, upon receipt of
payment of the proper Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage Service license fees, and other
required information, as specified, and
upon compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter, shall be issued a Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Operator’s license or a
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage Owner’s
license.
(Ord. 2008-19, 09/02/2008; 2011-09, 07/18/2011;
2014-13, 08/18/2014; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-5. Renewal of License.
The City Clerk may renew a Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Operator License, or
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage Owner’s
license from year to year by appropriate
endorsement thereon. An application for
renewal of a Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
Operator’s license or a Taxicab, Pedicab,
or Carriage Owner’s license shall be made
in writing on a form provided by the City.
The application shall be filled out with the
full name and current address of the
applicant along with the statement of the
date upon which the original Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Operator’s license or
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage Owner’s
license was granted. A copy of applicant’s
valid driver’s license or other DMV
approved identification shall be provided.
The Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
Operator’s license or Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage Owner’s license fee, in an amount
as set from time to time by Resolution of
the City Council, shall be paid to the City
for a Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
Operator’s license or Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage Owner’s license.
(Ord. 2014-13, 08/18/2014; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-6. License Fees.
Any person providing Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Service shall pay an
annual Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
Service Operator or Owner license fee
established by Resolution adopted by the
Council from time to time. No license shall
be granted for less than six (6) months. A
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage Owner’s
license shall be issued for a period of not
longer than one (1) year. A Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Owner’s license shall
expire before midnight on December 31st of
each year.
(Ord. 2008-19, 09/02/2008; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-7. Insurance Required.
No person shall provide a Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Service without public
liability and property damage insurance in
some good and reliable insurance company
for the vehicle being utilized for such
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage Service.
Before any license is issued for any
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage, the Owners
thereof shall be required to file with the
City Clerk a certified copy of a policy of
insurance executed by an insurance
company authorized to do business within
the state ensuring the public against any
loss or damage which may result to any
person or persons from the operation of
said Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage,
provided for limited amount of liability in
such policy of insurance specified shall be
as follows:
§ 5-7 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 5-12
A. Property damage: not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000)
except for Carriages and Pedicabs,
which shall be not less than twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000).
B. Public liability: minimum five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000) per
incident except for Carriages and
Pedicabs, which shall be not less than
one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000).
C. Provide for notice to the City of
nonrenewal or cancellation of
insurance coverage.
D. The license to operate such Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage business shall
expire of itself or terminate upon the
cancellation of said insurance for
failure to pay premiums or for any
other reason and no license shall be
granted or be effective unless the
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage for
which said license is requested has
been fully covered with insurance as
hereinabove specified.
No person shall provide a Taxicab
Service without underinsured and
uninsured motorist insurance for the
vehicle being utilized in such Taxicab
Service.
The City shall not issue a license to any
applicant for a Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage Operator’s or Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage Owner’s license until the
applicant has furnished proof satisfactory
to the Clerk that insurance of the type and
in the amount required by this Chapter has
been purchased for the vehicle to be
utilized in such Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage Service and that the City has been
made an insurance certificate holder in
such insurance.
(Ord. 99-02, 2/16/1999; 2008-19, 09/02/2008; 2014-
22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-8. Policies Subject to
Inspection.
Any person providing a Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Service shall submit
the relevant insurance policies to the
administrative authority of the City for
examination, upon request.
(Ord. 2008-19, 09/02/2008; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-9. Smoking Prohibited While
Taxicab Service is Being
Provided.
Smoking in Taxicabs, Pedicabs, or
Carriages shall be prohibited at all times
any passenger is present during the
provision of Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
Service.
(Ord. 2011-09, 07/18/2011; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-10. Fares to be Prominently
Displayed.
Except where pre-paid limousine
services are being provided, any person
providing Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
Services shall, at all times, prominently
display all fares for such services.
Additionally, all fares for Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Services of any type
shall be disclosed immediately to anyone
who requests them.
(Ord. 2011-09, 07/18/2011; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-11. Miscellaneous.
A. Horse or animal drawn Carriages shall
be equipped with manure catching
device which will capture and retain
animal manure. All manure will be
removed from the capture device as
soon as is practical and stored in a
covered metal container provided by
the Carriage operator. The Carriage
Operator will be responsible for the
disposal of animal manure at an
approved location outside the City
limits.
B. All Pedicabs and Carriages operating at
night must use headlights.
(Ord. 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-12. Mandatory Drug Testing;
Denial or Revocation.
A. Every person licensed under this
Chapter who is involved in an accident
resulting in injury to or death of any
person, or damage to the property of
§ 5-12 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 5-13
any one (1) person in excess of One
Thousand Five Hundred Dollars
($1,500) while providing Taxicab
Service shall submit to one or more
tests as may be required to determine
the amount of alcohol, narcotics, and
prescription and non-prescription drugs
present in such person. Any such
required test(s) shall be at such
licensed person's own expense.
B. If a required test shows the presence of
illegal drugs, alcohol in excess of the
legal limit established in Idaho Code
Title 18, Chapter 80, prescription drugs
used other than as prescribed, or
evidence of intoxicants, such person's
license shall be immediately revoked.
Refusal to submit to any test required
shall result in the immediate revocation
of the Taxicab Service license.
Following revocation under this
subsection, no Taxicab Service license
shall be granted until five (5) years
immediately following the last
violation of this subsection.
(Ord. 1999-02, 2/16/99; 2011-09, 07/18/2011;
2014-13, 08/18/2014, 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-13. Background Check
Required.
Before any license shall be issued
under this Chapter, the City shall complete
a background check of every applicant.
Such background check may utilize the
fingerprints submitted. Any back-ground
check requests made to the Federal Bureau
of Investigation shall be conducted
pursuant to applicable law, including, but
not limited to, Idaho Code Section 67-3008,
as amended. The background check may
include the statewide criminal identification
bureau; the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) criminal history; the
statewide child abuse registry; and/or other
inquiries as deemed necessary to carry out
the intent of this Chapter. New fingerprints
are required every five (5) years.
A. Requirements. To determine the
suitability of prospective applicants for
a Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage Service
License, the City Police Department
and/or City Clerk for the City of
Moscow shall require an applicant to
provide information and fingerprints
necessary to obtain criminal history
information from the Idaho State Police
(ISP) and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI). Pursuant to Idaho
Code Section 67-3008, and
congressional enactment Public Law
92-544, the City Police Department
and/or City Clerk for the City of
Moscow shall submit the required fees
and a set of fingerprints obtained from
the applicant, to the ISP, Bureau of
Criminal Identification, for a criminal
records check of State and National
databases per Public Law 92-544. The
submission of fingerprints and
information required by this section
shall be on forms prescribed by the
ISP. The City Police Department
and/or City Clerk for the City of
Moscow is authorized to receive
criminal history information from the
ISP and from the FBI for the purpose of
evaluating the fitness of applicants for
a Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage Service
License. As required by state and
federal law, further dissemination or
other use of the criminal history
information is prohibited. The
applicant authorizes the use of FBI
records for the screening process.
B. Background Check Guidelines. All
background checks require a complete
set of fingerprints; a signed statement
that contains the applicant’s name,
address, and date of birth appearing on
a valid identification document issued
by a governmental entity, as well as
furnishing if such applicant has or has
not been convicted of a crime, and the
particulars and description of the same.
(Ord. 2011-09, 07/18/20110; 2014-13,
08/18/2014, 2014-22, 12/01/2014; 2019-06,
07/01/2019)
§ 5-14 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 5-14
Sec. 5-14. Denial of License.
No Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
license shall be issued:
A. Where the applicant or licensee has:
1. Been found guilty of, plead guilty
to, received a withheld judgment, or
admitted to the elements of any of the
following enumerated crimes, or
admitted that sufficient evidence exists
which could be likely to convince a
judge or jury to find the applicant or
licensee to be guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt, or any substantially
similar provision of foreign criminal
violation, notwithstanding the form of
judgment(s):
a. Felony injury of a child,
Section 18-1501, Idaho Code.
b. The sexual abuse of a child
under sixteen (16) years of age, Section
18-1506, Idaho Code.
c. The ritualized abuse of a child
under eighteen years of age, Section
18-1506A, Idaho Code.
d. The sexual exploitation of a
child, Section 18-1507 or 18-1507A,
Idaho Code.
e. Sexual abuse of a child under
the age of sixteen years, Section
18-1506, Idaho Code.
f. Lewd conduct with a child
under the age of sixteen years, Section
18-1508, Idaho Code.
g. The sale or barter of a child
for adoption or other purposes, Section
18-1511, Idaho Code.
h. Murder in any degree, Section
18-4001 or 18-4003, Idaho Code.
i. Assault with intent to murder,
Section 18-4015, Idaho Code.
j. Voluntary manslaughter,
Section 18-4006, Idaho Code.
k. Rape, Section 18-6101 or
18-6108, Idaho Code.
l. Incest, Section 18-6602, Idaho
Code.
m. Forcible sexual penetration by
use of foreign object, Section 18-6608,
Idaho Code.
n. Abuse, neglect or exploitation
of a vulnerable adult, Section 18-1505,
Idaho Code.
o. Aggravated, first degree,
second degree and third degree arson,
Sections 18-801 through 18-805, Idaho
Code.
p. Crimes against nature, Section
18-6605, Idaho Code.
q. Kidnapping, Sections 18-4501
through 18-4503, Idaho Code.
r. Mayhem, Section 18-5001,
Idaho Code.
s. Poisoning, Section 18-4014 or
18-5501, Idaho Code.
t. Possession of sexually
exploitative material, Section
18-1507A, Idaho Code.
u. Robbery, Section 18-6501,
Idaho Code.
v. Stalking in the first degree,
Section 18-7905, Idaho Code.
w. Video voyeurism, Section
18-6609, Idaho Code.
x. Enticing of children, Section
18-1509 or 18-1509A, Idaho Code.
y. Inducing individuals under
eighteen years of age into prostitution,
Section 18-5609, Idaho Code.
z. Inducing a person under
eighteen years of age to patronize a
prostitute, Section 18-5611, Idaho
Code.
aa. Any felony punishable by
death or life imprisonment.
bb. Attempt, Section 18-306,
Idaho Code, conspiracy, Section
18-1701, Idaho Code, or accessory
after the fact, Section 18-205, Idaho
Code, to commit any of the crimes
designated in this subsection.
2. Been classified as a voluntary
patient or involuntary patient pursuant
to Chapter 3, Title 66, Idaho Code, or
similar provision in another
jurisdiction, unless:
a. Such person has been released
from, and is no longer under, any form
of treatment in relation to such
classification, and
§ 5-14 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 5-14
b. Such person has been
examined by at least one (1)
professional licensed to evaluate
mental health and such professional
certifies that the person is no longer
mentally ill and presents no threat or
danger to any child. Such examination
shall not be at City expense.
B. Where the applicant or licensee has:
Been found guilty of, plead guilty
to, or received a withheld judgment, or
admitted to the elements of any of the
following enumerated crimes, or any
substantially similar provision of
foreign criminal violation,
notwithstanding the form of
judgment(s) for any offense involving
neglect or any physical injury to, or
other abuse of a child, or any of the
following offenses or a similar
provision in another jurisdiction, for a
period of five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of application for
license or renewal:
1. Aggravated assault, Section
18-905, Idaho Code.
2. Aggravated battery, Section
18-907(1), Idaho Code.
3. Burglary, Section 18-1401, Idaho
Code.
4. Felony theft, Sections 18-2403
and 18-2407(1), Idaho Code.
5. Forgery of a financial transaction
card, Section 18-3123, Idaho Code.
6. Fraudulent use of a financial
transaction card or number, Section
18-3124, Idaho Code.
7. Forgery or counterfeiting, Chapter
36, Title 18, Idaho Code.
8. Misappropriation of personal
identifying information, Section
18-3126, Idaho Code.
9. Insurance fraud, Section 41-293,
Idaho Code.
10. Damage to or destruction of
insured property, Section 41-294, Idaho
Code.
11. Public assistance fraud, Section
56-227, Idaho Code.
12. Provider fraud, Section 56-227A,
Idaho Code.
13. Attempted strangulation, Section
18-923, Idaho Code.
14. Misdemeanor injury to a child,
Section 18-1501(2), Idaho Code.
15. Felony domestic violence, Section
18-918, Idaho Code.
16. Any violation (felony or
misdemeanor) of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 27,
Title 37, Idaho Code.
17. Grand theft, Section 18-2407(1),
Idaho Code.
18. Disseminating obscene material to
minors, as defined in Sections 18-1513
through 18-1515, Idaho Code.
19. Arson, as defined in Sections
18-801 through 18-804, Idaho Code.
20. Transporting a minor in a motor
vehicle while under the influence,
Section 18-1501(3), Idaho Code.
21. Driving without privileges,
Section 18-8001, Idaho Code.
22. Driving under the influence of
alcohol, drugs, or other intoxicating
substances, Section 18-8004, Idaho
Code.
23. Persons under twenty one (21)
years of age with less than point zero
eight (0.08) alcohol concentration,
Section 18-8004A, Idaho Code.
24. Driving under the influence with
excessive alcohol concentration,
Section 18-8004C, Idaho Code.
25. Any person who pleads guilty to
or is found guilty of a violation of the
provisions of Section 18-8004(1)(a),
Section 18-8005, Idaho Code.
26. Aggravated driving while under
the influence of alcohol, drugs, or any
other intoxicating substances, Section
18-8006, Idaho Code.
27. Leaving scene of accident
resulting in injury or death, Section
18-8007, Idaho Code.
28. Reckless driving, Section
49-1401(1), Idaho Code.
29. Any person who is eighteen (18)
years of age or older who sells, gives,
§ 5-14 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 5-15
or furnishes, or causes to be sold,
given, or furnished, alcoholic
beverages, including any distilled
spirits, beer or wine, to a person under
the age of twenty one (21) years,
Section 23-603, Idaho Code.
30. Misdemeanor theft as defined in
Title 18, Chapter 24 of the Idaho Code.
31. Any felony as defined by Idaho
Code, Sections 18-111 and 18-111A,
other than those listed in Subsection
A.1. hereinabove.
32. Any crime of physical violence
against persons, other than those listed
in Section A.1. hereinabove.
33. Attempt, Section 18-306, Idaho
Code, conspiracy, Section 18-1701,
Idaho Code, or accessory after the fact,
Section 18-205, Idaho Code, to commit
any of the crimes designated in this
subsection.
C. To any applicant or licensee who has
supplied false or misleading
information, failed or refused to
provide or to disclose information
required on the application form or by
this Chapter, failed to disclose a
suspension or revocation of a driver’s
license, or refused to authorize the
investigation required herein. No such
applicant or licensee shall be able to
apply to receive a license under this
Chapter for a period of less than six (6)
months following the date of the denial
or revocation of the Taxicab, Pedicab,
or Carriage license under this
Subsection or for a period of six (6)
months following the date that the
Clerk became aware of disqualifying
information, whichever is later in time.
D. 1. To any Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage licensee who has violated any
of the provisions of this Chapter during
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
licensure.
Violation of any provision of this
Chapter during Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage licensure shall result in
immediate and automatic revocation of
the Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage
license. Such revocation of the
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage license
shall be effective as of the date of such
violation. No such person shall be
qualified to apply to receive a Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage license under this
Chapter for a period of less than six (6)
months following the date of the
revocation of the Taxicab, Pedicab, or
Carriage license under this Subsection
or for a period of six (6) months
following the date the Clerk became
aware of such information, whichever
is later in time, unless otherwise
provided in this Chapter.
2. Effect of Driver’s License
Suspension or Revocation. Suspension
or revocation of the driver’s license
held by any licensed Taxicab Operator
shall result in the immediate and
automatic revocation of such Taxicab
Operator license, effective as of the
date of such driver’s license suspension
or revocation. No such person shall be
qualified to apply to receive a Taxicab
license under this Chapter for a period
of less than six (6) months following
the date of full reinstatement of the
driver’s license or for a period of not
less than six (6) months following the
date the Clerk became aware of such
driver’s license suspension or
revocation, whichever is later in time.
E. Where an applicant or licensee does
not meet the conditions of licensure in
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2008-26, 12/15/2008; 2011-09,
07/18/2011; 2012-14, 07/16/2012; 2012-12,
10/15/2012; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-15. Appeals.
A. 1. Any person aggrieved by the action
of denial, suspension or revocation of
the license by the Clerk for a reason
other than disqualification under
Subsection (A) or (B) of the “Denial of
License” Section of this Chapter, shall
have the right of appeal to the Council.
2. If a license application is revoked
or denied because of disqualification of
the Applicant or Licensee under
§ 5-15 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 5-16
Subsection (A) or (B) of the “Denial of
License” Section of this Chapter, such
disqualification shall not be waived.
Review of revocation or denial of a
license because of disqualification of
the Applicant or Licensee under
Subsection (A) of the “Denial of
License” Section of this Chapter shall
be limited to a review of whether the
information upon which such denial or
revocation was based is true and
accurate.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Clerk written notice thereof
within ten (10) business days after the
denial or the entry of the order of
suspension or revocation. The notice
of appeal shall specify an address at
which the person appealing may be
given notice of hearing on the appeal.
C. At the appeal hearing before the
Council, the applicant or person
appealing shall be entitled to appear in
person and offer evidence pertinent to
the denial, suspension or revocation or
may appear through legal counsel. City
staff shall likewise be entitled to appear
at the hearing and offer evidence in
support of the denial, order of
suspension or revocation. Failure by
applicant, person appealing, or their
representative to appear before Council
at the time scheduled to hear such an
appeal shall result in the automatic
denial of such appeal.
D. The Council shall determine whether
the denial, suspension or revocation
shall be sustained and shall make a
final reasoned statement in writing
within fifteen (15) business days
following the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2009-06, 02/17/2009; 2011-09,
07/18/2011; 2012-14, 07/16/2012; 2014-22,
12/01/2014)
Sec. 5-16. Penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of
this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished pursuant to
this Code and the Idaho Code.
B. Any person violating any provision of
this Chapter shall have any current
Taxicab, Pedicab, or Carriage Service
license revoked. Upon proof of
eligibility following revocation, such
person shall be issued a Taxicab,
Pedicab, or Carriage Service license,
unless otherwise prohibited by this
Chapter.
(Ord. 99-02, 2/16/99; Ord. 2000-20, 09/18/00;
2011-09, 07/18/2011; 2014-22, 12/01/2014)
§ 6-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-2
Chapter 6
BEER REGULATIONS
Sec. 6-1: Title
Sec. 6-2: Definitions
Sec. 6-3: License Required
Sec. 6-4: Display of License
Sec. 6-5: License Status
Sec. 6-6: License Fees
Sec. 6-7: Expiration of License
Sec. 6-8: Sworn Statement Filed by
Licensees of Premises
Operated as Restaurants;
Endorsement Upon License
Sec. 6-9: Certification Fee
Sec. 6-10: Issuance/Renewal of Beer
License
Sec. 6-11: License for Location
Sec. 6-12: Issuance by Clerk
Sec. 6-13: License to Sell Beer at
Retail; Application
Procedure and Form;
Showing of Eligibility for
License and
Disqualifications
Sec. 6-14: Diagram
Sec. 6-15: Changes in Qualification of
Licensees and Licensed
Premises
Sec. 6-16: Alcohol Catering Permit
Sec. 6-17: Zoning
Sec. 6-18: Lighting
Sec. 6-19: Entrances
Sec. 6-20: Transferability
Sec. 6-21: Revocation, Suspension or
Nonrenewal of Licenses
Sec. 6-22: Procedure for Revocation
Sec. 6-23: Procedure
Sec. 6-24: Notice of Revocation or
Suspension to Other
Licensing Authorities
Sec. 6-25: Procedure on Refusal to
Grant License
Sec. 6-26: Appeals
Sec. 6-27: Certified Analysis is Prima
Facie Evidence of Alcoholic
Content
Sec. 6-28: Sale Off Licensed Premises
Sec. 6-29: Violation by Employees
Sec. 6-30: Law Enforcement Officers
Sec. 6-31: Procuring For or Selling to
Person Under Twenty One
Years of Age a
Misdemeanor
Sec. 6-32: Hours of Sale of Beer
Sec. 6-33: Restrictions Concerning Age
Sec. 6-34: Restrictions on Sales
Sec. 6-35: Public Places
Sec. 6-36: Gambling
Sec. 6-37: Liquor
Sec. 6-38 Penalties
Sec. 6-39: Repeal
Sec. 6-40: Validity of Existing Licenses
Sec. 6-1. Title.
This Chapter shall be known and
designated as "The City Beer Ordinance."
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-2. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, unless the
context otherwise indicates:
A. Beer. Any beverage obtained by the
alcoholic fermentation of an infusion
or decoction of barley, malt, and/or
other ingredients in drinkable water.
B. Licensed Premises. Premises means
the building and contiguous property
owned, or leased or used under
government permit by a licensee as
part of the business establishment in
the business of sale of beer at retail or
any part of or place within such
property, which property is improved
to include decks, docks, boardwalks,
lawns, gardens, golf courses, ski
resorts, courtyards, patios, poolside
areas or similar improved
appurtenances in which the sale of
beer at retail is authorized under the
provisions of this Chapter.
C. Licensee. Any person(s) to whom a
license is issued under the provisions
of this Chapter.
D. Restaurant. As used in this Chapter,
means any restaurant, cafe, hotel
dining room, coffee shop, cafeteria,
railroad dining car or other eating
establishment having kitchen and
cooking facilities for the preparation
of food and where hot meals are
regularly served to the public.
E. All other terms used herein shall have
the same definitions and meanings as
those terms set forth at Chapter 10, of
Title 23, Idaho Code.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1001; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
§ 6-3 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-8
Sec. 6-3. License Required.
No retailer shall sell or serve beer at
any location within the corporate limits of
the City unless such retailer shall comply
with the terms of this Chapter and without
having first obtained a license therefor for
each such location in accordance with the
terms of this Chapter.
Ref. Idaho Code §§ 23-1009 and 23-1016.
Sec. 6-4. Display of License.
Each licensee shall at all times keep
the license issued for each location
prominently displayed in a conspicuous
location on the licensed premises.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1009; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-5. License Status.
There shall be no vested right in any
license or the transfer or renewal thereof.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy
of the City to make the possession of a
license to sell beer a personal privilege,
revocable or nonrenewable or suspendable
upon any violation or conviction of any law
set forth in Code Section 9-6-23 which may
be suspended, revoked or not renewed upon
the violation or conviction of any Federal,
State or City ordinance pertaining,
regulating, governing or prohibiting the
sale, manufacturing, transportation or
possession of any alcoholic beverage or
intoxicating liquor.
Sec. 6-6. License Fees.
Every person licensed under the
provisions of this Chapter shall pay to the
City an annual license fee, for each
location, as established by rule and
regulation of the Clerk, which said rule and
regulation shall be in effect upon passage
and approval by resolution adopted by the
Council. Said rule and regulation shall
provide for a prorated fee in the event said
license is issued for a portion of the year.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1016
Sec. 6-7. Expiration of License.
Each license issued under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be granted
for the same period as a beer license issued
by the State of Idaho pursuant to Title 23,
Chapter 10 of Idaho Code, as amended, and
shall be subject to renewal upon proper
application with City.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1010(6); (Ord. 84-01,
1/19/84; 2002-24, 12/16/2002; 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-8. Sworn Statement Filed by
Licensees of Premises
Operated as Restaurants;
Endorsement Upon
License.
A. Every applicant for a license for the
sale of beer for consumption on the
premises claiming that the premises
for which such license is sought
constitute and are operated as a
restaurant, as defined in this Chapter,
shall, with each application for a
license and with each application for
renewal of license, file with the City a
statement under oath setting forth that
such premises constitute and are
operated as such restaurant as defined
in this Chapter.
B. Upon issuance of license for the sale
of beer for consumption on the
premises constituting and operated as
a restaurant, the licensee of which has
filed the sworn statement herein
required, the Clerk shall endorse on
the face of the license the fact that it
has been issued to a restaurant as
herein defined.
C. Unless such sworn statement shall
have been filed and said endorsement
shall appear on the face of the license,
the premises shall not be deemed to be
a restaurant for the purpose of this
Chapter and the restrictions contained
in Code Section 9-6-15 shall apply,
notwithstanding that the premises shall
in fact constitute and be operated as a
restaurant.
D. The filing of a false statement sworn
to as herein required shall be grounds
for suspension or revocation of
license. If premises licensed as a
restaurant under this Chapter
subsequently cease to meet the
qualifications of a restaurant as
defined in this Chapter, the premises
shall not be deemed to be a restaurant
§ 6-8 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-12
for the purposes of this Chapter and
the restrictions contained in Code
Section 9-6-15 shall apply,
notwithstanding that the premises shall
in fact constitute and be operated as a
restaurant, and the licensee shall
immediately advise the City in writing
that the premises no longer constitute
a restaurant as defined in this Chapter
so that the certificate or endorsement
may be recalled.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-9. Certification Fee.
Every applicant for a restaurant
certification under this Chapter shall
submit with the application, a fee to be
established by the Clerk and approved by
resolution adopted by the Council.
Sec. 6-10. Issuance/Renewal of Beer
License.
A. All beer licenses as herein provided
shall be renewed or issued by the
Clerk after written application for
issuance or renewal. Such written
application shall be filed with the
Clerk accompanied by an affidavit of
the applicant showing such applicant
to be qualified by the provisions of
this Chapter and Idaho Code. Said
application shall state the place of
business with respect to which the
license is to be renewed or issued and
shall contain a floor plan for the
building for which the permit or
license is requested and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the lease for
said building and said lease shall show
the consent of the owner of the
building. For license renewals, in the
event no changes in said matters have
occurred since the previous
certification or application, then the
licensee may so state and need not
attach said documents.
B. Such application shall be accompanied
by a copy of the license issued by the
Director of the Department of Law
Enforcement of the State for the
premises and for the time for which
the application is made.
C. The application shall be accompanied
by a copy of the license issued by the
Board of Latah County
Commissioners for the premises and
for the time for which the application
is made.
D. The application shall be accompanied
by a receipt from the Clerk for the
amount of the license fee. In the event
a written protest or objection to the
renewal of said license or permit is
filed with the Clerk, then, and in that
event, said application for renewal
shall be submitted to the Council and
issued only after approval by the
Council.
E. The Council shall grant or deny all
applications for issuance or renewal
within forty five (45) days of the date
of such application as filed with the
Clerk.
F. Whenever the Mayor and Council
deny an application, they shall specify
in writing:
1. The Statutes, ordinances and
standards used in evaluating the
applications;
2. The reason for the denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the
applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof.
G. In all cases where the Council or its
designee is considering applications
for licenses, transfers or renewals
thereof, a transcribable, verbatim
record of the proceeding shall be made
and shall be retained for a period of
not less than six (6) months after a
final decision on the matter, if the
request was denied.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1016; (Ord. 2002-24,
12/16/2002; 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-11. License for Location.
No more than one beer license shall be
issued under this Chapter for any one
location.
Sec. 6-12. Issuance by Clerk.
Licenses required under this Chapter
shall be issued by the Clerk, but only to
qualified licensees.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
§ 6-13 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-13
Sec. 6-13. License to Sell Beer at
Retail; Application
Procedure and Form;
Showing of Eligibility for
License and
Disqualifications.
A. Every person who shall apply for a
license to sell beer at retail under this
Chapter shall tender the license fee to,
and file written application for license
with the Clerk. The application shall
be on a form prescribed by the City
which shall require such information
concerning the applicant, the premises
for which the license is sought and the
business to be conducted thereon by
the applicant as the City may deem
necessary and advisable, and which
shall enable the City to determine that
the applicant and premises are eligible
and have none of the disqualifications
for the license for which the
application is made, as provided for in
this Chapter. Such information shall
include the following:
1. The name and residence of the
applicant and length of such
applicant's residence within the State,
and if the applicant is a partnership,
the names, residence and lengths of
residence within this State of each
partner, and, if the applicant is a
corporation or association, the date
and state of incorporation or
organization, the location of its
principal business address in Idaho
and the names and residence of its
officers and directors or members of
its governing board, and of the person
who manages or will manage the
business of selling beer at retail;
2. The particular premises for which
the license is desired, designating the
same by a street and number, if
practicable, or by such other apt
description as definitely locates such
place or premises, and the name of the
owner of the premises for which
license is sought;
B. The application shall affirmatively
show:
1. That the applicant is the bona fide
owner of the business which will be
engaged in the sale of beer at retail
and with respect to which such license
is sought;
2. That the condition and location of
the premises where it is proposed to
sell beer at retail conforms to all laws
and regulations of the State and to the
ordinances of the County of Latah,
Idaho, and the City applicable thereto
relating to public health and safety and
to the zoning ordinances of the City;
3. That there is no stamp or permit
outstanding and in force which has
been issued to any person by the
United States government for the
premises for which license to sell beer
at retail is sought which stamp or
permit denotes payment of any special
tax imposed by the United States
government on a retail dealer in liquor
or wines unless said premises are
premises for which a retail license for
sale of liquor by the drink issued
under the provisions of chapter 9, title
23, Idaho Code, is in force and effect;
4. That the individual applicant,
each partner of a partnership
applicant, is qualified to do business
within the State and further, that such
individual applicant, at least one of the
partners of the partnership, manager of
a corporation or manager of an
association shall have been a bona fide
resident of the State for at least thirty
(30) days prior to the date of
application;
5. That the applicant, if an
individual, is not less than nineteen
(19) years of age;
6. That within three (3) years
immediately preceding the date of
filing the application, the applicant has
not been convicted of the violation of
any law of the State, or any other
State, or of the United States, or of any
ordinance of any county or of the City,
regulating, governing or prohibiting
the sale, manufacture, transportation
or possession of alcoholic beverages,
intoxicating liquors, narcotic drugs or
controlled substances, or within said
time, suffered the forfeiture of a bond
for failure to appear in answer to
charges of any such violation;
§ 6-13 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-14
7. That within five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of
filing the application, the applicant has
not been convicted of any felony or
paid any fine or completed any
sentence of confinement therefore
within said time;
8. That within three (3) years next
preceding the date of filing said
application, the applicant has not had
any license provided for herein, or any
license or permit issued to the
applicant pursuant to the law or
ordinance of the State, or any other
state, or of the United States, or of the
City, to sell, manufacture, transport or
possess alcoholic beverages or
intoxicating liquors revoked.
C. The affirmative showing required with
respect to an applicant under Chapter
Subsections B, 5 through 8 shall also
be required to be made with respect:
1. To each partner of a partnership
applicant;
2. To each incumbent officer,
director and member of the governing
board of a corporation or association
applicant;
3. To each person employed by an
applicant whose duties include the
serving or dispensing of beer.
D. The applicant shall be subscribed and
sworn to by the individual applicant,
or by a partner of a partnership
applicant, or by an officer of a
corporation or association applicant,
before a notary public or other person
authorized by law to administer oaths.
E. If an applicant shall be unable to make
any affirmative showing required in
this Code Section or if an application
shall contain a false material
statement, knowingly made, the same
shall constitute a disqualification for
license and license shall be refused. If
a license is issued to any applicant on
any application containing a false
material statement, knowingly made,
such license shall be revoked. The
licensee and licensed premises shall at
all times during the period for which
the license is issued continue to have
all of the qualifications and none of
the disqualifications set forth in this
Section. If at any time during the
period for which license is issued, a
licensee becomes unable to make the
affirmative showings as required in
this Code Section, the license shall be
revoked, or, if the disqualification can
be removed, the license shall be
suspended until the same shall be
removed. The procedure to be
followed upon refusal, revocation or
suspension of license as herein
provided for shall be in accordance
with the procedures set forth in this
Chapter.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1010, (Ord. 2002-06,
03/04/2002; Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-14. Diagram.
Each application submitted under
Code Section 9-6-13 shall be accompanied
by a diagram of the place and premises
sought to be licensed. Such diagram shall
contain the following information:
A. The dimensions of the premises sought
to be licensed.
B. The location of each and every
entrance and exit to and from the
premises .
C. The location of each and every wall
and interior partition of the premises .
D. The location of the bar or bars from
which beer will be dispensed.
E. The location of the kitchen and
kitchen facilities, if any.
F. The location of the area wherein food
and/or meals, if any, will be served to
the public.
G. The location of the lavatories and
washrooms.
H. The seating arrangement including the
location of the tables, chairs and stools
in the areas where beer, food and
meals, and each of them will be
served.
I. The dimensions of each such area and
room within the licensed premises.
J. The location and dimensions of the
access to the premises from the public
street or streets of the City.
K. The location and dimensions of the
fire lane or lanes, if any, adjacent to
the premises.
L. The location and dimensions of the
parking area, if any, to be provided by
§ 6-14 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-20
the applicant for the parking of motor
vehicles of persons desiring to
patronize the premises sought to be
licensed.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-15. Changes in Qualification
of Licensees and Licensed
Premises.
If at any time during the period for
which a license is issued under this
Chapter, a licensee becomes unable to
make the affirmative showings required
under the provisions of Code Section 9-6-8,
or if there should be any change or changes
in the information submitted under Code
Sections 9-6-13 or 9-6-14, such licensee
shall immediately notify the City, in
writing, of the inability of the licensee to
make such showing, or of such change or
changes, as the case may be, specifying in
such notice in ordinary and concise
language the showing or showings which
the licensee is unable to make, or the
changes or change in the information
submitted under Code Sections 9-6-13 or 9-
6--14, as the case may be. Such
notification shall be filed with the Clerk.
Sec. 6-16. Alcohol Catering Permit.
A. Any person holding a retail alcohol
license may serve and sell beer, retail
by the drink at a party, festival, or
convention in accordance with Title 9,
Chapter 7, Section 11, of this Code.
B. Any person licensed as a brewer under
Idaho Code Section 23-1003, and who
holds a County alcohol retailers’
license, as required under Idaho Code
Section 23-1015, may apply for an
alcohol catering permit in accordance
with Title 9, Chapter 7, Section 11 of
this Code.
(Ord. 2016-10, 08/01/2016; 2017-14,
12/04/2017)
Sec. 6-17. Zoning.
A. No license shall be issued for the sale
of beer for consumption on the
premises located outside the
boundaries of a Neighborhood
Business Zoning District (NB),
Central Business Zoning District
(CB), General Business Zoning
District (GB), Motor Business Zoning
District (MB), Industrial Zoning
District (I), and University Zoning
District (U) as set forth in the Zoning
Code and Moscow Zoning Map except
one day catering permits as allowed by
State law and this Chapter; provided
that any license existing at the time of
the adoption of this Chapter may be
renewed for the premises for which
the license was issued at the time of
the adoption of this Chapter without
regard to the location of such licensed
premises.
B. No license shall be issued for any
location where beer is sold or
dispensed to be consumed on the
premises, whether conducted for
pleasure or profit, that is within three
hundred (300) feet of any public
school, church, or any other place of
worship measured in a straight line to
the nearest entrance to the licensed
premises, except with the approval of
the Council; provided that this
limitation shall not apply to any duly
licensed premises that at the time of
licensing did not come within the
restricted area but subsequent to
licensing came therein.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04; 2008-25,
12/01/2008) (I.C. § 23-1011B)
Sec. 6-18. Lighting.
Each room of a licensed premises
wherein beer is sold or consumed shall be
sufficiently lighted with sufficient
illumination and to the extent that objects
and persons are clearly distinguishable
from one end of the room to the other.
Sec. 6-19. Entrances.
The main entrance of each licensed
premises shall be accessible to entrance by
law enforcement officers of the City, Latah
County, Idaho and State of Idaho at all
times during which beer is sold or
consumed on the licensed premises.
Sec. 6-20. Transferability.
Licenses issued under this Chapter
shall not be transferred from one person to
another, either by contract or operation of
law, or otherwise, or from one location to
§ 6-20 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-25
another location, without the prior approval
of the Clerk. Application to transfer any
license issued hereunder shall be made to
the Clerk. Upon receipt of such
application, together with a transfer fee
established by duly adopted resolution of
the Council, the Clerk shall thereafter and
within thirty (30) days grant or deny the
transfer of said license. In the event the
Clerk grants the transfer of said license, the
license shall be endorsed over to the
proposed transferee by said licensee for the
remainder of the period for which said
license has been issued and the Clerk shall
note the approval thereof upon such
license.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1005A; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-21. Revocation, Suspension or
Nonrenewal of Licenses.
A. In the event of the conviction or
violation of the licensee licensed
under the provisions of this Chapter or
this Code or any law of the United
States of America, or of the State of
Idaho, or any ordinance of Latah
County, Idaho, regulating, governing
or prohibiting the sale, manufacture,
transportation, consumption of any
alcoholic beverage or intoxicating
liquor, or if the licensee licensed under
the provisions of this Chapter shall
violate any of the provisions of this
Chapter, the Clerk may seek the
revocation, suspension or nonrenewal
of said license.
B. If the Fire Chief or designee, upon
inspection of the licensed premises,
has reason to believe that occupancy
load limits have been exceeded, or that
any other violation of health and
safety regulations has occurred, such
Fire Chief or designee shall have the
authority to demand immediate
compliance. If such compliance is not
obtained, the Fire Chief or designee
may issue a citation for such violation
to said licensee and may immediately
revoke said licensee's license to sell
beer.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1037; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-22. Procedure for Revocation.
Whenever any person shall make
complaint, in writing and under oath, and
shall file such complaint with the Clerk
setting forth facts showing that grounds
exist to revoke, to suspend, or to refuse
grant of a renewal of a license issued to a
licensee under the provisions of this
Chapter, the procedure set forth herein
shall be followed.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1038; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-23. Procedure.
The determination of the Clerk to
revoke, suspend, or to refuse grant of
renewal of any retailer's license, shall be
upon the grounds that the licensee has
violated any ordinance validly enacted by
the Council and regulating, governing or
prohibiting the sale, manufacture,
transportation or possession of alcoholic
beverages or intoxicating liquor, and notice
thereof shall be given, and proceedings to
contest said determination allowed, as
provided for in this Chapter.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1042; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-24. Notice of Revocation or
Suspension to Other
Licensing Authorities.
When revocation or suspension of any
licensed retailer's license shall become
effective by reason of the determination
made by the Clerk as provided for herein,
or by reason of the judgment of any district
court on proceedings to contest any such
determination, the Council which made
such determination shall forthwith give
notice thereof in writing to the other
licensing authorities from whom license
was obtained by the licensee involved.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1043; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-25. Procedure on Refusal to
Grant License.
Upon a determination by the Clerk to
refuse issuance of a license to an applicant
upon original application, the same
procedure herein provided for in cases
involving refusal to grant renewal of
§ 6-25 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-30
license for notice and for proceedings to
contest determination shall govern insofar
as the same are applicable, except that
issuance of temporary license shall not be
required pending proceedings to contest
determination.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1044; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-26. Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of
denial, suspension or revocation of the
license by the Clerk shall have the
right of appeal to the Council.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Clerk written notice thereof
within five (5) business days after the
denial or the entry of the order of
suspension or revocation. The notice
of appeal shall specify an address at
which the person appealing may be
given notice of hearing on the appeal.
C. At the appeal hearing before the
Council, the applicant or person
appealing shall be entitled to appear in
person and offer evidence pertinent to
the denial, suspension or revocation or
may appear through legal counsel.
The Clerk, Chief of Police, and/or
legal counsel for the City shall
likewise be entitled to appear at the
hearing and offer evidence in support
of the denial, order of suspension or
revocation. Failure by applicant,
person appealing, or their
representative to appear before
Council at the time scheduled to hear
such an appeal shall result in the
automatic denial of such appeal.
D. The Council shall determine whether
the denial, suspension or revocation
shall be sustained and shall make a
final reasoned statement in writing
within fifteen (15) business days
following the close of the hearing.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1045; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-27. Certified Analysis is Prima
Facie Evidence of
Alcoholic Content.
A certificate, signed by any State
agency in writing as an analyst, as to the
percentage of alcohol contained in any
liquid, drink beverage, or liquors, when
produced in any court shall be prima facie
evidence of the percentage of alcohol
contained therein.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-28. Sale Off Licensed
Premises.
Except when otherwise expressly
permitted under the laws of the State, it
shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or
serve beer except on the licensed premises
of the licensee.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-29. Violation by Employees.
A violation of any of the provisions of
this Chapter by an employee, agent,
servant, or other person in any way acting
on behalf of the licensee shall be deemed to
be a violation by the licensee.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-30. Law Enforcement Officers.
Any law enforcement officer of the
City, or of Latah County, Idaho, or of the
State, shall have the right to at any time
enter and make an inspection of any
premises licensed under the provisions of
this Chapter for the purpose of determining
whether the laws and ordinances of the
State, Latah County, Idaho and the City
relating to the sale of beer are being
complied with. Under the terms of this
Chapter, the licensee shall be deemed to
have consented to such entry and
inspection; and any refusal of any licensee
to permit any such entry or inspection shall
be a violation of this Chapter.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1011A; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
§ 6-31 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-37
Sec. 6-31. Procuring For or Selling to
Person Under Twenty One
Years of Age a
Misdemeanor.
Any person who shall procure beer for
any person under twenty one (21) years of
age or any person under twenty one (21)
years of age who shall purchase, attempt to
purchase or otherwise procure, consume or
possess beer, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. This section does not apply
to possession by a person under the age of
twenty one (21) years making a delivery of
beer in pursuance of the order of a parent
or in pursuance of his or her employment,
or when such person under the age of
twenty one (21) years is in a private
residence accompanied by a parent or
guardian and with such parent's or
guardian's consent.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1023; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-32. Hours of Sale of Beer.
No beer shall be sold, dispensed, or
served in any licensed premises whether for
profit or pleasure between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A. M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. on each day of the week local time.
It shall be unlawful during such period of
time to consume any beer or other alcoholic
beverage on the premises at any time after
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. local time until the
authorized time to sell beer in accordance
with this Code Section.
(Ord. 89-08, 4/17/89; (Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04); Ref.
Idaho Code § 23-1012
Sec. 6-33. Restrictions Concerning
Age.
Any person who is nineteen (19) years
of age or older may sell, serve, possess or
dispense beer in the course of his
employment, otherwise it shall be unlawful
for any person to sell, serve or dispense
beer to or by any person under twenty one
(21) years of age, proof of which, shall be a
validly issued state, district, territorial,
possession, provincial, national or other
equivalent government driver's license,
identification card or military identification
card bearing a photograph and date of birth,
or a valid passport.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1013; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 6-34. Restrictions on Sales.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to
sell, dispense, or serve beer to any person
actually, apparently or obviously
intoxicated.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-35. Public Places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, serve, give away, dispense, consume
or carry any beer in open containers on or
in any public street, highway, alley, lane,
sidewalk, public or private parking lot,
conveyance, primary and secondary school
facilities, except on the premises of a
licensed retail beer establishment or
licensed sidewalk café or is otherwise
authorized or permitted by City. It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, serve, give
away, dispense, consume or carry any beer
in open containers except on or in public
parks or City buildings and University of
Idaho facilities in accordance with specific
regulations, including any permit fee,
adopted by the Council by resolution.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04; 2007-09, 08/20/2007)
Sec. 6-36. Gambling.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to
conduct or permit to be conducted, played
or carried on any game of faro, monte,
roulette, lansquenent, rouge et noir, rondo,
Indian stick game, poker or any game
played with cards, dice or other device for
money, checks, credit or other
representative of value upon any licensed
premises.
(Ord. 912, 12/10/51; Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-37. Liquor.
No licensee of any licensed premises,
any employee or customer thereof, shall
bring or keep any alcoholic beverage for
purposes of consumption, other than beer
in the licensed premises, unless such
licensee also has a valid license for the sale
of liquor or wine.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
§ 6-38 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 6-40
Sec. 6-38. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction,
shall be punished pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-39. Repeal.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances
of the City insofar only as they are in
conflict with the provisions of this Chapter
are hereby repealed, provided that the
repeal of ordinances as provided herein
shall not affect any right which has
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty
incurred, or any action or proceedings
commenced under or by virtue of any
ordinance hereby repealed.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 6-40. Validity of Existing
Licenses.
All beer licenses heretofore issued by
the City for the year 1996 are hereby
validated subject to the provisions of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
§ 7-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 7-3
Chapter 7
LIQUOR
Sec. 7-1: Definitions
Sec. 7-2: License Required
Sec. 7-3: License to Retail Liquor
Sec. 7-4: Application for Licenses;
Penalty for False Statements
Sec. 7-5: Qualifications of Applicant
Sec. 7-6: Investigation of Applicant
Sec. 7-7: License Fee
Sec. 7-8: Transfer of License
Sec. 7-9: Renewal of License
Sec. 7-10: Hours of Sale of Liquor
Sec. 7-11: Alcohol Beverage Catering
Permit
Sec. 7-12: Approval of Alcohol
Catering Permit
Sec. 7-13: Clerk to Make Regulations
Sec. 7-14: Revocation, Suspension or
Nonrenewal of Licenses
Sec. 7-15: Licenses; Suspension or
Revocation Review
Sec. 7-16: Penalties
Sec. 7-17: Repeal
Sec. 7-18: Public Places
Sec. 7-19: False Representation as
Being Twenty One (21) or
More Years of Age a
Misdemeanor
Sec. 7-20: Zoning
Sec. 7-21: Establishing Additional
Days for Liquor Sales
Sec. 7-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter,
definitions shall be the same as established
in Idaho Code Title 23, Chapter 9.
(Ord. 2012-05, 04/16/2012)
Sec. 7-2. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell liquor by the drink at retail within the
City without having first procured, and
only after having received, a license
therefore issued by the City.
Sec. 7-3. License to Retail Liquor.
A. The Clerk is hereby empowered,
authorized and directed to issue
licenses to qualified applicants as
herein provided, whereby the licensee
shall be authorized and permitted to
sell liquor by the drink at retail and,
upon the issuance of such license, the
licensee therein named shall be
authorized to sell liquor at retail by the
drink, but only in accordance with the
rules and regulations promulgated by
the Clerk and approved by the Council
and the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Provided, however, that in addition to
the qualifications hereinafter set forth,
no license to sell liquor by the drink
shall be issued to a person,
organization or business establishment
which does not fall within the
following classifications, defined
herein:
1. Any bona fide fraternal,
benevolent or charitable organization
having a valid national charter.
2. a. Hotels and motels, the
applicant owner or applicant manager
of which has been a resident of the
City for a period of thirty (30) days
immediately prior to the filing of an
application for a license under this
Chapter, except as noted herein.
b. A hotel, as defined herein,
means every building or other
structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised or held out to the public to
be a place where food is served and
sleeping accommodations are offered
for pay to transient guests, in which
twenty (20) or more rooms are used
for the sleeping accommodations of
such transient guests, such sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms
being conducted in the same building,
in connection therewith, and such
structure being provided, in the
judgment of the Council, with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity
for preparing, cooking and serving
suitable food for its guests.
c. A motel, as defined herein,
means every group of buildings or
other structures kept, used,
maintained, advertised or held out to
the public to be a place where food is
served and sleeping accommodations,
together with automobile
accommodations are offered for pay to
§ 7-3 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 7-4
transient guests, in which fifteen (15)
or more units are used for the sleeping
accommodation of such transient
guests and having one or more dining
rooms where meals are served to such
transient guests, such sleeping and
automobile accommodations and
dining rooms being grouped in one
area, in connection therewith, and
such structures being provided, in the
judgment of the Council, with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity
for preparing, cooking and serving
suitable food for its guests and with
adequate parking and garage facilities
for the automobiles of its guests.
3. a. Cafes and restaurants, the
applicant, owner or applicant manager
of which has been a resident of the
City for a period of thirty (30) days
immediately prior to the filing of an
application for a license under this
Chapter.
b. Restaurants, as used, means
any restaurant, cafe, hotel dining
room, coffee shop, cafeteria, railroad
dining car or other eating
establishment having kitchen and
cooking facilities for the preparation
of food and where hot meals are
regularly served to the public.
4. Catering permits for one day may
be issued to any person or
organization or establishment licensed
under this Chapter, as provided in
Idaho Code, §23-934A.
5. Any other classification approved
by the State for which the State shall
issue a license, the applicant owner or
applicant manager of which has been a
resident of the City for a period of
thirty (30) days immediately prior to
the filing of an application for a
license under this Chapter.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-903
Sec. 7-4. Application for Licenses;
Penalty for False
Statements.
Prior to the issuance of a license as
herein provided, the applicant shall file
with the Clerk an application in writing,
signed by the applicant and containing such
information and statements relative to the
applicant and the premises where the liquor
is to be sold as may be required by the
Clerk. The application shall be verified by
the affidavit of the person making the same
before a person authorized to administer
oaths and shall be accompanied with the
license fee herein required. In addition to
setting forth the qualifications required by
other provisions of this Chapter, the
applicant shall show:
A. A detailed description of the premises
for which a license is sought and its
location.
B. A detailed statement of the assets and
liabilities of the new applicant.
C. The names and addresses of all
persons who will have any financial
interest in any business to be carried
on in and upon the licensed premises,
whether such interest results from
open loans, mortgages, conditional
sales contracts, silent partnerships,
trusts or any other basis than open
trade accounts incurred in the ordinary
course of business, and the amounts of
such interest.
D. If the premises to be licensed are not
owned by the applicant, then a
certified copy of the lease by which
the applicant will occupy the premises
showing that the owner consents to the
sale of liquor by the drink on such
premises.
E. The name and address of the
applicant, which shall include all
members of a partnership or
association and the officers, members
of the governing board and ten (10)
principal stockholders of a
corporation.
F. A copy of the articles of incorporation
and by-laws of any corporation the
articles of association and the by-laws
of any association, or the articles of
partnership of any partnership.
G. If during the period of any license
issued hereunder any change shall take
place in any of the requirements of
subsections C, D, E or F of this Code
§ 7-4 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 7-7
Section, the licensee shall forthwith
make a verified report of such change
to the Clerk.
H. If any false statement is made in any
part of said application, or any
subsequent report, the applicant, or
applicants shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-905; (Ord. 2002-24,
12/16/2002; 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 7-5. Qualifications of
Applicant.
The following qualifications shall be
met by an applicant for a license under this
Chapter:
A. The applicant for a license shall
possess all of the qualifications
necessary to obtain a license from the
Commissioner of Law Enforcement of
the State as prescribed by Chapter 9,
Title 23, Idaho Code, as amended, and
shall obtain such state license.
B. No application for a license shall be
considered by the City unless such
applicant, or the applicant manager of
such corporation, partnership,
association, or organization applying
for such license shall have been a
resident of the City for at least thirty
(30) days.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 7-6. Investigation of Applicant.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a
license under this Chapter,
accompanied by the necessary license
fee, the Clerk, within thirty (30) days
thereafter, shall cause to be made
thorough investigation of all matters
pertaining thereto.
B. The Clerk shall determine that the
contents of the application are true,
that such applicant is qualified to
receive a license, that the premises are
suitable for the carrying on of the
business, and that the requirements of
this Chapter and the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Clerk
are met and complied with.
C. In making the investigation required
by this Code Section, the Clerk shall
have the power to investigate and
examine the books and records of the
licensee and any person having a
financial interest in any business to be
conducted on the licensed premises,
including, but not limited to, their
bank accounts, returns filed under the
Idaho Property Release Act, 1931, as
amended, and any other sources of
information deemed to be desirable by
the Clerk relative to the application
and not specifically prohibited by law.
The Clerk shall be aided in
investigation by the Chief of Police
where appropriate.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-907; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 7-7. License Fee.
A. The license fee imposed and collected
shall be established by resolution
adopted by the Council in an amount
that is in compliance with Idaho Code
Section 23-916, for each license year,
as established in this Chapter. If the
license is issued for less than a full
calendar year, the license fee shall be
prorated as of the month of actual
issuance up to one-half (1/2) of the
total fee.
B. Every license issued under this
Chapter shall be issued by the Clerk
and shall set forth the name of the
person to whom issued, the location by
street and number, or other definite
designation, of the premises, and such
other information as the Clerk shall
deem necessary. If issued to a
partnership, the names of the persons
constituting such partnership shall be
set forth. If issued to a corporation or
association, the names of the principal
officers and the governing board shall
be set forth. Such license shall be
signed by the licensee. Every license
issued under the provisions of this
Chapter is separate and distinct and no
person except the licensee therein
named, except as herein otherwise
provided, shall exercise any of the
privileges granted thereunder.
C. Each license issued under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be
§ 7-7 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 7-11
granted for the same period as a liquor
license issued by the State of Idaho,
pursuant to Title 23, Chapter 13 of
Idaho Code, as amended, and shall be
subject to renewal upon proper
application with City.
D. No person shall be granted more than
one license for any one (1) year; and
no partnership, association or
corporation holding a license under
this Chapter shall have as a member,
officer or stockholder any person who
has any financial interest of any kind
in, or is a member of, another
partnership or association or an officer
of another corporation holding a
license in the same city for the same
year; provided, that this Code Section
shall not prevent any person owning
two (2) or more buildings on
connected property from making
application for and receiving licenses
permitting the sale of liquor by the
drink in such building.
(Ord. 2002-24, 12/16/2002; 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 7-8. Transfer of License.
A. Application to transfer any license
issued hereunder shall be made to the
Clerk. Upon receipt of such
application, together with a transfer of
fee as established by resolution of the
Council, the Clerk shall make the
same investigation and determination
and take the same action with respect
to the transferee as is required of an
applicant by this Chapter.
B. The Clerk shall thereafter and within
thirty (30) days grant or deny the
transfer of said license. In the event
the Clerk grants the transfer of said
license, the license shall be endorsed
over to the proposed transferee by said
licensee for the remainder of the
period for which license has been
issued and the Clerk shall note the
Clerk's approval thereof upon such
license.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 7-9. Renewal of License.
A. All liquor licenses as herein provided
shall be renewed by the Clerk after
written application for renewal which
said written application shall be filed
with the Clerk accompanied by an
affidavit of the applicant showing such
applicant to be qualified by the
provisions of this Chapter and the
Idaho Code.
B. Said application shall state the place
of business with respect to which the
license is to be renewed and shall
contain a floor plan for the building
for which the permit or license is
requested and shall be accompanied by
a copy of the lease of said building
and said lease shall show the consent
of the owner of the building.
C. In the event no changes in said matters
have occurred since the previous
certification or application then the
licensee may so state and need not
attach said documents.
D. The application shall be accompanied
by a receipt from the Clerk for the
amount of the license fee.
E. In the event a written protest or
objection to the renewal of said
license or permit is filed with the
Clerk, then and in that event, said
application for renewal shall be
submitted to the Council and issued
only after approval by the Council.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 7-10. Hours of Sale of Liquor.
No liquor shall be sold, offered for
sale or given away upon any licensed
premises, and all liquor not in sealed
bottles shall be locked in a separate room
or cabinet between two o'clock (2:00) a.m.
and ten o'clock (10:00) a.m. local time.
(Ord. 89-08, 4/17/89; Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04; Ord.
2008-12, 06-02-2008); Ref. Idaho Code § 23-927
Sec. 7-11. Alcohol Beverage Catering
Permit.
Any person holding a retail alcohol
license may serve and sell liquor, and/or
beer and wine at retail by the drink, at a
party, festival, or convention at a location
other than at the licensed premises for a
period not to exceed five (5) consecutive
days; a holder of an Idaho Winery License
§ 7-11 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 7-13
may serve and sell wine and/or beer, for a
period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive
days, upon obtaining an alcohol beverage
catering permit. Applications for such
permit shall be made to the Clerk on such
form as prescribed by the Clerk, which
form shall contain the following
information:
A. The name and address of the applicant
and the number of said applicant's
state alcohol license.
B. The dates and hours during which the
permit is to be effective, not to exceed
five (5) consecutive days; not to
exceed seven (7) consecutive days for
a holder of an Idaho Winery license.
C. The names and addresses of the
organizations, groups, or persons
sponsoring the event.
D. The address at which the alcohol is to
be served.
The application shall be verified by
the applicant and filed with the Clerk. A
filing fee in an amount established by
Resolution duly adopted by the Council for
each day the permit is to be effective shall
be paid to the Clerk. Such fee shall not be
refunded in any event.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-934A; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04; 2016-10, 08/01/2016; 2017-14,
12/04/2017)
Sec. 7-12. Approval of Alcohol
Catering Permit.
A. Upon the filing of an application for
an alcohol beverage catering permit,
the Clerk, pursuant to Resolution No.
92-12 shall, upon the advice and
recommendation of the Chief of Police
or designee, and the Fire Chief or
designee, approve or disapprove the
application and indicate the
determination on the face of the
application by endorsement signed by
the Clerk.
B. Copies of the application with signed
endorsements thereon shall be mailed
or delivered immediately to the Chief
of Police or designee, the Fire Chief or
designee, the Director of the Idaho
Department of Law Enforcement and
the applicant, and a signed copy shall
be retained by the Clerk.
C. An application approved in this
manner shall constitute a permit,
unless disapproved by the Director of
the Idaho Department of Law
Enforcement by notice served upon
the applicant for the retail sale of
liquor by the drink, and/or beer and
wine for the period authorized by the
permit.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-934A; (Res 92-12,
7/20/92); (Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04; 2016-10,
08/01/2016)
Sec. 7-13. Clerk to Make
Regulations.
A. For the purpose of the administration
of this Chapter, the Clerk may
promulgate and publish such rules and
regulations as the said Clerk may
deem necessary for carrying out the
provisions of this Chapter and for the
orderly and efficient administration
hereof and except as may be limited or
prohibited by law and the provisions
of this Chapter such rules and
regulations so made and promulgated
shall have the force of ordinance. Said
rules and regulations shall be in effect
from and after approval by resolution
duly adopted by the Council.
B. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing provision, the Clerk shall be
empowered and it is made the Clerk's
duty to prescribe forms to be used in
the administration of this Chapter, the
proof to be furnished and conditions to
be observed in the issuance of the
licenses, prescribing notices required
by this Chapter or the regulation
thereof, and the manner of giving and
serving the same, prescribing, subject
to the provisions of this Chapter, the
conditions and qualifications
necessary to obtain a license, and
providing for the inspection of such
licensed premises, and make
regulations respecting the sale and
consumption of liquor in all places of
business of said licensee.
§ 7-13 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 7-19
C. Notice that each proposed rule and
regulation shall be considered by the
Council and shall be published once in
a newspaper of general circulation in
the City prior to consideration by the
Council. Said notice may summarize
the substance of each proposed rule
and regulation.
D. A revocation or suspension of the
State license by the Commissioner of
Law Enforcement shall be deemed
prima facie evidence for the
revocation or suspension of any
license issued hereunder.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-933
Sec. 7-14. Revocation, Suspension or
Nonrenewal of Licenses.
A. In the event of the conviction or
violation of the licensee licensed
under the provisions of this Chapter or
any law of the United States of
America, or of the State, or any
ordinance of Latah County, Idaho,
regulating, governing or prohibiting
the sale, manufacture, transportation,
consumption of any alcoholic
beverage or intoxicating liquor or if
the licensee licensed under the
provisions of this Chapter shall violate
any of the provisions of this Chapter,
the Council may seek, in its discretion,
the revocation, suspension or
nonrenewal of said license.
B. If the Fire Chief or designee, upon
inspection of the licensed premises,
has reason to believe that occupancy
load limits have been exceeded, or that
any other violation of health and
safety regulations has occurred, such
Fire Chief or designee shall have the
authority to demand immediate
compliance. If such compliance is not
obtained, the Fire Chief or designee
may issue a citation for such violation
to said licensee and may immediately
revoke said licensee's license to sell
liquor.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-933; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 7-15. Licenses; Suspension or
Revocation Review.
The procedure for refusal to issue or
renew a license issued under this Chapter
or for suspension or revocation of said
license shall be the same as established in
Chapter 6, Title 9 of this Code.
Sec. 7-16. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction
shall be punished pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code.
Sec. 7-17. Repeal.
All provisions of this Code insofar
only as they are in conflict with the
provisions of this Chapter are hereby
repealed; provided, that the repeal as
provided herein shall not affect any right
which has accrued, any duty imposed, any
penalty incurred or any action or
proceeding commenced under or by virtue
of any such provisions hereby repealed.
Sec. 7-18. Public Places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, serve, give away, dispense, consume
or carry any liquor in open containers on or
in any public street, highway, alley, lane,
sidewalk, public or private parking lot,
conveyance, primary and secondary school
facilities, except on the premises of a
licensed retail liquor establishment.
Sec. 7-19. False Representation as
Being Twenty One (21) or
More Years of Age a
Misdemeanor.
A. Any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years who shall by any means
represent to any person licensed to sell
liquor at retail or wholesale, or to any
agent or employee of such retail or
wholesale licensee, that he or she is
twenty one (21) or more years of age
for the purpose of entering licensed
premises or inducing such retail or
§ 7-19 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 7-21
wholesale licensee, his or her agent or
employee, to sell, serve or dispense
liquor to him or her shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
B. Any person who shall by any means
represent to any such retail licensee,
his or her agent or employee, that any
other person is twenty one (21) or
more years of age, when in fact such
other person is under the age of twenty
one (21) years, for the purpose of
entering licensed premises or inducing
such retail or wholesale licensee, his
or her agent or employee, to sell, serve
or dispense liquor to such other
person, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1024
Sec. 7-20. Zoning.
A. No license shall be issued for the sale
of liquor for consumption on the
premises located outside the
boundaries of a Neighborhood
Business zoning district (NB), Central
Business zoning district (CB), General
Business zoning district (GB), Motor
Business zoning district (MB),
Industrial zoning district (I), and
University zoning district (U) as set
forth in the Zoning Code and Moscow
Zoning Map, except three-day catering
permits as allowed by the Idaho Code
and this Chapter; provided, that any
license existing at the time of this
Chapter may be renewed for the
premises for which the license was
issued without regard to the location
of such licensed premises.
B. No license shall be issued for any
location where liquor is sold or
dispensed to be consumed on the
premises, whether conducted for
pleasure or profit, that is within three
hundred feet (300’) of any public
school, church, or any other place of
worship measured in a straight line to
the nearest entrance to the licensed
premises, except with the approval of
the Council; provided that this
limitation shall not apply to any duly
licensed premises that at the time of
licensing did not come within the
restricted area but subsequent to
licensing came therein.
(Ord. 2008-25, 12/01/2008) (I.C. § 23-913)
Sec. 7-21. Establishing Additional
Days for Liquor Sales.
From the effective date of this Section,
in accordance with the provisions of Idaho
Code Section 23-927(2), and Latah County
Ordinance Number 84, liquor may be sold
in the City on Sundays, Memorial Day, and
Thanksgiving.
(Ord. 86-24, 6/30/86)
§ 8-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 8-6
Chapter 8
WINE
Sec. 8-1: Definitions
Sec. 8-2: License Required
Sec. 8-3: Application for License
Sec. 8-4: Qualifications
Sec. 8-5: Issuance of License
Sec. 8-6: Zoning
Sec. 8-7: Wine Catering Permit
Sec. 8-8: License Non-transferable
Sec. 8-9: Consumption on Premises
Sec. 8-10: Possession
Sec. 8-11: Revocation of License
Sec. 8-12: Renewal of License
Sec. 8-13: Disqualifications
Sec. 8-14: Licenses; Suspension; or
Revocation; Review
Sec. 8-15: Penalties
Sec. 8-16: Repeal
Sec. 8-17: Public Places
Sec. 8-18: False Representation as
Being Twenty One or More
Years of Age a
Misdemeanor
Sec. 8-1. Definitions.
The following terms as used in this
Chapter are hereby defined as follows:
A. Commissioner. The Commissioner of
Law Enforcement of the State of
Idaho.
B. Retail Wine License. A license issued
by the Commissioner, authorizing a
person to sell wine at retail.
C. Retailer. A person to whom a retail
wine license has been issued.
D. Wine. Any alcoholic beverage
containing not more than fourteen
percent (14%) alcohol by volume
obtained by the fermentation of the
natural sugar contents of fruits or
other agricultural products containing
sugar.
E. Wine By The Drink License. A license
to sell wine by the individual glass or
opened bottle at retail, or consumption
on the premises only.
F. Any other terms used herein shall have
the same definitions and meanings as
those terms set forth in Chapter 13, of
Title 23, Idaho Code.
Sec. 8-2. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell wine at retail within the City without
having first procured a license therefor.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1306
Sec. 8-3. Application for License.
Application for license shall be in
writing, signed and sworn to by the
applicant upon application forms furnished
by the Clerk. Such application shall be
approved or rejected by the Clerk.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1306; (Ord. 2002-24,
12/16/2002; 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 8-4. Qualifications.
The applicant for a license shall
possess all of the qualifications necessary
to obtain a license from the Commissioner,
as prescribed by the laws of the State, and
maintain such qualifications throughout the
period for which such license is issued.
The possession of licenses regularly issued
by the Idaho Department of Law
Enforcement and by Latah County in
addition to a City beer license, shall be
prima facie evidence of the applicant's
qualifications to receive a license
hereunder.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1307; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 8-5. Issuance of License.
Upon filing the application for a
license and production of evidence as
required by Code Section 9-8-4 herein as to
the qualifications of the applicant and by
the payment of the required license fee, the
Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license
to sell wine at retail within the City for
such calendar year.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1306; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 8-6. Zoning.
A. No license shall be issued for the sale
of wine for consumption in the
premises located outside the
boundaries of a Neighborhood
Business Zoning District (NB),
Central Business Zoning District
(CB), General Business Zoning
District (GB), Motor Business Zoning
§ 8-6 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 8-11
District (MB), Industrial Zoning
District (I), and University Zoning
District (U) as set forth in the Zoning
Code and Moscow Zoning Map,
except one day catering permits as
allowed by the Idaho Code and this
Chapter; provided that any license
existing at the time of the adoption of
this Chapter may be renewed for the
premises for which the license was
issued at the time of the adoption of
this Chapter with regard to the
location of such licensed premises.
B. No license shall be issued for any
location where liquor is sold or
dispensed to be consumed on the
premises, whether conducted for
pleasure or profit, that is within three
hundred feet (300’) of any public
school, church, or any other place of
worship measured in a straight line to
the nearest entrance to the licensed
premises, except with the approval of
the Council; provided that this
limitation shall not apply to any duly
licensed premises that at the time of
licensing did not come within the
restricted area but subsequent to
licensing came therein.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04; 2008-25,
12/01/2008) (I.C. § 23-1301A)
Sec. 8-7. Wine Catering Permit.
A. Any person holding a retail alcohol
license or an Idaho Winery license
may serve and sell wine and/or beer, at
retail by the drink at a party, gathering
or convention at a location other than
at the licensed premises for a period
not to exceed seven (7) consecutive
days upon obtaining a wine catering
permit. Applications for such permit
shall be made to the Clerk on such
form as prescribed by the Clerk, which
form shall contain the following
information:
1. The name and address of the
applicant and the number of said
applicant's state alcohol license.
2. The dates and hours during which
the permit is to be effective, not to
exceed five (5) consecutive days
unless applicant is a holder of an
Idaho Winery license, then not to
exceed seven (7) consecutive days.
3. The names and addresses of the
event sponsor.
4. The address at which the alcohol
is to be served.
B. The application shall be verified by
the applicant and filed with the Clerk.
A filing fee, as set from time to time
by resolution of the Council, for each
day the permit is to be effective, shall
be paid to the Clerk. Such fee shall
not be refunded in any event.
(Ord. 98-29, 8/24/98; 2003-25, 12/01/03;
2004-33, 08/16/04; 2017-14, 12/04/2017); Ref.
Idaho Code §§ 23-934A and 23-1337
Sec. 8-8. License Non-transferable.
No license issued hereunder may be
transferred from one person to another,
either by contract or operation of law, or
from one location to another, without the
consent of the Clerk. A transfer fee shall
be adopted by resolution of the Council.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1317; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 8-9. Consumption on Premises.
A. Retailers who do not possess a valid
license for the retail sale of liquor by
the drink or a valid wine by the drink
license shall not permit consumption
of wine on the licensed premises and
may sell the wine only in its original
unbroken, sealed container.
B. Wine sold for consumption on the
retailer's premises may be sold only
during hours that beer may be sold for
consumption on the premises pursuant
to this Code.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 8-10. Possession.
No person may, while operating or
riding in or upon a motor vehicle upon a
public highway, street, or parking area
open to the public in the City, have in his
or her possession any wine in an open or
unsealed container of any kind.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 8-11. Revocation of License.
A. The Clerk may, as hereinafter
provided, revoke or cancel any license
§ 8-11 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 8-13
for fraud or misrepresentation in its
procurement, or for a violation of any
of the provisions of this Chapter, or
for any conduct or act of the licensee
or such licensee's employees or any
conduct or act permitted by such
licensee on the premises where such
business is conducted, or in
connection therewith or adjacent
thereto, tending to render such
business or such premises where the
same is conducted as a public nuisance
or a menace to the health, peace,
safety or general welfare of the City;
provided, that the revocation or
suspension of the State license by the
Commissioner shall be deemed prima
facie evidence for revocation or
suspension of the license issued
herein.
B. If the Fire Chief or designee, upon
inspection of the licensed premises,
has reason to believe that occupancy
load limits have been exceeded, or that
any other violation of health and
safety regulations has occurred, such
Fire Chief or designee shall have the
authority to demand immediate
compliance. If such compliance is not
obtained, the Fire Chief or designee
may issue a citation for such violation
to said licensee and may immediately
revoke said licensee's license to sell
wine.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1037; Ref. Idaho Code
§ 23-1331; (Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 8-12. Renewal of License.
A. All wine licenses as herein provided
shall be renewed by the Clerk after
written application for renewal which
said written application shall be filed
with the Clerk accompanied by an
affidavit of the applicant showing such
application to be qualified by the
provisions of this Chapter and the
Idaho Code.
B. Said application shall state the place
of business with respect to which the
license is to be renewed and shall
contain a floor plan for the building
for which the permit or license is
requested and shall be accompanied by
a copy of the lease of said building
and said lease shall show the consent
of the owner of the building.
C. In the event no changes in said matters
have occurred since the previous
certification or application, then the
licensee may so state and need not
attach said documents. The
application shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the Clerk for the amount
of the license fee.
D. Provided further that in the event a
written protest or objection to the
renewal of said license or permit is
filed with the Clerk, and in that event,
said application for renewal shall be
submitted to the Council and issued
only after approval by the Council.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1316; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 8-13. Disqualifications.
No retail wine license, wine by the
drink license shall be issued to an applicant
who at the time of making the application:
A. If an individual has not resided within
the State for a period of thirty (30)
days immediately prior to the
application;
B. If a partnership does not include at
least one member thereof who has
resided within the State for at least a
period of thirty (30) days;
C. If a corporation has not qualified as
required by law to do business in the
State;
D. Has had a retail wine license, wine by
the drink license revoked by the
Commissioner or City within three (3)
years from the date of making such
application;
E. Has been convicted of a violation of
the laws of this State or of the United
States governing the sale of alcoholic
beverages, wine or beer, within three
(3) years from the date of making such
application;
F. Has been convicted of a felony or been
granted a withheld judgment following
an adjudication of guilt of a felony
within five (5) years from the date of
making such application;
§ 8-13 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 8-18
G. If an individual or partnership, either
the individual or at least one of the
partners of a partnership is not
nineteen (19) years of age or older;
H. If the application is for a retail wine
license or wine by the drink license,
the applicant does not possess a retail
beer license issued by the City.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1307; (Ord. 2002-06,
03/04/2002; 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 8-14. Licenses; Suspension; or
Revocation; Review.
The procedure for refusal to issue or
renew a license issued under this Chapter
or for suspension or revocation of said
license shall be the same as established in
Chapter 6, Title 9 of this Code.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1331; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
Sec. 8-15. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction,
shall be punished pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 8-16. Repeal.
All provisions of this Code insofar
only as they are in conflict with the
provisions of this Chapter are hereby
repealed; provided that the repeal as
provided herein shall not affect any right
which has accrued, any duty imposed, and
penalty incurred, or any action or
proceeding commenced under or by the
virtue of any such provision hereby
repealed.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04)
Sec. 8-17. Public Places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, serve, give away, dispense, consume
or carry any wine in open containers on or
in any public street, highway, alley, lane,
sidewalk, public or private parking lot
conveyance, primary and secondary school
facilities, except on the premises of a
licensed retail wine establishment or
licensed sidewalk café or is otherwise
authorized or permitted by City. It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, serve, give
away, dispense, consume or carry any wine
in open containers except on or in specified
public parks or City buildings and
University of Idaho facilities, in accordance
with specific regulations, including any
permit fee, adopted by the Council by
resolution.
(Ord. 2004-33, 08/16/04; 2007-09, 08/20/2007)
Sec. 8-18. False Representation as
Being Twenty One or
More Years of Age a
Misdemeanor.
A. Any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years who shall by any means
represent to any person licensed to sell
wine at retail or wholesale, or to any
agent or employee of such retail or
wholesale licensee, that he or she is
twenty one (21) or more years of age
for the purpose of entering licensed
premises or inducing such retail or
wholesale licensee, his or her agent or
employee, to sell, serve or dispense
wine to him or her shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
B. Any person who shall by any means
represent to any such retail licensee,
his or her agent or employee, that any
other person is twenty one (21) or
more years of age, when in fact such
other person is under the age of twenty
one (21) years, for the purpose of
entering licensed premises or inducing
such retail or wholesale licensee, his
or her agent or employee, to sell, serve
or dispense wine to such other person,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Ref. Idaho Code § 23-1024; (Ord. 2004-33,
08/16/04)
§ 9-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 9-2
Chapter 9
SOLID WASTE
Sec. 9-1: Short Title
Sec. 9-2: Definitions
Sec. 9-3: Solid Waste Collection from
Entire City
Sec. 9-4: Separation of Solid Waste
Sec. 9-5: Compulsory Service
Sec. 9-6: Regulations
Sec. 9-7: Regulations Relating to
Hauling
Sec. 9-8: Solid Waste Accumulation
Unlawful
Sec. 9-9: Collection from Private
Property
Sec. 9-10: Solid Waste Produced by
Business Units
Sec. 9-11: Burning Prohibited
Sec. 9-12: Solid Waste Disposal
Prohibited
Sec. 9-13: Theft of Services
Sec. 9-14: Suppression of Nuisances
Sec. 9-15: Appeals
Sec. 9-16: Penalties
Sec. 9-17: Rates
Sec. 9-1. Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known and cited
as the "Solid Waste" Ordinance of the City.
Sec. 9-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the
following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the
plural number. The "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory. These
definitions shall apply to all rules,
regulations or agreements entered into
pursuant to this Chapter.
A. Ashes. The residue from the burning
of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
B. Bags. See Containers.
C. Bundle. Small trees, branches, shrub
and brush trimmings or newspapers
and magazines securely tied together
forming an easily handled package not
to exceed four feet (4’) in length
and/or thirty five (35) lbs. in weight.
D. Business. An individual, partnership,
association, corporation, company,
trust, firm, estate, joint venture, unit,
agent, public agency, industry, or
other legal entity operating as a self
contained independent enterprise, such
as a beauty shop, retail shop,
professional office, etc.
E. Business Unit. Each space occupied
by an individual Business. A Business
Unit shall be deemed occupied when
either occupied or producing Solid
Waste.
F. Containers.
1. Bag: Plastic sacks designed to
store Solid Waste with sufficient wall
strength to maintain physical integrity
when lifted by top. Total weight of a
Bag and its contents shall not exceed
thirty-five (35) pounds for collection
services.
2. Compactor Container: A
receptacle designed to compact Solid
Waste and to be moved by mechanical
means so that its contents can be
emptied.
3. Mechanical Container: A
receptacle designed for loose Solid
Waste to be lifted by mechanical
means so that its contents can be
emptied.
4. Roll Cart Container: A
receptacle of various sizes, shapes and
colors, generally constructed of
medium or high density polyethylene
(MDPE/HDPE) plastic resin and
utilized for the City’s residential Solid
Waste collection. Roll Cart
Containers normally have handles,
wheels and permanently attached
closeable lids. Roll Cart Containers
are universally designed to allow
§ 9-2 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 9-2
service by semi-automated and fully
automated mechanical lifting devices.
G. Containment Structures. Any
structure, framework or fence
constructed or erected for the purpose
of housing or retaining any Containers
as defined herein.
H. Curbline/Curbside. That portion of
right-of-way or private property
adjacent to the traveled portion of the
City rights-of-way used for the
placement of all Solid Waste
Containers on collection days.
Containers shall be placed as close as
is reasonably possible to the traveled
right-of-way without obstructing
parking lanes or public sidewalks.
I. Designated Disposal Site. A waste
facility or site where Solid Waste is
transferred, composted, disposed of,
reduced and/or recovered (such as
landfills, transfer stations,
incinerators, and resource recovery
facilities). Such City-designated
facilities and sites must be licensed or
approved to receive Solid Waste for
processing and/or for final Disposal by
all governmental bodies and agencies
having jurisdiction and permission.
J. Director. City Supervisor.
K. Disposal. Transporting and Disposal
of Solid Waste in a designated
Disposal site; Disposal of Solid Waste
for resource recovery or transportation
to an ultimate Disposal site or facility.
L. Equipment. Equipment used by a
Franchisee within the City for the
collection or Disposal of Solid Waste.
M. Franchisee. The person, persons, or
corporation holding a contract and/or
franchise issued or granted by the City
authorizing such person to operate,
conduct or maintain a municipal Solid
Waste collection and Disposal system
upon, or over any streets, alleys and
public ways of the City.
N. Garbage Can. See Containers.
O. Generator. Any Residential or
Business Unit which creates or
produces Hazardous Waste
P. Haul or Hauling. An individual trip
transporting Solid Waste from the
Producer, or any other point within the
City to a designated Disposal site.
Q. Inspector. The person(s) authorized
by the Director as having the duty of
enforcement of this Chapter.
R. On Demand Collection Service. A
Roll Cart Container service level
limited to the use of a thirty five (35)
gallon capacity Roll Cart Container
only. On Demand Collection Service
may be requested by low volume
waste Producers not requiring every
week collection. On Demand Roll
Cart Containers are equipped with
colored lids that distinguish them from
Roll Cart Containers collected weekly.
On Demand Roll Cart Containers shall
be collected only when they are set out
for service. On Demand service
customers shall be billed a monthly
base fee and an additional “per
service” fee, as determined by
Resolution of the Council. The On
Demand Collection Service shall be
available only to single family
residences, as determined by the
Director. Where On Demand
Collection Service results in frequent
Over Service, the Director may
discontinue On Demand Service to the
Producer and may order collection
service at a level appropriate to the
Producer’s actual use.
S. Premises. Land and all buildings and
structures thereon including but not
excluding by terms of enumeration,
single or multi-family dwellings,
rooming houses, apartment houses,
hospitals, convalescent and nursing
homes, hotels and motels, restaurants,
drive-in establishments, schools
(kindergartens, academic, trade or
industrial), and any other place of
habitation, office, shop or
establishment or place of conducting a
Business, trade or occupation.
§ 9-2 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 9-2
T. Producer. Any person, Business or
other entity which produces Solid
Waste within the City.
U. Resident. Every person in possession,
charge, custody or control of any
Premises where Solid Waste is
produced or accumulated.
V. Residential Unit. A dwelling within
the City occupied by a person or group
of persons. A Residential Unit shall
be deemed occupied when either
occupied or producing Solid Waste.
Each unit within an apartment or
condominium dwelling shall be treated
as an individual dwelling unit, unless
served by a Mechanical Container or
Compactor.
W. Service. Solid Waste collection and
transfer and Disposal of, or resource
recovery from Solid Waste, as further
defined by agreement.
X. Solid Waste. All Solid Waste or Semi-
Solid Waste including without
limitation: Bulky, Household,
Hazardous, Infectious, garbage,
rubbish, refuse, trash, Ashes or swill,
newsprint or waste paper, corrugated
paper or cardboard, grass clippings,
compost, discarded appliances,
equipment, furniture, vehicle parts,
tires, vegetable or animal wastes, wire,
cement, concrete, demolition or other
wastes resulting from industrial,
commercial, agriculture, institutional
and residential activities. Includes
material that is no longer directly
usable by the Producer, owner,
Resident or possessor of the material,
but may be recovered by another
person. Solid Waste may include
materials that may have value and thus
be recovered. Solid Waste shall
include waste presently in liquid form.
No material shall be considered Solid
Waste until placed for collection.
1. Bulky Waste: Stoves,
refrigerators, water tanks, washing
machines, furniture, appliances,
springs, mattresses, carpets,
demolition, commercial, industrial,
tree stumps, tree trunks, logs, vehicle
bodies and parts, wire, large dead
animals (over ten (10) pounds),
cement, concrete, sheetrock, sod, dirt,
tires, rock, loose branches, any item
weighing over sixty (60) pounds or
over four feet (4’) in length.
2. Heavy Waste / Inert Waste /
Demolition Waste: Heavy Waste and
materials resulting from excavation,
construction, remodeling, repair or
demolition operations including rocks,
tree trunks, logs, cement, concrete and
sod.
3. Hazardous Waste: Any chemical,
compound, mixture, substance or
article which is designated by federal
law or regulation, Idaho law or
regulation or the law or regulation of
any other state when applicable (such
as in the case of Solid Waste exported
to or through another state for ultimate
Disposal) to be "Hazardous,"
"dangerous," or "extremely
dangerous."
4. Household Waste: That waste
produced by an ordinary Residential
Unit, fitting into a Bag, Roll Cart
Container or Bundle less than four feet
(4’) in length. Does not include
Bulky, Infectious or Hazardous
Wastes or any type of Solid Waste that
is not normally collected by the
Franchisee at residential or Business
Units, on the regular collection routes.
5. Infectious Waste: Any material,
chemical, compound, mixture,
substance or article known to be
Infectious by the Producer or which is
designated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or
other appropriate agency of the federal
government or the State of Idaho to be
"Infectious" as that term is commonly
defined or defined by or pursuant to
law.
6. Over Service: Occasional extra
waste material items (Bags, boxes,
Bundles, etc.) that do not fit
completely within an approved
§ 9-2 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 9-3
Container with its lid fully closed,
when such is placed at curb or alley
within the City for collection.
7. Putrescible Waste: Solid Waste
which has capacity to become rotten
or foul.
8. Unacceptable Waste: That
portion of the Solid Waste, exclusive
of Hazardous Waste, such as, but not
limited to, explosives, pathological
and biological waste, radioactive
materials, foundry sand, cesspool
waste, human remains, industrial
process wastes, motor vehicles
(including major motor vehicle parts
such as transmissions, rear ends,
springs and fenders), agricultural and
farm machinery and equipment,
marine vessels and major parts thereof
or any other large type of machinery
or equipment, or that which in the
reasonable judgment of Franchisee or
the Director, may present a substantial
endangerment to health or safety, or
has a reasonable possibility of
adversely affecting the operation of
the Transfer Station or the acceptance
of Transport Waste by the Ultimate
Disposal Site.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04/15/2013)
Sec. 9-3. Solid Waste Collection
from Entire City.
A. All Solid Waste from the entire
confines of the City shall be placed for
collection by the Producer as provided
for in this Chapter, and such
regulations as the Council may
approve, and shall be collected by a
duly authorized Franchisee or
contractor in order to maintain and
preserve the sanitation and thereby the
health and welfare of the City.
B. The Council reserves the right to issue
a franchise to such Franchisees as are
necessary to carry out the terms of this
Chapter. The Council reserves the
right to award a franchise contract for
the entire City or any portion thereof if
deemed to be in the public interest.
The Council may advertise for
proposals or bids to provide collection
services and may award one (1) or
more franchises within the City based
on cost and a subjective evaluation of
the services offered by the proponent
or bidder. The Council may enter into
a contract or contracts for Solid Waste
services after reviewing and giving
fair consideration to proponents.
C. The Council shall charge a franchise
fee or license fee to all Franchisees.
Said fee shall initially be set at five
percent (5%) of gross receipts, but
may be revised by the Council from
time to time by Resolution. Fees shall
be payable on a monthly basis based
on the licensee's gross revenue.
Revenues retained by the City shall be
used exclusively for costs related to
the City's management of the Solid
Waste system. Such revenues may be
utilized for administration, code
enforcement, maintenance of rights of
way, for cleaning programs and for
costs incurred in enforcing this
Chapter. The Council may waive a
franchise fee where the Franchisee is
providing a public service worthy of
such subsidy.
D. The City shall have the power to
regulate the maximum rate which a
Franchisee may charge subject to the
provisions contained in any agreement
between the City and Franchisee.
Franchisees shall maintain records of
tonnage of Solid Waste hauled from
the City through actual weighing of
trucks. The City may require that
Franchisees be bonded and maintain
minimum levels of liability insurance.
E. The City shall bill and collect all fees
for Solid Waste collection within the
City unless otherwise agreed. It shall
be unlawful for any Franchisee to
discount or "kick-back" funds or
provide gifts to any Producer,
government entity or an agent or
employee thereof. The City shall not
§ 9-3 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 9-8
be responsible for unpaid or bankrupt
accounts.
Sec. 9-4. Separation of Solid Waste.
All Solid Waste shall be drained of
excess water and all wet Household Solid
Waste or Putrescible Wastes and any
animal defecation shall be separately
wrapped in tightly secured plastic Bags
before being placed in a Container.
Sec. 9-5. Compulsory Service.
A. No Producer shall be permitted to
refuse collection services provided for
herein, and the failure of any Producer
to receive such service shall not
exempt such Producer from the
payment of charges herein provided
for, save and except any of those
Producers residing in areas in which
collection service is not available for
the entire area, and in such areas
where no service is rendered. The
boundaries within the City exempted
from such charges shall be established
by the Director. Producers shall
utilize Solid Waste collection services
sufficient to remove Solid Waste
generated by or accumulating weekly
from the Producer’s Premises. The
Director may order collection service
upgrades when such is determined
necessary. When collection service
upgrade is ordered by the Director, the
Producer shall utilize additional
Containers or a larger capacity
Container.
B. Each Over Service item may be
assessed Over Service additional
charges. Frequent Over Service items
shall require a service upgrade at the
discretion of the Director.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04/15/2013
Sec. 9-6. Regulations.
The Director is hereby empowered to
prepare rules and regulations from time to
time in connection with the preparation,
handling, collection, transport and Disposal
of Solid Waste within the City, subject to
the approval of the Council. Such
regulations may include the regulation or
prohibition of certain wastes which, in the
Director's opinion, may constitute a danger
to the public health, safety or welfare, or
which may constitute a violation of
applicable federal or state laws. One (1)
copy of said rules and regulations shall be
retained by the Clerk for use by the public,
and the Franchisee shall be immediately
notified of all changes. The Director may
direct that the Franchisee shall not collect
Solid Waste from any Premises where said
rules and regulations are not complied
with, and the failure to collect the same by
such direction shall not relieve the
Producer of such Premises from the
payment of fees or penalties as provided for
herein.
Sec. 9-7. Regulations Relating to
Hauling.
A. No person shall be permitted to haul
Solid Waste over the streets of the
City unless such vehicle so conveying
such waste is equipped with a canvas
top or some other device effective to
prevent the waste from being strewn
and littered about the streets and
alleys. No person shall convey Solid
Waste over and across the streets or
the alleys of the City for hire unless
such person shall have first filed a
written application and received a
franchise to haul from the City.
B. No person, whether having entered
into an agreement with the City for
collection of Solid Waste, or not, shall
be permitted to transport the Solid
Waste over public thoroughfares in
anything other than water tight
Containers.
Sec. 9-8. Solid Waste Accumulation
Unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit or to allow to accumulate in or
about any yard, lot, place or Premises; or
upon any street, alley or sidewalk adjacent
to such lot, yard, place, or Premises owned
§ 9-8 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 9-9
or occupied by such person, any Solid
Waste so as to cause such yard, lot,
Premises or street or alley or sidewalk
adjacent thereto to be or remain in such
condition as to cause or create a nuisance,
obstruction, hazard to the public health, or
offensive odor or rodent harborage or
thereby to be or to become, or to cause or
create, a public or private nuisance within
the City.
Sec. 9-9. Collection from Private
Property.
A. All Solid Waste (except Ashes,
Hazardous, Infectious or Unacceptable
Waste) shall be placed in authorized
Containers. Unless approved
otherwise, all Solid Waste shall be
placed at the curbline (as defined
herein) in a manner whereby it may be
easily seen.
B. 1. Producers using Roll Cart
Containers with adequate alley access
for collection equipment, as
determined by the Director, shall
receive collection service from the
alley. All other collection service
shall be conducted from the
curbline/curbside adjacent to a City
street.
Solid Waste Producers not
abutting public streets or alleys shall
permit access to the Franchisee for
collection and Disposal of Solid Waste
placed in Containers. Requests for
accommodation due to special
circumstances shall be reviewed by the
Director. The Director shall
determine which locations are best
suited for alley or curb collection.
The specific location for such
collection will be based on
considerations including, but not
limited to, vehicle access, site-specific
conditions and operational efficiency
and convenience.
2. For purposes of this Chapter, Roll Cart
Containers placed or stored adjacent to
alleys (including On Demand Roll
Cart Containers) shall be considered to
be placed at that location for
collection and shall be charged
accordingly. Roll Cart Containers
(including On Demand Roll Cart
Containers) shall be placed for
collection no later than seven (7:00)
a.m., local time, on the day of
scheduled collection (as determined by
the Director). Roll Cart Containers
(including On Demand Roll Cart
Containers) shall be promptly
removed and stored out of general
curbside, sidewalk or collection
area(s) by the Producers, by 12:00
p.m. (noon) local time on the next day
following the scheduled collection
day.
C. 1. Solid Waste shall be placed in
Compactor Containers, Mechanical
Containers, or Roll Cart Containers
approved by the Director. Solid
Waste shall not be placed in any type
of Container other than those defined
in this Chapter. All Containers shall
be loaded to allow ease of dumping of
contents when the Container is
inverted. Solid Waste shall not be
compacted in a Container in a manner
that interferes with easy removal of
Solid Waste from the Container.
2. Roll Cart Container contents shall
be able to fall freely from within the
Roll Cart Container when dumped or
emptied. All Roll Cart Container lids
shall be in a completely closed
position and shall swing freely open
when the Container is collected by the
Franchisee. Each property owner /
Producer shall be financially
responsible for lost, stolen, damaged
or otherwise missing Roll Cart
Containers. Roll Cart Containers shall
remain at the property/address to
which such Roll Cart Container is
registered until such is exchanged or
removed by Franchisee (due to tenant
change, account change, sale of
property or when the property
becomes otherwise vacated, etc.). All
§ 9-9 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 9-10
Roll Cart Containers shall remain the
property of the Franchisee.
3. Solid Waste exceeding Container
capacity (e.g., Over Service) shall be
placed in securely tied Bags or
Bundles and shall be secured from
blowing or becoming scattered.
Overfilled or overloaded Containers
may result in additional charges to the
Producer(s).
D. Ashes placed for collection shall be
cold and free from any fire, live coals
or other substances which might
ignite. Ashes shall be placed in tightly
secured plastic Bags and placed in a
separate metal Container from any
flammable materials.
E. Small tree limbs, when tied in Bundles
not over four feet (4’) long and
weighing less than thirty-five (35)
pounds, will be collected.
F. Magazines and papers may be tied in
Bundles but must not be put out in wet
weather or any earlier than twelve (12)
hours before collection time unless in
a sealed Container.
G. Broken concrete, rocks, plaster,
discarded building materials, trees,
large tree limbs and other Bulky waste
may not be placed for collection as
Household Waste.
H. Bags containing Solid Waste except
Hazardous, Infectious or Unacceptable
Waste will be collected but may not be
set out for service until the morning of
the collection day. Bags may be
placed for collection in advance of the
collection day if they contain only
leaves, grass cuttings, weeds and
hedge trimmings. Bags containing
Solid Waste must weigh less than
thirty five (35) pounds.
I. Loose paper, waste basket material,
waste paper, etc., must be placed in
covered Containers.
J. Dead animals or portions thereof
placed for collection must weigh less
than ten (10) pounds and must be
placed in a securely tied plastic Bag,
then in a Container with a tight fitting
lid.
K. Hazardous, Infectious or Unacceptable
Waste must be disposed of in a
manner consistent with federal, State
of Idaho, and City regulations.
Anyone needing to dispose of
Hazardous Waste must contact the
Director and Franchisee. All fees and
charges regarding Hazardous Wastes
shall be the responsibility of the
Generator thereof. The Franchisee
may require a deposit from the
Hazardous Waste Generator prior to
pickup of Hazardous Waste. Title to
Hazardous Waste shall remain with
the Hazardous Waste Generator.
L. Infectious Solid Waste must be
disposed of in a manner consistent
with this Code, the Idaho Code and
federal regulations. Such waste must
be double Bagged in securely tied
plastic Bags, inside clearly marked
puncture proof plastic Containers in a
manner approved and placed by the
Director and the Franchisee, who shall
be notified by the Producer of the fact
that such waste is being placed for
collection. Title to Infectious Waste
shall remain with the Producer.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04/15/2013)
Sec. 9-10. Solid Waste Produced by
Business Units.
A. Every owner or lessee or person in
charge of any commercial or industrial
establishment or other similar place
where Solid Waste other than
Hazardous, Infectious or Unacceptable
Waste is produced or accumulated
shall provide or cause to be provided
for such Producer, a metal, water tight
Container into which all Solid Waste
(except Hazardous, Infectious or
Unacceptable Waste) which has been
properly and sanitarily prepared for
Disposal shall be placed. Said
Container shall have a tight fitting
cover and shall be kept covered.
Individual arrangements shall be
§ 9-10 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 9-13
reviewed by the Director and
Franchisee.
B. Loose paper, waste basket material,
waste paper, etc., must be placed in
covered Containers.
C. Solid Waste resulting from the
construction, reconstruction or repairs
of Premises shall not be placed with
other Solid Waste for collection, but
shall be disposed of directly by the
Producer owning, occupying or
leasing the Premises, unless specific
arrangements have been made with the
Director and Franchisee.
D. Residents having a commercial use in
their home shall be billed a
commercial rate.
E. Hazardous, Infectious and
Unacceptable Waste must be disposed
of in a manner consistent with this
Code, the Idaho Code and federal
regulations and as set forth elsewhere
in this Chapter, and other reasonable
regulations which may be formulated
by the Director.
F. Mechanical Containers and
Compactors may not be filled in a
manner which exceeds safe loading
weights and volumes.
G. It shall be unlawful to place Bulky
Waste, Heavy Waste, Hazardous
Waste, Infectious Waste or
Unacceptable Waste in any
Mechanical Container or Compactor
unless the Producer or Generator has
obtained the written approval for such
action from the Director and the
Franchisee.
Sec. 9-11. Burning Prohibited.
The burning of substances of any kind
within the City is hereby prohibited except
by special permit issued by the Fire Chief
or the Fire Chief’s designee or except
during specific periods authorized for
burning by the Council.
Sec. 9-12. Solid Waste Disposal
Prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
incinerate Solid Waste or to deposit
the same on vacant lots or private
property. No person, including the
Franchisee shall drop, spill or permit
Solid Waste to fall upon any private
property, public street, alley or rightof-
way without immediately cleaning
up said waste.
B. After emptying any Container (except
Bags), Franchisee's employee shall
return Containers to the location in
which such Containers were taken and
shall replace the covers. Space about
the Containers shall be left free from
any Solid Waste spilled during the
collection. The Franchisee is not
responsible for cleaning up conditions
about Solid Waste Containers caused
by the carelessness of the owner or
others.
Sec. 9-13. Theft of Services.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit Solid Waste in any
Commercial Container placed for a
private or public individual, Business,
or agency unless the person has been
so authorized by the owner or
individual in charge of the Container.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person not
a resident of the City to leave Solid
Waste with a City resident for pickup
pursuant to this Chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for a Business or
Business Unit to place compostable
materials generated by such Business
or Business Unit into the composting
bins placed for public use at the
Moscow Recycling Center.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit Solid Waste, other than
acceptable compostable materials or
acceptable recyclable materials as
defined by the City, at the Moscow
Recycling Center.
§ 9-13 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 9-17
E. Violation of this section shall be
construed as a "theft of services."
Sec. 9-14. Suppression of Nuisances.
A. The Director shall take cognizance of
all Solid Waste related nuisances
within the limits of the jurisdiction of
the City and shall take such measures
as may be effectual to suppress and
abate the same, including contracting
to abate such nuisances and billing the
property owner for the expenses of
abatement.
B. The improper collection, Disposal or
discharge into the atmosphere of
Hazardous material is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and is unlawful.
Sec. 9-15. Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of
denial, suspension or revocation of the
license by the Clerk shall have the right
of appeal to the Council.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Clerk written notice thereof
within ten (10) business days after the
denial or the entry of the order of
suspension or revocation. The notice
of appeal shall specify an address at
which the person appealing may be
given notice of hearing on the appeal.
C. At the appeal hearing before the
Council, the applicant or person
appealing shall be entitled to appear in
person and offer evidence pertinent to
the denial, suspension or revocation or
may appear through legal counsel. City
staff shall likewise be entitled to appear
at the hearing and offer evidence in
support of the denial, order of
suspension or revocation. Failure by
applicant, person appealing, or their
representative to appear before Council
at the time scheduled to hear such an
appeal shall result in the automatic
denial of such appeal.
D. The Council shall determine whether
the denial, suspension or revocation
shall be sustained and shall make a
final reasoned statement in writing
within fifteen (15) business days
following the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2009-06, 02/17/2009)
Sec. 9-16. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction,
shall be punished pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code.
Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue and/or each
separate incident shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Sec. 9-17. Rates.
The Council is hereby authorized to
adopt rates to be charged Producers and
Generators by Resolution.
§ 10-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-3
Chapter 10
MOSCOW DAY CARE ORDINANCE
Sec. 10-1: Short Title
Sec. 10-2: Purpose
Sec. 10-3: Definitions
Sec. 10-4: License or Registration
Required
Sec. 10-5: Application Required
Sec. 10-6: Temporary Licenses
Sec. 10-7: Investigation. Background
Check Required
Sec. 10-8: Denial of License
Sec. 10-9: Issuance of License
Sec. 10-10: Fee
Sec. 10-11: Day Care Facility License
Renewal
Sec. 10-12: Day Care Provider License
Renewal
Sec. 10-13. License Revocation and
Duty to Notify of
Ineligibility
Sec. 10-14: Notice
Sec. 10-15: Appeals
Sec. 10-16: Insurance and Liability;
Prepayment
Sec. 10-17: Health Requirements
Sec. 10-18: Inspection
Sec. 10-19: Standards
Sec. 10-20: Child-Staff Ratios
Sec. 10-21: No City Liability Created
Sec. 10-22: Penalties and Additional
Fees
Sec. 10-1. Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known as the
Moscow Day Care Ordinance.
(Ord. 2010-05, 03/01/2010)
Sec. 10-2. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose
of this Ordinance to establish a minimum
City-wide system for the protection of
children receiving Day Care services. This
system is intended to establish minimum
standards while still leaving primary
responsibility for evaluation and selection
of Day Care services with parents. Every
person and/or facility providing Day Care,
as defined by this Chapter, is encouraged to
become licensed. An additional purpose of
this Ordinance is to exercise the authority
granted to the City to adopt an ordinance
for regulation and/or licensing of Day Care
services at least as stringent as the
requirements of the basic Day Care license
in Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter 11. The
City hereby exercises the authority granted
by the State to the City to require a limited
criminal history background check at least
as extensive as that required by Idaho Code
Title 39, Chapter 11. Nothing in this
Chapter shall be construed to limit or
restrict the teaching of religious doctrines,
values, or tenets in a Facility licensed under
the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2009-25, 12/21/2009; 2010-13, 07/06/2010;
2011-06, 06/20/2011)
Sec. 10-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the
following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When consistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the
singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
A. Applicant. A Person who submits to
the City an application for a license or
the renewal of a license individually or
in behalf of a corporation, partnership
or association to provide, conduct,
operate, maintain, or be employed at a
Day Care Facility under this Chapter.
B. Child. An individual who is under the
age of eighteen (18) years, including an
individual who is related by blood,
adoption or who is otherwise the
charge of any individual providing Day
Care. The age of a child shall be
determined by their date of birth.
C. Day Care. Direct care and supervision
of children provided for compensation
during part of a twenty-four (24) hour
day. For purposes of this Chapter, Day
Care shall not include any arrangement
§ 10-3 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-3
for the care of Related children;
however, a Day Care License shall be
required pursuant to this Chapter where
the total number of children who are
not Related and who are provided
direct care and supervision in a home
or Facility exceeds five (5) children.
D. Day Care Facility. Any business,
place of business, home, residence, or
establishment which provides Day
Care. This definition includes any
Premises, location, play area,
playground, organization, institution,
partnership, public school, private
school, home, residence, dwelling,
group home, foster home, place or
facility whether such business or
concern calls itself a mini school,
kindergarten, nursery, preschool, club,
cooperative, mother's-day-out, after
school program, all-day kindergarten
program, a kindergarten plus program,
learning center or any other business
whose activity is the same or
substantially similar to a Day Care
operation or concern. The definition of
Day Care Facility shall not include:
1. Any institution, school or facility
operated by or under the direction of
the State of Idaho by any agency or
political subdivision of the State of
Idaho or by any other public body or
public entity, except for an after school
program or the like.
2. Any preschool, elementary, junior
high, or high school licensed and
designated as such by the State of
Idaho, except for an after school
program or the like.
3. Any medical or hospital facility
operated pursuant to license issued by
the State of Idaho.
4. Any day camp, summer camp,
sports camp, or similar program
designed primarily for children to
attend, as long as such camp or
program does not exceed a total of
twelve (12) weeks during a calendar
year, or not more often than once a
week.
5. The occasional care of a
neighbor’s, relative’s, or friend’s child
or children by a person not ordinarily
in the business of providing Day Care.
6. The operation of a private school
or religious school for educational
purposes for children over four (4)
years of age or a religious kindergarten.
7. The provision of Day Care
exclusively for children of parents who
are simultaneously in the same building
as such children.
E. There shall be four classifications of
Day Care Facility:
1. Family Day Care Facility. A Day
Care Facility providing Day Care for
five (5) or fewer children;
2. Group Day Care Facility. A Day
Care Facility providing Day Care for
six (6) to twelve (12) children;
3. Small Day Care Facility: A Day
Care Facility providing Day Care for
thirteen (13) to twenty (20) children;
and
4. Large Day Care Facility. A Day
Care Facility providing Day Care for
twenty-one (21) or more children.
F. Day Care Poster. An informational
sign provided by the City for prominent
display in every licensed Day Care
Facility.
G. Director. An adult who has primary
responsibility for the day-to-day
operations and/or management of a
Day Care Facility.
H. Licensee. A Person who holds a
current and valid license issued by the
City for operation of a Day Care
Facility.
I. Owner. Any Person with a financial or
proprietary interest of any kind in a
Day Care Facility.
J. Person. Any individual, group of
individuals, association, firm,
partnership or corporation.
K. Premises. A structure, facility, yard,
play area, or any part of a structure,
facility, yard, or play area where any
Day Care is provided.
§ 10-3 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-4
L. Preschool. A place of structured
instruction and where such place is not
operated by or under the direction of
the State of Idaho by any agency or
political subdivision of the State of
Idaho or by any other public body or
public entity where learning and
knowledge is imparted to children in
preparation for public and/or private
education (whether or not meals are
served and/or a sleeping area is
provided).
M. Related. A niece, nephew, first
generation cousin, grandchild, brother,
sister, half-brother, half-sister, stepbrother,
step-sister, son, daughter, stepson,
step-daughter, who is related
either by blood, adoption, or marriage
to the Day Care provider or pursuant to
a legal guardianship.
N. Registered Day Care Provider. A
Family Day Care Facility providing
Day Care to four (4) or five (5)
children that complies with all
requirements to operate a “family day
care home”, as defined in Title 39,
Chapter 11 of the Idaho Code, or any
person working in such Facility.
O. Staff. Every individual who provides
Day Care at a Day Care Facility; every
employee or other individual who has
unsupervised direct contact with
children who attend a Day Care
Facility; and every individual providing
Day Care for more than twelve (12)
hours in any one (1) month period
(whether or not such individual is
directly supervised or receives
compensation).
P. Volunteer. Every individual who
provides service in a Day Care Facility
(whether or not directly supervised) no
more than twelve (12) hours in any one
(1) month period and without any
express or implied promise of
compensation.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2009-25,
12/21/2009; 2010-13, 07/06/2010; 2011-06,
06/20/2011; 2012-20, 09/17/2012)
Sec. 10-4. License or Registration
Required.
A. No Person shall maintain, operate, or
permit to be operated within the City,
any Day Care Facility, as herein
defined unless a current and valid Day
Care Facility license or certificate of
registration has been issued by the City
as provided herein.
B. No Person shall maintain, operate, or
permit to be maintained or operated, a
Day Care Facility on Premises under
such Person’s control unless all
necessary licenses and/or registration
for such operation shall have been so
obtained and remain in effect.
C. Every Person who provides Day Care
at a licensed Day Care Facility, other
than a directly supervised Volunteer as
defined in this Chapter, shall apply for
a license within five (5) business days
of the first day of employment at such
licensed Day Care Facility. A
Volunteer who intends to provide
unsupervised Day Care shall be
licensed. Any individual who provides
Day Care for more than twelve (12)
hours in any one (1) month period with
or without any express or implied
promise of compensation shall be
licensed.
D. Every owner, director, office staff
member, or other Day Care Facility
employee who provides unsupervised
Day Care shall be licensed or
registered. No unlicensed Day Care
provider, including a Volunteer or
temporarily licensed Day Care provider
or employee, shall provide
unsupervised Day Care on any
occasion, including indoors, outdoors,
rest periods, field trips, and the like.
E. A Registered Day Care Provider shall
not be required to be licensed by the
City but shall be required to
demonstrate qualification as a
Registered Day Care provider to the
City by annual completion of a
§ 10-4 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-5
registration form approved by the City
Clerk. No Registered Day Care
provider who fails to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of a
“family day care home”, as defined in
Title 39, Chapter 11 of the Idaho Code,
shall provide Day Care within the City.
No Registered Day Care provider shall
provide Day Care where such Facility
or person would be disqualified from
being licensed.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2009-25,
12/21/2009; 2010-13, 07/06/2010; 2012-20,
09/17/2012)
Sec. 10-5. Application Required.
A. 1. Applicant: Every Applicant for a
license under this Chapter shall
complete a form provided by the City,
which shall include all information,
releases and authorizations necessary
to provide a complete criminal history
background check as set forth herein.
Information for a Day Care Facility
license shall include, but may not be
limited to, a current list of all Owners,
Director, Staff, and all individuals
thirteen (13) years of age or older
residing at the Premises. In addition,
an Applicant for a Day Care Facility
license must designate one Person as
Director, if applicable. Failure to
provide the necessary information,
releases or authorizations shall be
grounds to deny a license or
application. An Applicant may provide
Day Care at more than one (1)
Licensed Day Care Facility as long as
all locations where Day Care services
are to be provided by such Applicant
are identified.
2. Corporation. When the Applicant
for such a license is a corporation, such
corporation must be authorized to do
business in the State of Idaho. The
application shall be made by the
Director of the Premises and such
application shall contain all
information required of an individual
Applicant as provided herein. Such
license to a corporation shall be
revoked upon a change of Director. A
new application and license shall be
required before a Director other than
the Director designated in the original
application shall provide services at
such Premises. After investigation as
required herein and upon change of
Director, the City may issue a license
for an interim period of not to exceed
sixty (60) days during which time the
corporation shall make the new
application for license, naming therein
the new Director of the Premises.
3. Partnership: When the Applicant
for such a license is a partnership, each
active partner in the partnership shall
join in the application for such license
and shall furnish all of the information
and recommendations required of an
individual Applicant as provided
herein, and shall be subject to the same
provisions for revocation and
reapplication upon a change of Director
as provided in the case of corporation
Applicants above.
4. Association: When the Applicant
for such a license is an unincorporated
association, the application shall be
made by the officers of the association
and Director of the Premises and shall
contain all information required of an
individual Applicant as provided
herein, and shall be subject to the same
provisions for revocation and
reapplication upon a change of Director
as provided in the case of corporation
Applicants above.
B. Additional Information May Be
Required.
Upon application submission, if
additional information is required by
the City in order to complete the
application or to clarify or explain an
ambiguity, the applicant shall submit
such information within thirty (30)
days of original application date or
§ 10-5 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-7
change in circumstances. Failure to
comply shall require applicant to
submit a new application and fee.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2008-06,
05/05/2008; 2009-25, 12/21/2009; 2010-13,
07/06/2010)
Sec. 10-6. Temporary Licenses.
A. In order to facilitate the provision of
Day Care during the Day Care license
application process, a temporary
license may be granted to an applicant
by the City. Such temporary license
may be granted for not more than sixty
(60) days from the first date of
application. Issuance of such
temporary license shall be at the City’s
sole discretion.
B. A permanent Day Care license shall
only be granted following training,
CPR/First Aid Certification, successful
background check and compliance with
all other provisions of this Chapter.
C. At least one (1) person who is licensed
shall remain on the licensed Premises
with any temporarily licensed Day Care
Provider.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005)
Sec. 10-7. Investigation. Background
Check Required.
Before any license shall be issued
under this Chapter, the City shall complete
an investigation of every Applicant,
Licensee, Owner, Director, Staff,
individual thirteen (13) years of age or
older residing at the Premises, and an
inspection of the Premises, except as
otherwise provided. The purpose of the
investigation is to determine whether the
Applicant or Licensee and the Premises
fully comply with all pertinent ordinances
and regulations of the City; to insure that
the Day Care Facility does not create a
nuisance or danger to the public; and to
require a criminal history background
check for first time applicants and license
renewal applicants at least as stringent as
that required by Idaho Code Title 39,
Chapter 11.
The City shall perform a background
check on every Applicant, Licensee,
Owner, Director, Staff, and individual
thirteen (13) years of age or older residing
at the Premises; however, where Day Care
is provided in the home of a child or a
child’s legal guardian, a background check
for such child’s parent(s), legal guardian(s)
or Related children, shall not be required.
New fingerprints are required every
five (5) years.
Where possible and required herein, a
background check on an individual under
eighteen (18) years of age shall include a
check of the juvenile justice records of
adjudication of the magistrate division of
the district court, county probation
services, and department of health and
welfare records in all jurisdictions in which
such individual has lived since the age of
twelve (12), as authorized by the minor and
his or her parent or guardian. Background
checks and crime information requests
made to the FBI shall be conducted
pursuant to applicable law, including but
not limited to, Idaho Code Section 56-
1004A, as amended. The limited criminal
history check shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the statewide criminal
identification bureau; the FBI criminal
history; and the statewide child abuse
registry for first time applicants and shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the
statewide criminal identification bureau;
and the statewide child abuse registry for
license renewal applicants.
A. Requirements. To determine the
suitability of prospective Day Care
Applicant, Licensee, Owner, Director,
Staff, individual thirteen (13) years of
age or older residing at the Premises,
the City Police Department and/or
City Clerk for the City of Moscow
shall require an applicant to provide
information and fingerprints necessary
to obtain criminal history information
from the Idaho State Police (ISP) and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI). Pursuant to Idaho Code Section
§ 10-7 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-8
67-3008, and congressional enactment
Public Law 92-544, the City Police
Department and/or City Clerk for the
City of Moscow shall submit the
required fees and a set of fingerprints
obtained from the applicant, to the
ISP, Bureau of Criminal Identification,
for a criminal records check of State
and National databases per Public Law
92-544. The submission of
fingerprints and information required
by this Section shall be on forms
prescribed by the ISP. The City Police
Department and/or City Clerk for the
City of Moscow is authorized to
receive criminal history information
from the ISP and from the FBI for the
purpose of evaluating the fitness of
applicants for Applicant, Licensee,
Owner, Director, Staff, individual
thirteen (13) years of age or older
residing at the Premises. As required
by State and Federal law, further
dissemination or other use of the
criminal history information is
prohibited. The applicant authorizes
the use of FBI records for the
screening process.
B. Background Check Guidelines. All
background checks require a complete
set of fingerprints; a signed statement
that contains the applicant’s name,
address, and date of birth appearing on
a valid identification document issued
by a governmental entity, as well as
furnishing if such applicant has or has
not been convicted of a crime, and the
particulars and description of the
same.
(Ord. 2001-18; 09/17/2001; 2005-06,
02/07/2005; 2008-06, 05/05/2008; 2009-25,
12/21/2009; 2010-13, 07/06/2010; 2011-06,
06/20/2011; 2019-06, 07/01/2019)
Sec. 10-8. Denial of License.
No Day Care license shall be issued:
A. Where Applicant, Licensee, Owner,
Director, Staff, individual thirteen (13)
years of age or older residing at the
Premises, managing agent of a
corporation, or active partner of a
partnership has:
1. Been found guilty of, plead guilty
to, received a withheld judgment, or
admitted to the elements of any of the
following enumerated crimes, or any
substantially similar provision of
foreign criminal violation,
notwithstanding the form of
judgment(s):
a. Felony injury of a child,
section 18-1501, Idaho Code.
b. The sexual abuse of a child
under sixteen years of age, section
18-1506, Idaho Code.
c. The ritualized abuse of a child
under eighteen years of age, section
18-1506A, Idaho Code.
d. The sexual exploitation of a
child, section 18-1507 or 18-1507A,
Idaho Code.
e. Sexual abuse of a child under
the age of sixteen years, section
18-1506, Idaho Code.
f. Lewd conduct with a child
under the age of sixteen years, section
18-1508, Idaho Code.
g. The sale or barter of a child for
adoption or other purposes, section
18-1511, Idaho Code.
h. Murder in any degree, section
18-4001 or 18-4003, Idaho Code.
i. Assault with intent to murder,
section 18-4015, Idaho Code.
j. Voluntary manslaughter,
section 18-4006, Idaho Code.
k. Rape, section 18-6101 or
18-6108, Idaho Code.
l. Incest, section 18-6602, Idaho
Code.
m. Forcible sexual penetration by
use of foreign object, section 18-6608,
Idaho Code.
n. Abuse, neglect or exploitation
of a vulnerable adult, section 18-1505,
Idaho Code.
o. Aggravated, first degree,
second degree and third degree arson,
sections 18-801 through 18-805, Idaho
Code.
§ 10-8 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-8
p. Crimes against nature, section
18-6605, Idaho Code.
q. Kidnapping, sections 18-4501
through 18-4503, Idaho Code.
r. Mayhem, section 18-5001,
Idaho Code.
s. Poisoning, section 18-4014 or
18-5501, Idaho Code.
t. Possession of sexually
exploitative material, section 18-
1507A, Idaho Code.
u. Robbery, section 18-6501,
Idaho Code.
v. Stalking in the first degree,
section 18-7905, Idaho Code.
w. Video voyeurism, section 18-
6609, Idaho Code.
x. Enticing of children, section
18-1509 or 18-1509A, Idaho Code.
y. Inducing individuals under
eighteen years of age into prostitution,
section 18-5609, Idaho Code.
z. Inducing Person under eighteen
years of age to patronize a prostitute,
section 18-5611, Idaho Code.
aa. Any felony punishable by
death or life imprisonment.
bb. Attempt, section 18-306, Idaho
Code, conspiracy, section 18-1701,
Idaho Code, or accessory after the fact,
section 18-205, Idaho Code, to commit
any of the crimes designated in this
subsection.
2. Been classified as a voluntary
patient or involuntary patient pursuant
to Chapter 3, Title 66, Idaho Code, or
similar provision in another
jurisdiction, unless:
a. Such Person has been released
from, and is no longer under, any form
of treatment in relation to such
classification, and
b. Such Person has been
examined by at least one (1)
professional licensed to evaluate
mental health and such professional
certifies that the Person is no longer
mentally ill and presents no threat or
danger to any Child. Such examination
shall not be at City expense.
3. Had his or her parental rights
restricted or terminated by a Child
protection action under Idaho Code,
Section 16-1601 et seq., or Child
custody termination action under Idaho
Code, Section 16-2001 et seq.
4. Where a registered sex offender
resides on the Premises where Day
Care services are provided.
B. Where Applicant, Licensee, Owner,
Director, Staff, individual thirteen (13)
years of age or older residing at the
Premises, managing agent of a
corporation, or active partner of a
partnership has:
Been found guilty of, plead guilty to, or
received a withheld judgment, or
admitted to the elements of any of the
following enumerated crimes, or any
substantially similar provision of
foreign criminal violation,
notwithstanding the form of
judgment(s) for any offense involving
neglect or any physical injury to, or
other abuse of a child, or any of the
following offenses or a similar
provision in another jurisdiction, for a
period of five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of application for
license or renewal:
1. Aggravated assault, section 18-905,
Idaho Code.
2. Aggravated battery, section 18-
907(1), Idaho Code.
3. Burglary, section 18-1401, Idaho
Code.
4. Felony theft, sections 18-2403 and
18-2407(1), Idaho Code.
5. Forgery of a financial transaction
card, section 18-3123, Idaho Code.
6. Fraudulent use of a financial
transaction card or number, section 18-
3124, Idaho Code.
7. Forgery or counterfeiting, Chapter
36, Title 18, Idaho Code.
8. Misappropriation of personal
identifying information, section 18-
3126, Idaho Code.
9. Insurance fraud, section 41-293,
Idaho Code.
§ 10-8 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-8
10. Damage to or destruction of
insured property, section 41-294, Idaho
Code.
11. Public assistance fraud, section 56-
227, Idaho Code.
12. Provider fraud, section 56-227A,
Idaho Code.
13. Attempted strangulation, section
18-923, Idaho Code.
14. Misdemeanor injury to a child,
section 18-1501(2), Idaho Code.
15. Felony domestic violence, section
18-918, Idaho Code.
16. Any violation (felony or
misdemeanor) of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 27,
Title 37, Idaho Code.
17. Grand theft, section 18-2407(1),
Idaho Code.
18. The provision of Day Care
exclusively for a child or children
related to the person providing care,
except as subject to the requirements of
the Idaho Child Care Program for
persons receiving benefits thereunder.
19. Disseminating obscene material to
minors, as defined in sections 18-1513
through 18-1515, Idaho Code.
20. Arson, as defined in sections 18-
801 through 18-803, Idaho Code.
21. Transporting a minor in a motor
vehicle while under the influence,
section 18-1501(3), Idaho Code.
22. Driving under the influence of
alcohol, drugs, or other intoxicating
substances, section 18-8004, Idaho
Code.
23. Excessive alcohol concentration,
section 18-8004C, Idaho Code.
24. Aggravated driving while under the
influence of alcohol, drugs, or any
other intoxicating substances, section
18-8006, Idaho Code.
25. Reckless driving, section 49-
1401(1), Idaho Code.
26. Persons under the age of twenty
one (21) not allowed to purchase,
attempt to purchase, or otherwise
consume or possess any alcoholic
beverage, section 23-604, Idaho Code.
27. Persons under the age of twenty
one (21) not allowed to purchase,
attempt to purchase, possess, serve,
dispense, or consume beer, wine or
other alcoholic liquor, section 23-949,
Idaho Code.
28. Violation of City open container
law. Moscow City Code Title 10,
Chapter 1, Section 12.
29. Any felony as defined by Idaho
Code, Section 18-111 and 18-111A,
other than those listed in Subsection
A.1. hereinabove.
30. Any crime of physical violence
against persons, other than those listed
in Section A.1. hereinabove.
31. Attempt, section 18-306, Idaho
Code, conspiracy, section 18-1701,
Idaho Code, or accessory after the fact,
section 18-205, Idaho Code, to commit
any of the crimes designated in this
subsection.
C. For any Premise, unless all applicable
codes, and other pertinent provisions of
all City ordinances, including health
requirements herein, as far as can be
determined, are being complied with.
D. For any Applicant, Licensee, Owner,
Director, Staff, or individual thirteen
(13) years of age or older presiding at
the Premises, where there is evidence
demonstrating to the City that health or
safety problems exist or are probable.
No Applicant, Licensee, Owner,
Director, Staff, or individual presiding
at the Premises shall be qualified to
receive a license under this Chapter for
a period of no less than one (1) year
from the date of the health and/or
safety problems which resulted in
denial or revocation of a license under
this Chapter.
E. For any Applicant, Licensee, Owner,
Director, Staff, or individual presiding
at the Premises, who has supplied
false or misleading information, failed
or refused to disclose any information
required on the application form, or
refused to authorize the police
investigation required herein. No
§ 10-8 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-11
Applicant, Licensee, Owner, Director,
Staff, or individual presiding at the
Premises shall be able to apply to
receive a license under this Chapter
for a period of less than six (6) months
from the date of the denial,
suspension, or revocation of the
license under this Subsection.
F. For any Applicant, Licensee, Owner,
Director, Staff, or individual presiding
at the Premises, who has violated any
of the provisions of this Chapter
during licensure other than Subsection
A of the “Denial of License” Section
of this Chapter. No Applicant,
Licensee, Owner, Director, Staff, or
individual presiding at the Premises
shall be qualified to receive a license
under this Chapter for a period of less
than six (6) months from the date of
the denial or revocation of the license
under this Subsection.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2008-06,
05/05/2008; 2009-25, 12/21/2009; 2010-05,
03/01/2010; 2010-13, 07/06/2010; 2011-06,
06/20/2011)
Sec. 10-9. Issuance of License.
A. Upon receipt of an application
presented in due form to the Clerk
which shows that such Applicant
possesses all of the qualifications and
none of the disqualifications herein and
meets all of the requirements of this
Code, the City shall issue such license
to the Applicant. A Day Care Facility
license shall be issued for an initial
term to expire March 1 of the following
year.
B. All licenses shall be in such form as the
City may prescribe and shall contain
the name, address, place of business,
and date of expiration of such license
and shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Clerk. The Day Care
Facility license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at the Day Care
Facility. A Day Care Poster shall also
be posted in a conspicuous place within
all licensed Day Care Facilities. The
names of all Staff and all individuals
thirteen (13) years of age or older
residing at the Premises shall be
provided to the office of the Clerk
within five (5) days of their initial hire
date and/or establishment of residence.
Fingerprints shall be provided to the
Moscow Police Department for each
such staff member or resident.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2008-06,
05/05/2008; 2009-25, 12/21/2009)
Sec. 10-10. Fee.
Fee to be paid upon issuance or
renewal of any license issued pursuant to
this Chapter shall be set from time to time
by resolution duly passed and adopted by
the Council.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005)
Sec. 10-11. Day Care Facility License
Renewal.
Any Day Care Facility license issued
by the City may be renewed for an
additional one (1) year upon the same terms
and subject to the same application and
requirements as provided herein. In order
to be eligible for renewal, the applicant for
a Day Care Facility license shall present a
completed application accompanied by the
renewal fee at least thirty (30) days prior to
license expiration. Whenever the Licensee
desires to effect a change or addition of
Premises or to renew the license, the
Licensee shall notify the Clerk and make
application for a license in the same
manner as in the first application, except
that investigation provided for in the
“Investigation” Section of this Chapter may
be waived by the City where the Licensee
provides an affidavit not less than thirty
(30) days prior to the change or addition of
Premises or expiration of the license
asserting compliance to all requirements
herein with the application for renewal.
Inspection of a new Premise shall not be
waived. No license issued by the City shall
be assignable or transferable. The fee to be
§ 10-11 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-15
paid for license renewal and a fee for tardy
applications shall be set from time to time
by Resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2009-25, 12/21/2009;
2010-13, 07/06/2010)
Sec. 10-12. Day Care Provider License
Renewal.
A Day Care Provider License issued
under this Chapter shall be valid for one (1)
year from the date of issuance. In order to
be eligible for renewal, the applicant for a
Day Care Provider license shall present a
completed application accompanied by the
renewal fee at least thirty (30) days prior to
license expiration. The fee to be paid for
license renewal and a fee for tardy
applications shall be set from time to time
by Resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2008-06, 05/05/2008)
Sec. 10-13. License Revocation and
Duty to Notify of
Ineligibility.
A. A Day Care Facility license shall be
revoked immediately whenever it is
determined that the Licensee would be
denied under the “Denial of License”
Section of this Chapter.
B. Every licensed Day Care Provider shall
notify the City of any change in
circumstance which renders the
information on the application for Day
Care license incorrect within five (5)
business days of such change or such
Day Care license shall be revoked
immediately and such license shall be
automatically null and void.
C. If a license application is revoked or
denied because of a disqualification
contained in the “Denial of License”
Section of this Chapter, no permanent
license shall be issued to an Applicant
until the expiration of the time period
for such disqualification and such
Applicant shall be ineligible for a
temporary license.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2010-05,
03/01/2010)
Sec. 10-14. Notice.
A. Prior to the revocation or denial of
renewal of a license as required herein,
the Clerk shall provide written notice
of such revocation or denial of renewal
to the Licensee or Applicant, as the
case may be. Such written notice shall
be sent by certified mail or hand
delivery to the address provided in the
application or to the address of the Day
Care Facility filed by such Licensee or
Applicant. Such written notice shall
state the reason(s) for such revocation
or denial and shall state that such
Licensee or Applicant may request an
appeal hearing as provided herein.
Notice of revocation or denial of
renewal is effective on the date such
notice is placed in a mailbox controlled
by the United States Postal Service or
is hand delivered to Licensee or
Applicant.
B. When the City certifies that there is an
immediate danger to life or health of a
Child, the Day Care Facility license or
application may be immediately and
summarily revoked or denied. Under
such conditions, notice of such
revocation or denial will be given as
soon as practicable thereafter.
C. Failure by the City to give notice as
provided herein shall not establish a
right to a license under this Chapter.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2009-25,
12/21/2009; 2010-13, 07/06/2010)
Sec. 10-15. Appeals.
A. If a license is revoked, or a license
renewal or an application is denied for
a reason other than disqualification
under Subsection (A) or (B) of the
“Denial of License” Section of this
Chapter, the Licensee or Applicant may
give notice of appeal of such
revocation or denial to the City within
ten (10) calendar days from the date the
notice of revocation or denial was
given. If a license application is
revoked or denied because of
§ 10-15 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-17
disqualification of the Applicant or
Licensee under Subsection (A) or (B)
of the “Denial of License” Section of
this Chapter, such disqualification shall
not be waived.
B. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and
delivered to the Clerk. The Council
shall then set a time and place for such
hearing and the Clerk shall inform the
Licensee or Applicant of the hearing
date in writing, at least five (5)
business days prior to such hearing.
C. The Council may direct the Clerk to
issue a license which has been revoked
or denied upon a finding of good cause
for the issuance of such license.
D. Failure by an Applicant, person
appealing, or their representative, to
appear before the Council at the time
scheduled to hear such appeal shall
result in the automatic denial of such
appeal.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2010-05,
03/01/2010; 2010-13, 07/06/2010; 2012-20,
09/17/2012)
Sec. 10-16. Insurance and Liability;
Prepayment.
A. Each Facility required to be licensed
shall maintain liability insurance in the
amount of three hundred thousand
dollars per occurrence/six hundred
thousand dollars aggregate
($300,000/$600,000) with the City
listed as an additional insured for each
licensed Day Care Facility and
Premises. All policies of insurance
shall require thirty (30) days notice to
the City by certified or regular mail of
any cancellation or change affecting an
interest or coverage. A current
certificate of insurance shall be kept on
file with the Clerk at all times. The
Licensee shall be responsible for all
activities associated with the Day Care
Facility and Premises, including the
actions and inactions of every Person,
Owner, Licensee, Director, Staff,
Volunteer, Child, employee and
individual, and shall hold the City
harmless for same and shall indemnify
and defend any claim filed against the
City relating to all activities associated
with the Day Care Facility and
Premises and the provision of Day
Care. Where Day Care is provided in a
residence, an Applicant or Licensee
may apply to Council for a waiver or
modification of the insurance
provisions in this Section.
B. The issuance of a Day Care Facility
license shall not constitute a
representation or affirmance to any
Person that the Day Care Facility to
which a license is issued is free from
risk with regard to the standards herein.
The City shall not be liable for nor
shall a cause of action exist for any loss
or damage based upon the failure of
any Person to meet the standards
contained in this Ordinance.
C. If the City receives notice of
cancellation of a Licensee’s liability
insurance more than two (2) times
during any one (1) year of licensure,
such Licensee shall prepay the
insurance policy for a minimum of
twelve (12) months and shall provide
proof of such prepayment to the Clerk
by the end of the next business day
following the City’s receipt of such
notification. Failure to provide such
proof of prepayment shall cause the
license to be immediately revoked and
the license shall be automatically null
and void.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2010-13,
07/06/2010; 2011-03, 05/16/2011)
Sec. 10-17. Health Requirements.
A. All Staff on the Premises of a Day Care
Facility shall certify that each is in
good health and that each has received
required immunization against
communicable disease. Any Director,
Staff member of a Day Care Facility,
Volunteer, or employee diagnosed with
a communicable disease must not be
§ 10-17 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-19
present at a Day Care Facility until
such disease is no longer
communicable as declared by a
licensed physician.
B. 1. Within fourteen (14) days of a
child’s initial attendance at any
licensed Day Care Facility, the parent
or guardian shall provide a statement to
the Director of the Day Care Facility
regarding the child’s immunity to
certain childhood diseases. This
statement shall provide a certificate
signed by a physician or a
representative of a health district, that
the child has received, or is in the
process of receiving immunizations as
specified by the state board of health
and welfare, or can effectively
demonstrate immunity through
verification in a form approved by the
City gained through prior contraction
of the disease. Immunizations required
and the manner and frequency of their
administration shall conform to
recognized standard medical practices
in the State.
2. Any minor child whose parent or
guardian has submitted to the Director
of a licensed Day Care Facility a
certificate signed by a physician
licensed by the state board of medicine
stating that the physical condition of
the child is such that all or any of the
required immunizations would
endanger the life or health of the child
shall be exempt from the provisions of
this Section.
C. Every dog, cat, and ferret over four (4)
months of age present in a licensed or
registered Day Care Facility shall be
vaccinated against rabies and every
owner of every such dog, cat and/or
ferret shall retain proof of current
vaccination.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2012-20,
09/17/2012)
Sec. 10-18. Inspection.
Every Licensee shall keep and maintain
such records as are required by the City,
including employee and Staff records.
Every Licensee shall, at all times during
business hours, open the Day Care Facility
records and each and every portion of the
licensed Premises for inspection by the
Moscow Police Department and other City
departments for the purpose of inspection
and enforcement of any provision herein.
The Clerk shall have the absolute right to
enter the Premises of any Licensed or
Registered Day Care Facility during
business hours as often as is necessary to
secure compliance with or to prevent a
violation of this Chapter. The Clerk may
initiate administrative and/or criminal
action to enforce this Chapter.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2010-13, 07/06/2010;
2012-20, 09/17/2012)
Sec. 10-19. Standards.
A. 1. Every licensed Day Care Facility,
Licensee, Director and Staff shall
comply with all safety standards as set
forth in Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter
11, and such other requirements as the
Council may enact by Resolution.
2. Every licensed Day Care Facility
shall provide:
a. Adequate fire and smoke
alarms;
b. A functional telephone located
on the Day Care Facility Premises
during the hours of operation;
c. Adequate fire extinguishers;
d. Adequate exits;
e. Firearms or weapons which are
stored on the Premises of a Day Care
Facility must be kept in a locked
container that is inaccessible to
children while Day Care attendees are
present;
f. Pools, hot tubs, ponds and
other bodies of water that are on the
Day Care Facility Premises must
provide the following safeguards:
(1) The area surrounding the
body of water shall be fenced and
locked in a manner that prevents access
by children and meets the following
requirements:
§ 10-19 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-19
(a) The fence must be at
least four feet (4’) high with no vertical
opening more than four inches (4”0
wide, be designed so that a young child
cannot climb or squeeze under or
through the fence, surround all sides of
the pool and have a gate that is selfclosing
and that has a self-latching
mechanism in proper working order out
of the reach of young children;
(b) If the building forms
one (1) side of the barrier for the pool,
all doors that provide unrestricted
access to the pool must have alarms
that produce an audible sound when the
door is opened;
(c) Furniture or other large
objects shall not be left near the fence
in a manner that would enable a child
to climb on the furniture or other large
object and gain access to the pool; and
(2) If the area surround a pool,
hot tub, pond or other body of water is
not fenced and locked, there shall be a
secured protective covering that will
not allow access by a child;
(3) Wading pools must be
empty when not in use;
(4) Children must be under the
direct supervision of at least one (1)
adult at all times while using a pool,
hot tub, pond or other body of water;
and
(5) A minimum of a four foot
(4’) high fence shall be present that
prevents access from the Day Care
Facility Premises if the Day Care
Premises are adjacent to a body of
water; and
g. The Day Care Facility shall
provide open space for outdoor play. A
minimum of one hundred (100) square
feet per child is required. This area
shall be adjacent to the Day Care
Facility and shall provide a safe play
area that can be easily maintained and
is accessible for use by children.
B. Every licensed Day Care Facility shall
comply with all health standards as set
forth in Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter
11, and such other requirements as the
Council may create by Resolution.
C. Every licensed Day Care Facility,
Licensee, Director and Staff shall
conform to the requirements herein and
all other applicable Titles and Chapters
of this Code, except that no fire
standards adopted by Council that are
applicable to this Day Care Facility
Ordinance shall be more stringent than
the standards contained in the
International Fire Code, as adopted by
the State of Idaho.
D. Every licensed Day Care Facility,
Licensee, Director and Staff shall
conform to all life safety standards
found in all applicable uniform
standard codes which are adopted by
the City as of the date of application
for license, except for the Child-Staff
ratios as modified in the Section of this
Chapter entitled “Child-Staff Ratios”.
E. Every licensed Day Care Facility
having a flame source utility on its
Premises shall have a carbon monoxide
detector properly operating at all times
within any enclosed area on every level
or floor where children are present.
F. Every Day Care Facility Owner,
Licensee, Director and Staff shall be
required to obtain and keep current Red
Cross, American Heart Association, or
equivalent first aid treatment
certification and child/infant
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
and pediatric rescue breathing
certification prior to licensure and shall
keep such certifications current.
Additionally, at least one (1) such
certified adult shall be present at every
Day Care Facility at all times a child is
present at the Day Care Facility.
G. The minimum age of any Director shall
be twenty-one (21) years of age, except
in a Family Day Care Facility where
the Director is the only adult individual
present on a regular basis. In this latter
case, the Director shall be at least
§ 10-19 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-20
eighteen (18) years of age. At least one
(1) employee eighteen (18) years of age
or older shall be present at all times
when a child or children are in
attendance at a Day Care Facility. Day
Care Facility Applicants and Licensees
shall be precluded from hiring
employees under fourteen (14) years of
age.
H. Every Day Care Facility Licensee,
Director and Staff member shall be
required to acquire four (4) hours or
more of training in early childhood
development and/or children’s health
and safety within thirty (30) days of
employment in such Facility and shall
thereafter obtain four (4) hours or more
of such training on an annual basis.
Such training within twelve (12)
months prior to employment shall
satisfy this requirement for the first
year of employment. Proof of training
shall be submitted to and approved by
the City. The annual training required
under this Subsection shall be in
addition to the first aid and CPR
requirement listed elsewhere in this
Section.
I. No Owner, Licensee, Director, or Staff
member shall directly or indirectly;
1. Use or permit the consumption or
use of any alcoholic beverage or
smoking on the Premises while the
children are present or are being cared
for; or
2. Possess, use or permit the
possession or use of any unlawful drug
or narcotic, including marijuana, on the
Premises.
3. Use or permit a Volunteer or
employee with a temporary license to
provide Day Care to a Child without
the physical presence and direct
supervision of a Licensee, Owner,
Director or licensed Staff member.
J. Every sleeping or resting child shall be
heard at all times by at least one (1)
Owner, Licensee, Director, or Staff,
either in person or via live feed audio
equipment.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2008-06,
05/05/2008; 2009-25, 12/21/2009; 2010-13,
07/06/2010; 2011-06, 06/20/2011; 2012-20,
09/17/2012)
Sec. 10-20. Child-Staff Ratios.
A. 1. A minimum Child-Staff ratio of
one (1) Director and/or Staff for every
ten (10) points or any fraction in excess
thereof shall be maintained by a Day
Care Facility at all times on the
Premises, indoors, outdoors, on field
trips and during rest periods. Any
points or fraction of points greater than
ten point zero (10.0) requires the
presence of one (1) additional Director
and/or Staff for every ten (10) points or
any fraction in excess thereof as
determined from the following chart:
Age of Child Points Per
Child*
0 to less than 2 years 3
2 to less than 3 years 2
3 to less than 5 years 1
5 to less than 7 years 0.83
7 to less than 13 years 0.66
13 years and over 0 (zero)
*Example: A Day Care Facility with
three (3) one-year-olds (9 points) and
one (1) four-year-old (1 point) must
maintain a Director and/or Staff of
one (1). The enrollment of an eightyear-
old Child (.66) to the Day Care
Facility requires the addition of
another Staff member.
2. Each Director and each Staff
member on the Premises who is
providing direct care or is actively
involved with children shall be
considered for purposes of computing a
Child-Staff ratio.
3. No unlicensed Volunteer shall be
counted for purposes of computing a
Child-Staff ratio.
§ 10-20 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 10-22
4. It shall be a violation of this
Chapter to operate a licensed Day Care
Facility with a Child-Staff ratio not in
compliance with this Section.
B. 1. On days where the school district
in which a child resides holds classes,
the number of children may be
increased with the addition of school
aged children (first grade and up) from
3:00 p.m. until 6:00 p.m. without
affecting the classification of Day Care
Facility, as set out herein. On days
where the school district in which a
child resides declares teacher work
days, snow days, vacation days or
otherwise cancels classes, the number
of children may be increased with the
addition of school-aged children (first
grade and up) without affecting the
classification of Day Care Facility as
set out herein.
a. Family Day Care Facility - up
to four (4) additional children.
b. Group Day Care Facility - up
to five (5) additional children.
c. Small Day Care Facility - up to
six (6) additional children.
d. Large Day Care Facility – up to
seven (7) additional children.
2. Children, for purposes of this
Subsection, shall include (a) every
school-aged child of the Owners,
Licensee, Director, and Staff present at
a Day Care Facility; (b) children
receiving direct care and supervision in
such child’s or legal guardian’s own
home; and (c) children who are
Related.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2009-25,
12/21/2009; 2010-05, 03/01/2010; 2010-13,
07/06/2010; 2011-06, 06/20/2011; 2012-20,
09/17/2012)
Sec. 10-21. No City Liability Created.
The issuance of a license by the City
pursuant to this Chapter shall not constitute
a representation of affirmance to any
person that the Day Care Facility or person
to whom a license is issued is free from risk
with regard to the standards in this Chapter.
The City shall not be liable for, nor shall a
cause of action exist, for any loss or
damage based upon the failure of any
person to meet the standards contained in
this Chapter, unless otherwise provided by
Idaho Code or Federal law.
(Ord. 2011-06, 06/20/2011)
Sec. 10-22. Penalties and Additional
Fees.
A. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof in a court of
competent jurisdiction, shall be
punished pursuant to this Code and the
Idaho Code. Each day of the violation
shall be considered a separate offense.
B. Any Applicant, Owner, Director, Staff
or Person convicted of a violation of
this Chapter shall be denied a license
and any current license shall be
revoked.
C. The Clerk may charge a Day Care
Facility Licensee an administrative fee
for every contact or inspection required
to ensure compliance with this Chapter
where such contact or inspection is in
excess of those necessary to process
the license initially. Such
administrative fee shall be established
from time to time by resolution duly
adopted by the Council, and shall be in
addition to any other fee(s) and/or
fine(s). Failure to pay such
administrative fee shall result in
revocation of the license for which
such contact or inspection is required.
(Ord. 2005-06, 02/07/2005; 2011-06,
06/20/2011)
§ 11-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 11-3
Chapter 11
VENDORS
Sec. 11-1: Purpose
Sec. 11-2: Definitions
Sec. 11-3: License Required
Sec. 11-4: Application for License.
Sec. 11-5: Background Check Required
Sec. 11-6: Renewal of License
Sec. 11-7: License Required / Health
and Fire Inspections
Sec. 11-8: Display of License, Prices
Required and Vendor
Identification
Sec. 11-9: Denial, Suspension, or
Revocation of License
Compliant
Sec. 11-10: Notice of Denial, Suspension
or Revocation
Sec. 11-11: Approval of Contiguous
Property Owner Required
Sec. 11-12: Hours of Operation
Sec. 11-13: Location
Sec. 11-14: Exemptions; License Not
Required
Sec. 11-15: Appeal
Sec. 11-16: Violation a Nuisance,
Summary Abatement
Sec. 11-17: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 11-1. Purpose.
To provide a means for merchants to
conduct Vending Operations on the public
right-of-way in designated areas of the City
while retaining the rights of the public in
the use of the public rights-of-way and
providing a means for regulation of
Vending for the protection of the public.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004)
Sec. 11-2. Definitions.
A. Mobile Vending Unit: A motorized
vehicle operated by a Vendor standing
on or within the frame of the vehicle,
which vehicle is capable of moving
under its own power.
B. Sidewalk Vending Unit: A portable
stand, structure, conveyance, pushcart,
cart, platform or location from which
sales of goods, wares, merchandise
and/or services are made or orders for
such are placed or taken.
C. Vending Operation(s): The act of
selling goods, wares, merchandise
and/or services on a public right-of-way
or the act of placing or taking orders for
goods, wares, merchandise and/or
services on a public right-of-way by
any person, including every owner of a
Vending Operation and his or her
employee(s).
D. Vending Site: The area or location
upon a public right-of-way within
which a licensed Vending Operation
may take place.
E. Vendor: Any person, including every
owner of a Mobile Vending Unit,
Sidewalk Vending Unit or Vending
Operation and his or her employee(s),
who engages in a Vending Operation in
the City.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2014-21,
12/01/2014)
Sec. 11-3. License Required.
A. Every person who intends to engage in
a Vending Operation within the City
shall be required to purchase an annual
license for each Vending Site which is
used for such Vending Operation. A
person so engaged shall not be relieved
from the provisions of this Chapter by
reason of association with any local
operating business dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer, nor by
conducting a temporary or transient
business in connection with or as a part
of or in the name of any local dealer,
trader, merchant, auctioneer or
business. The Vendor license shall be
posted at each Vending Site during all
Vending Operations.
B. Every licensed Vendor is required to
abide by the City of Moscow’s Policy
on Vendors as adopted by Moscow
City Council.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2014-21,
12/01/2014)
§ 11-4 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 11-5
Sec. 11-4. Application For License.
Proof of Registration
Application, Contents.
Application for a Vendor license, as
required by this Chapter, shall be in writing
upon a form to be furnished by the City and
made to the City through the City Clerk.
Every applicant shall supply a full set of
fingerprints with every application, except
that fingerprints will not be required for any
renewal that occurs within five (5) years of
the latest submittal of fingerprints by the
applicant. Applicant shall submit a copy of
applicant’s valid driver’s license or other
DMV approved identification.
The application for a Vendor license
shall contain all of the following
information:
A. Name, social security number, tax
identification number, driver's license
number and date and place of birth of
the applicant;
B. Permanent home and business address,
telephone number, and local address
and telephone number of the applicant;
C. A brief description of the nature of the
Vending Operation or business and of
the goods, wares, or merchandise to be
sold or services to be performed;
D. If the applicant is employed by another,
the current address or email address,
name, telephone number and facsimile
number of the applicant's employer;
E. A photograph of each applicant seeking
a Vendor license, taken within sixty
(60) days immediately prior to filing of
the application for license. Said picture
shall be approximately two (2) inches
by two (2) inches and shall show the
head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear manner;
F. A complete set of fingerprints of each
applicant in a form approved by the
Chief of Police or designee;
G. A sworn statement disclosing all
convictions of crimes, including
felonies and misdemeanors, and of
violations of City ordinances, the date
and the nature of each offense and the
penalty assessed therefor;
H. An acknowledgment by the applicant
that he/she understands that a Vendor
license, if granted, shall not be used or
represented as an endorsement by the
City for Vending Operations
thereunder;
I. The application shall be sworn to by
each applicant and shall be
accompanied by a license fee for each
person to be covered by such license, as
set from time to time by Resolution
duly adopted by Council.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2014-13,
08/18/2014)
Sec. 11-5. Background Check
Required
Before any Vendor license is issued
under this Chapter, the City shall complete
an investigation background check. New
fingerprints are required every five (5)
years.
A. Requirements. To determine the
suitability of prospective applicants for
a Vendor License, the City Police
Department and/or City Clerk for the
City of Moscow shall require an
applicant to provide information and
fingerprints necessary to obtain
criminal history information from the
Idaho State Police (ISP) and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
Pursuant to Idaho Code Section
67-3008, and congressional enactment
Public Law 92-544, the City Police
Department and/or City Clerk for the
City of Moscow shall submit the
required fees and a set of fingerprints
obtained from the applicant, to the ISP,
Bureau of Criminal Identification, for a
criminal records check of State and
National databases per Public Law
92-544. The submission of fingerprints
and information required by this section
shall be on forms prescribed by the ISP.
The City Police Department and/or City
Clerk for the City of Moscow is
authorized to receive criminal history
information from the ISP and from the
FBI for the purpose of evaluating the
fitness of applicants for Vendor
§ 11-5 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 11-9
License. As required by state and
federal law, further dissemination or
other use of the criminal history
information is prohibited. The
applicant authorizes the use of FBI
records for the screening process.
B. Background Check Guidelines. All
background checks require a complete
set of fingerprints; a signed statement
that contains the applicant’s name,
address, and date of birth appearing on
a valid identification document issued
by a governmental entity, as well as
furnishing if such applicant has or has
not been convicted of a crime, and the
particulars and description of the same.
(Ord. 2011-16, 09/19/2011; 2014-13,
08/18/2014; 2019-06, 07/01/2019)
Sec. 11-6. Renewal of License.
The City Clerk may renew a Vendor
license from year to year by appropriate
endorsement thereon. An application for
renewal of a Vendor license shall be in
writing on a form provided by the City.
The application shall be filled out with the
full name and current address of the
applicant along with the statement of the
date upon which the original Vendor
license was granted. A copy of applicant’s
valid driver’s license or other DMV
approved identification shall be provided.
The Vendor license fee, in an amount as set
from time to time by Resolution of the City
Council, shall be paid to the City for a
Vendor license.
(Ord. 2014-13, 08/18/2014)
Sec. 11-7. License Required/Health
and Fire Inspections.
When a Vendor proposes to sell any
product for human consumption, a
certification by the North Central Health
District shall be required prior to issuance
of a Vendor license. When deemed
necessary, and prior to the issuance of any
license, the City shall inspect and approve
each Vending Unit to assure compliance
with the Code, including, but not limited to,
any Uniform Codes contained therein.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16, 09/19/2011)
Sec. 11-8. Display of License, Prices
Required and Vendor
Identification.
Every person, while engaging in a
Vending Operation(s), must display in a
prominent and visible manner the Vendor
license issued by the City which allows
such operation and, in addition, shall
conspicuously post the price of every item
sold. Every Vendor shall conspicuously
display his or her name and business
telephone number(s) at the Vending Site
while engaging in Vending Operations.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16, 09/19/2011)
Sec. 11-9. Denial, Suspension, or
Revocation of License.
A license under this Chapter may be
denied, suspended or revoked for any of the
following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false
statement contained in the application
for the license;
B. Failure to properly and completely fill
out the application for the license;
C. Fraud, misrepresentation or false
statement made in the course of
carrying on a Vending Operation;
D. Where the applicant or licensee has:
1. Been found guilty of, plead guilty
to, received a withheld judgment, or
admitted to the elements of any of the
following enumerated crimes, or any
substantially similar provision of
foreign criminal violations,
notwithstanding the form of
judgment(s) or admitted that sufficient
evidence exists which could be likely to
convince a judge or jury to find the
applicant or person issued the Proof of
Registration to be guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt of such a crime:
a. Any felony as defined by Idaho
Code, Sections 18-111 and 18-111A,
within five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of application for
license or renewal;
b. Any violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 27,
Title 37, Idaho Code, similar provisions
in any other jurisdiction, within the past
§ 11-9 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 11-12
five (5) years immediately preceding
the date of application;
c. Any crime of physical violence
against persons, including but not
limited to battery and domestic battery
within the past five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of
application;
d. Any offense involving neglect
or any physical injury to, or other abuse
of, a Child, including any sex crime as
defined in Chapter 66, Title 18, Idaho
Code;
e. Rape as defined in Chapter 61,
Title 18, Idaho Code;
f. Injury to a Child as defined in
Idaho Code, Section 18-1501;
g. Trespassing as defined in Idaho
Code Section 18-7008(A)(8) or (9)
and/or Moscow City Code 10-1-5
within five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of application for
license;
h. Sexually abusing or exploiting
a Child as defined in Idaho Code,
Sections 18-1506 through 18-1508;
i. Stalking as defined in Idaho
Code Section 18-7905 within five (5)
years immediately preceding the date of
application for license;
j. Murder as defined in Idaho
Code, Sections 18-4001 and 18-4003;
k. Voluntary manslaughter as
defined in Idaho Code, Section
18-4006;
l. Kidnapping as defined in Idaho
Code, Section 18-4501;
m. Arson as defined in Idaho
Code, Sections 18-801 through 18-803;
n. Poisoning as defined in Idaho
Code, Section 18-4014;
o. Mayhem as defined in Idaho
Code, Section 18-5001; or
p. Any felony punishable by
death or imprisonment for life.
2 Received a withheld judgment
entered for any of the above offenses
within five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of application for
Proof of Registration.
E. Conducting a Vending Operation in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace or
public nuisance or so as to constitute a
menace to the health, safety or welfare
of the public;
F. Violation of any applicable rule or
regulation of Federal, State, County or
City health regulations;
G. Any violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16,
09/19/2011; 2016-09, 08/01/2016)
Sec. 11-10. Notice of Denial,
Suspension or Revocation.
Notice of denial, suspension or
revocation of a Vendor license shall be in
writing and mailed to the applicant at the
address of record on the original application
for such Vendor license.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16, 09/19/2011)
Sec. 11-11. Approval of Contiguous
Property Owner Required.
Where a Vending Site is on or
contiguous with private property, the
Vendor shall present to the City written
approval for such Vending Operation from
the contiguous property owner and/or
tenant. If placement of a Vending Unit on
the contiguous private property granting
permission to the Vendor is within five feet
(5’) of an adjacent property, as measured at
the property line closest to the property
owner(s) and/or tenant(s) granting
permission to the Vendor to utilize such
contiguous property, additional written
approval from the adjacent property
owner(s) and/or tenant(s) for use of such
Vending Site shall be presented to the City.
Such approval(s) shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16, 09/19/2011)
Sec. 11-12. Hours of Operation.
A. Every Vendor, except Mobile Vending
Operations, conducting Vending
business in City of Moscow’s Central
Business District, shall engage in
Vending Operations only between 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. local time unless
otherwise allowed by this Chapter or as
§ 11-12 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 11-14
approved by the City. Every Vending
Unit shall be removed from the public
right-of-way during non-Vending
Operation hours unless allowed by this
Chapter or as otherwise approved by
the City.
B. Mobile Vending Units operating in City
of Moscow’s Central Business District
shall engage in Vending Operations
only between 9:00 p.m. and 3:00 a.m.
local time unless otherwise allowed by
this Chapter or as approved by the City.
Every Vending Unit shall be removed
from the public right-of-way during
non-Vending Operation hours unless
allowed by this Chapter or as otherwise
approved by the City.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16,
09/19/2011; 2014-21, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 11-13. Location.
A. No Vendor shall have an exclusive
right to use of a particular Vending Site
nor shall a Vendor unnecessarily
impede the public.
B. A Vendor license shall not allow a
Vendor to conduct Vending Operations
where such is specifically prohibited by
the Zoning Code or by other provision
of this Code. No Vending Unit shall be
located within fifteen feet (15') of a fire
hydrant, fire escape, bus stop, loading
zone, or driveway of a fire station,
police station, school, or hospital.
C. The total operating area of a Sidewalk
Vending Unit Operation shall not
exceed thirty six (36) square feet of
sidewalk or public right-of-way, which
shall include the Vending Unit and,
when externally located, the Vendor
and trash receptacle. Sidewalk
Vending Units are not allowed to
operate within any public street or
alley, unless otherwise specifically
permitted.
D. No Mobile Vending Unit Operator can
secure a parking space that City allows
for Mobile Vending Operations by
parking any Vehicle, including the
Mobile Vending Unit, in a parking
space prior to Vending Operations with
the intention to use said parking space
for Mobile Vending Operations during
permitted hours. Mobile Vending
Units are not allowed to operate on any
sidewalk.
E. Every Vendor shall obey the direct
orders of a peace officer or duly
authorized City employee.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16,
09/19/2011; 2014-21, 12/01/2014)
Sec. 11-14. Exemptions; License Not
Required.
A Vendor license shall not be required
for the following:
1. Any activity protected by the
Constitution of the United States;
2. The distribution of goods or
information for which there is no
charge;
3. Vending Operations performed
occasionally by the contiguous property
owner and/or tenant (such as the setting
up of a sales or promotions table in
front of a downtown business, a yard
sale, or lemonade stand);
4. Vending Operations within the
location and during activities for which
a Downtown Special Event Permit is
required where the person issued the
Downtown Special Event Permit gives
permission to the Vendor for such
Vending Operations;
5. Vending Operations within the
location and during activities for which
a Park Special Event Permit is required
and the person issued the Park Special
Event Permit gives permission to the
Vendor for such Vending Operations;
6. Vending Operations within the
location and during Farmer's Market
where the Vendor is a current
authorized Farmer's Market Vendor;
7. Vending Operations occurring
pursuant to a Sidewalk Cafe License
issued by the City.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16,
09/19/2011)
§ 11-15 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 11-17
Sec. 11-15. Appeal.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of
denial, suspension or revocation of a
Vendor license by the City shall have
the right of appeal to the Council.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Clerk written notice thereof
within five (5) days after the denial or
the entry of the order of suspension or
revocation. The notice of appeal shall
specify an address at which the person
appealing may be given notice of
hearing on the appeal.
C. At the appeal hearing before the
Council, the person appealing shall be
entitled to appear in person and offer
testimony and evidence pertinent to the
denial, suspension or revocation, or
may appear through legal counsel. The
Clerk and/or legal counsel for the City
shall likewise be entitled to appear at
the hearing and offer testimony and
evidence in support of the denial, order
of suspension, or revocation. Failure
by applicant, person appealing, or their
representative to appear before Council
at the time scheduled to hear such an
appeal shall result in the automatic
denial of such appeal.
D. The Council shall determine whether
the denial, suspension or revocation
shall be sustained and shall make a
final reasoned statement in writing
within fifteen (15) business days
following the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16,
09/19/2011)
Sec. 11-16. Violation a Nuisance,
Summary Abatement.
The placement of any Vending Unit on
any public right-of-way in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. The City
may cause the immediate cessation of
Vending Operations and/or the removal of
any Vending Unit present on a public rightof-
way in violation of this Chapter. The
City is authorized to store such Vending
Unit until the owner thereof shall redeem it
by paying the removal and storage charges,
as set from time to time by Resolution duly
adopted by the Council.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16, 09/19/2011)
Sec. 11-17. Violations; Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction,
shall be punished pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2004-13, 04/05/2004; 2011-16, 09/19/2011)
§ 12-1 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 12-4
Chapter 12
SIDEWALK CAFÉ REGULATIONS
Sec. 12-1: Definitions
Sec. 12-2: Permit Required
Sec. 12-3: Application for Sidewalk
Café License
Sec. 12-4: Standards for Issuance of
License
Sec. 12-5: Liability and Hold Harmless
Agreement
Sec. 12-6: Conditions of License
Sec. 12-7: Denial, Revocation, or
Suspension of License
Sec. 12-8: Appeals
Sec. 12-9: Penalties
Sec. 12-1. Definitions.
A. Full Service Restaurant. An
establishment maintained, advertised
and held out to the public as primarily a
food eating establishment, where
individually priced meals are prepared
and regularly served to the public
primarily for on-premises consumption,
or an establishment where not less than
forty percent (40%) of its consumable
purchases are derived from the sale of
food and/or non-alcoholic beverages.
The full service restaurant shall also
have a dining room or rooms, kitchen,
and cooking facilities for preparation of
food (including stoves, ovens, and/or
refrigeration equipment).
B. Licensed Area. The area or location
upon public property and/or public
right-of-way and abutting an eating
and/or drinking establishment within
which a licensed Sidewalk Café may
operate.
B. Sidewalk. Sidewalk means that portion
of a street between the curb or lateral
lines of a roadway or other public rightof-
way and the abutting property lines
intended for use by pedestrians.
C. Sidewalk Café. An eating and/or
drinking establishment which serves
food and/or beverages on public
property or within a public right-of-way
as part of its business as an eating
and/or drinking establishment, pursuant
to City license.
(Ords. 2007-09, 08/20/2007; 2010-12,
06/07/2010)
Sec. 12-2. Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a Sidewalk Café without a
Sidewalk Café license as provided by this
Chapter. A Sidewalk Café license shall not
grant any person a property right or
property interest in the Licensed Area, any
public property, or right-of-way.
(Ord. 2007-09, 08/20/2007)
Sec. 12-3. Application for Sidewalk
Café License.
A. A person desiring to operate a Sidewalk
Café shall make written application to
the Clerk upon forms supplied by the
City.
B. A Sidewalk Café license shall be issued
for one (1) year, commencing on the
date of license issuance and ending at
midnight on December 31st of the year
of issuance.
C. An annual fee to be paid upon issuance
of a Sidewalk Café license shall be set
from time to time by Resolution duly
passed and adopted by the Council.
(Ord. 2007-09, 08/20/2007)
Sec. 12-4. Standards for Issuance of
License.
The Clerk shall issue a permit upon a
finding that:
A. The proposed Sidewalk Café will not
unreasonably interfere with pedestrian
traffic and/or other uses of the Licensed
Area and/or public rights-of-way.
B. The proposed Sidewalk Café shall
maintain an unobstructed pedestrian
access on the sidewalk of not less than
four contiguous feet (4’).
C. The applicant has met all other
applicable provisions of this Code as
well as the laws of the United States of
America, the State of Idaho, and Latah
County, Idaho, including, where
applicable, licenses to serve alcohol.
§ 12-4 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 12-6
D. A risk assessment has been performed
by the North Central District Health
Department on the applicant’s business
and the applicant has a current State
license authorizing the applicant to
serve food and beverages, where such
license is required.
E. The licensee shall demonstrate that
current, paid up, general liability
insurance has been obtained for each
Licensed Area in an amount not less
than Five Hundred Thousand Dollars
($500,000) combined single limits.
Such general liability insurance policy
shall be primary to any other insurance
related to the operation of the Sidewalk
Café and to that of any potential party
subject to a claim related to these
events. The City shall be named as an
additional insured on any insurance
policy of the licensee relating to the
operation of the Sidewalk Café. All
policies of insurance shall require ten
(10) days notice to City by certified
mail of any cancellation or change
affecting any interest of coverage. A
current certificate of insurance shall be
kept on file with the Clerk at all times.
F. A licensee who intends to serve
alcoholic beverages or allow such to be
consumed in the Sidewalk Café shall
meet the following additional
requirements:
1. The licensee shall have a valid
State, County, and City alcohol license
for lawful service of beer and/or wine
and/or liquor.
2. Service and/or consumption of
alcohol shall only occur in the Licensed
Area.
3. No taps, kegs, coolers, or other
alcoholic beverage storage devices
related to the Sidewalk Café are
allowed to be stored in the public rightof-
way; and
4. The licensee shall amend its
existing State, County, and City alcohol
license information to include the
Licensed Area.
5. Delineation of the Licensed Area
shall consist of a non-permanent
physical barrier such as a railing, potted
plants, decorative chain, fence, rope or
other physical barrier, as required and
approved by the City.
6. The licensee shall demonstrate that
the licensee has current, paid up,
Liquor Liability Insurance for each
Sidewalk Café in an amount not less
than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000)
combined single limits. Such insurance
shall be primary to any other insurance
related to the alcohol service by the
Sidewalk Café and to that of any
potential party subject to a claim
related to these events. City shall be
named as an additional insured on any
such insurance policy of the licensed
vendor or for the events described
herein. All policies of insurance shall
require ten (10) days notice to City by
certified mail of any cancellation or
change affecting any interest of
coverage. A current certificate of
insurance shall be kept on file with the
Clerk at all times.
(Ord. 2007-09, 08/20/2007; 2010-12,
06/07/2010)
Sec. 12-5. Liability and Hold
Harmless Agreement.
Every licensee shall hold City, its
agents, servants, employees, officers,
and/or contractors harmless, and shall
indemnify and defend any claim filed
against City, its agents, servants,
employees, officers and/or contractors for
any activities associated with the Sidewalk
Café, including the actions and/or inactions
of every person, licensee, owner, director,
employee, or agent.
(Ord. 2007-09, 08/20/2007)
Sec. 12-6. Conditions of License.
A. A Sidewalk Café license shall not be
issued in any zoning district other than
the Central Business (CB) Zoning
District.
B. A Sidewalk Café license shall not be
assigned to any other person or place.
C. If liquor is served or allowed to be
consumed in a Licensed Area, the
§ 12-6 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 12-8
establishment shall be a “full service
restaurant”, as that term is defined in
this Chapter.
D. The Sidewalk Café shall be specifically
limited to the Licensed Area shown in
the Sidewalk Café license and
accompanying diagram and shall take
up no more than fifty percent (50%) of
the unobstructed portion of the abutting
Sidewalk, except in accordance with
specific regulations adopted by the
Council by Resolution or as otherwise
authorized or permitted by City.
E. The proposed Sidewalk Café shall
maintain an unobstructed pedestrian
access on the sidewalk of not less than
four contiguous feet (4’).
F. The Sidewalk Café may operate only
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
midnight local time, and only during
hours the abutting eating and/or
drinking establishment is in operation.
G. No Sidewalk Café located within
Friendship Square shall operate during
Farmer’s Market hours of operation.
H. The Licensed Area, and all items
placed within it, shall at all times be
maintained in a clean and orderly
condition.
I. Only those items authorized by the
Sidewalk Café license and shown on
the diagram may be stored in the
Licensed Area when the Sidewalk Café
is not in operation.
J. The Licensed Area shall be returned to
the condition it was prior to the
Sidewalk Café license agreement
permitting operation of the Sidewalk
Café.
K. The Sidewalk Café shall conform to
any additional requirement established
from time to time by Resolution duly
passed and adopted by the Council.
(Ord. 2007-09, 08/20/2007; 2010-12,
06/07/2010; 2014-15, 09/15/2014)
Sec. 12-7. Denial, Revocation or
Suspension of License.
A. In the event that a licensee or applicant
has violated or cannot meet a condition
of approval or a provision of this
Chapter, the Clerk may seek the denial,
revocation, or suspension of the license.
B. Prior to the denial, revocation, or
suspension of a license as required
herein, the Clerk shall provide written
notice of such denial, revocation, or
suspension to the licensee or applicant,
as the case may be. Such written notice
shall state the reason(s) for such denial,
revocation, or suspension, and shall
state that such licensee or applicant
may request an appeal hearing as
provided herein. Notice of denial,
revocation, or suspension is effective
on the date such notice is placed in a
mailbox controlled by the United States
Postal Service. Failure by the City to
give notice as provided herein shall not
establish a right to a license under this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2007-09, 08/20/2007)
Sec. 12-8. Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of
denial, suspension or revocation of the
license by the Clerk shall have the right
of appeal to the Council.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Clerk written notice thereof
within ten (10) business days after the
denial or the entry of the order of
suspension or revocation. The notice of
appeal shall specify an address at which
the person appealing may be given
notice of hearing on the appeal.
C. At the appeal hearing before the
Council, the applicant or person
appealing shall be entitled to appear in
person and offer evidence pertinent to
the denial, suspension or revocation or
may appear through legal counsel. The
Clerk, Chief of Police, and/or legal
counsel for the City shall likewise be
entitled to appear at the hearing and
offer evidence in support of the denial,
order of suspension or revocation.
Failure by applicant, person appealing,
or their representative to appear before
Council at the time scheduled to hear
such an appeal shall result in the
automatic denial of such appeal.
§ 12-8 TITLE 9 — BUSINESS REGULATIONS § 12-9
D. The Council shall determine whether
the denial, suspension or revocation
shall be sustained and shall make a
final reasoned statement in writing
within fifteen (15) business days
following the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2007-09, 08/20/2007)
Sec. 12-9. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished
pursuant to this Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2007-09, 08/20/2007)
§ 1-1 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 1-5
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
Sec. 1-1: General Offense
Sec. 1-2: Deposits of Injurious
Material on Thoroughfares
Sec. 1-3: Expectorating on Sidewalk
or in Public Buildings
Sec. 1-4: False Representation
Sec. 1-5: Fraudulently Avoiding
Payment of Admission Fees
Sec. 1-6: Giving Assistance to Law
Enforcement Officers
Sec. 1-7: Keeping of Junk Restricted
Sec. 1-8: Malicious Injury to Property
Sec. 1-9: Mufflers; Unnecessary Noise
Sec. 1-10: Urinate
Sec. 1-11: Playing in Streets Prohibited
Sec. 1-12: Alcoholic Beverages, Open
Containers Prohibited
Sec. 1-13: Minors; Running Away
From Home
Sec. 1-14: False Alarm
Sec. 1-15: Trespass
Sec. 1-16: Public Nudity
Sec. 1-17: Throwing Substances at
Vehicles
Sec. 1-18: Laser Pointers
Sec. 1-19: Parades
Sec. 1-20: Selling from Vehicles on
Streets, Highways and Public
Rights-of-Way
Sec. 1-21: Tampering with Parking
Control Devices
Sec. 1-22: No Posting on Fences or
Buildings or Poles
Sec. 1-23: Prohibit Smoking in Bars
Sec. 1-24: Placement of Materials in
Thoroughfares Prohibited
Sec. 1-25: Fire Hydrant Obstruction
Sec. 1-26: Nuisance Fire Alarms
Prohibited
Sec. 1-1. General Offense.
It shall be unlawful for any person,
any owner of material, any owner of
property where material originated or came
from, or anyone acting on an owner’s
behalf, to commit any act or fail to perform
any requirement which is prohibited or
required by the Idaho Code, insofar as such
laws are applicable to City government.
(Ord. 2017-11, 08/31/2017)
Sec. 1-2. Deposits of Injurious
Material on
Thoroughfares.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon
any public thoroughfare any material or
substance injurious to person or property.
Ref. Idaho Code § 18-3096
Sec. 1-3. Expectorating on Sidewalk
or in Public Buildings.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
expectorate or spit upon any of the
sidewalks or upon any theater, public
building, church or room used for
public assemblies.
B. Any person violating the provisions of
this Section shall be deemed guilty of
an infraction and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished pursuant to
this Code and the Idaho code unless
otherwise specifically provided for in
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2000-20, 09/18/2000)
Sec. 1-4. False Representation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
falsely represent themself to be an officer
of the City or who shall attempt to
impersonate any such officer or who shall
without authority perform any official act
therein on behalf of an officer.
Ref. Idaho Code § 18-711
Sec. 1-5. Fraudulently Avoiding
Payment of Admission
Fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
fraudulently enter without payment of the
proper admission fees any theater, ballroom
lecture, concert, athletic event, or other
place where admission fees are charged,
provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prohibit or
restrict the free admission of law
enforcement officers, engaged in the
performance of police duties, to any place
of public entertainment or amusement.
§ 1-6 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 1-12
Sec. 1-6. Giving Assistance to Law
Enforcement Officers.
It shall be unlawful for any citizen of
the City over the age of eighteen (18) years
to refuse or neglect to render assistance to
any law enforcement officer when called
upon for such assistance.
Ref. Idaho Code § 18-707
Sec. 1-7. Keeping of Junk
Restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
store or keep any old articles or materials
which may be classed as junk, adjacent to
or in close proximity to any schoolhouse,
church, public park, public grounds,
business buildings or residence without first
providing proper and tight buildings or the
storage of the same.
Ref. Idaho Code § 40-1919
Sec. 1-8. Malicious Injury to
Property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully and maliciously injure, deface,
mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in
any manner interfere with or molest or
secret or destroy any real or personal
property belonging to or under the control
of any person.
Ref. Idaho Code § 18-7001
Sec. 1-9. Mufflers; Unnecessary
Noise.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any motor vehicle in such a
manner so as to create loud, offensive,
unnecessary or excessive noises. The
driver of any motor vehicle who shall
permit the vehicle to make any of the
following noises shall be in violation
of this Code Section:
1. The unnecessary acceleration or
deceleration of a motor vehicle so as to
cause squealing tires.
2. Excessive or unnecessary use of
the horn or other sound device on the
motor vehicle when the use of the horn
or sound device is not necessary to the
safety of the occupant of the vehicle,
pedestrians, or the drivers of other
motor vehicles.
3. The unnecessary acceleration or
deceleration of the engine of the motor
vehicle.
4. Any unnecessary offensive noise
created by use of the motor exhaust
system of said motor vehicle. If the
motor vehicle is not provided with a
good and sufficient muffler properly
attached or if the exhaust of the
muffler is ejected otherwise than
through such muffler or if the exhaust
is ejected toward the surface of the
street or ground, there shall be
considered to be a prima facie
violation of this Code Section, as it is
the intention of this Code Section to
compel the operation of such motor
vehicle in as noiseless a manner as
possible. The use of a muffler cutoff,
pipes or similar devices upon a motor
vehicle in any of the streets or
roadways of the City shall likewise be
considered a violation of this Code
Section.
B. Any person violating the provisions of
this Section shall be deemed guilty of
an infraction, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished pursuant to
this Code and the Idaho Code unless
otherwise specifically provided for in
this Chapter.
Ref. Idaho Code § 49-937; (Ord. 2000-20,
09/18/00)
Sec. 1-10. Urinate.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
urinate or defecate in any place open to
public view.
Sec. 1-11. Playing in Streets
Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
play ball, catch, or other game, or throw
any ball or other object to and fro upon any
public thoroughfare in the City.
Sec. 1-12. Alcoholic Beverages.
A. Open Containers Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
transport or have physical possession
or control of any alcoholic or
§ 1-12 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 1-15
intoxicating beverage in an open or
unsealed container of any kind on or
in any public place or place to which
the public has or is permitted to have
access, including, but not limited to,
any place, structure, or conveyance,
except in accordance with specific
regulations adopted by the Council by
Resolution for events in the Moscow
Central Business (CB) zoning district;
in the Moscow Motor Business (MB)
zoning district for any eating and/or
drinking establishment located within
the MB zone where business is
adjacent to a public right-of-way of a
street designated as a local street on
the 2010 City of Moscow Functional
Classification Map; in City Parks;
pursuant to a Sidewalk Café license;
or as otherwise authorized or
permitted by City.
B. Exemption to Open Containers
Prohibition.
This Ordinance shall not be in effect
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. in any place located within
6th Street to the North, South Rayburn
to the East and south, and Perimeter
Drive to the West and South, on days
when the University of Idaho has
home football games, provided that
any alcoholic beverage is held in an
opaque plastic or paper container that
is not labeled or branded by an alcohol
manufacturer or distributor.
(Ord. 98-38, 11/16/98; 2007-09, 08/20/2007;
2015-05, 03/16/2015; 2016-13, 09/19/2016;
2017-08, 08/07/2017)
Sec. 1-13. Minors; Running Away
From Home.
A. It shall be unlawful for any
unemancipated person under the age
of eighteen (18) years, living or found
in the City to be or to remain a person
who has run away from his or her
parent(s), guardian, or other legal
custodian.
B. It shall be unlawful for any
unemancipated person under the age of
eighteen (18) years to be absent from
his or her residence for a period of
more than twelve (12) consecutive
hours without the permission of his or
her parent(s), guardian, or other legal
custodian.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person by
any act or neglect to encourage, aid,
abet, or cause any unemancipated
person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to run away from or to remain
away from his or her parents,
guardian, or other legal custodian or to
place such unemancipated person
under the age of eighteen (18) years of
age beyond the control of his or her
parents, guardians, or other legal
custodian.
Ref. Idaho Code § 18-1510 (Ord. 2000-25,
10/16/2000; Ord. 2000-28, 12/18/2000)
Sec. 1-14. False Alarm.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
intentionally make, turn in, or give a false
alarm of fire, or of need for police,
emergency or ambulance assistance, or aid
or abet in the commission of such act.
Ref. Idaho Code § 18-6711A
Sec. 1-15. Trespass.
Every person who willfully commits
any trespass upon the property of another
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Acts of trespass shall include the following:
A. Entering real property, or driving
vehicle (as defined by Idaho Code
§49-123[2]) upon, belonging to or
lawfully occupied by another and
known not to be open to the general
public, without the consent of the
owner, his agent, or the person in
lawful possession thereof.
B. Refusing or failing to leave land, real
property, or structures belonging to or
lawfully occupied by another and not
open to the general public, upon being
requested to leave by a police officer
or the owner, his agent, or person in
lawful possession thereof.
C. Entering or remaining upon any real
property after first being notified in
writing by the owner of such real
§ 1-15 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 1-18
property or the owner’s authorized
agent, as follows:
1. The named person shall not enter
upon the described real property;
2. The reason(s) for which the
owner of the real property or the
owner’s authorized agent is providing
notice to the named person; and
3. The period of time during which
the named person shall not enter upon
the real property.
D. Any person who enters any vehicle (as
defined by Idaho Code Section 49-
123(2)), whether locked or unlocked,
whether public or private, without the
permission of the owner or person
entitled to possession or in control
thereof.
E. Any person who lodges in any
building structure, vehicle, or place,
whether public or private, without the
permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession or control
thereof.
(Ord. 97-28, 8/25/97)
Ref. Idaho Code §§ 18-7008, 18-7011
Sec. 1-16. Public Nudity.
A. Definitions:
1. Pubescent or post pubescent
female breast. This shall include the
entire breast once a female begins
puberty and continuing throughout her
adult life, but shall not include any
portion of breast cleavage.
2. Breast cleavage. The middle
depression or furrow between
pubescent or post-pubescent female
breasts. The nipple, the entire areola,
and the area contiguous to the areola
including the cleft between the breast
and the body below the areola which
extends upward toward the arm or
underarm is not considered cleavage.
3. Opaque. Material which is not
transparent or translucent. Body paint,
body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex
whether wet or dried, and similar
substances shall not be considered
opaque covering.
B. No person shall willfully expose to
view or fail to cover completely and
opaquely any portion of such person's
anus, cleft of the buttocks, genitals,
and the pubescent or postpubescent
female breast on or in any public place
or place open to public view.
C. Exposure of any portion of a female's
breast while she is in the act of
breastfeeding a baby is not a violation
of this Section.
D. This Section shall not apply to a
person who is prepubescent.
(Ord. 82-1487, 3/1/82) Ref. Idaho Code § 18-
4101 et seq.; Ord. 2002-13, 07/15/2002
Sec. 1-17. Throwing Substances at
Vehicles.
Any person who throws, projects,
propels, or causes or allows any substance
to be thrown, projected, or propelled at a
vehicle or any occupant thereof on a
highway or other public way is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 97-29, 8/25/97)
Sec. 1-18. Laser Pointers.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
direct light from a laser pointer at or
from an occupied motor vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to
direct light from a laser pointer at a
uniformed police officer, uniformed
security guard, uniformed emergency
communications officer, uniformed
firefighter, uniformed emergency
medical worker, or uniformed City,
State or Federal peace officer or into
the public office of any such
individual while occupied.
C. 1. “Laser pointer” shall mean any
device designed to emit light
amplified or concentrated by the
stimulated emission of radiation that is
visible to the human eye, for purposes
of this Code section.
2. “Motor Vehicle” shall mean
every apparatus defined at Idaho Code
Section 49-123(V)(2)(g) for purposes
of this Code Section.
(Ord. 00-07, 05-15-2000)
§ 1-19 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 1-22
Sec. 1-19. Parades.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct a parade upon any public
street, sidewalk or alley, or to
knowingly participate in any parade
unless a permit for such a parade has
been granted as provided in this
Chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to
intentionally obstruct or to interfere
with the orderly progress or conduct of
a parade for which a permit has been
issued.
C. Any person who wishes to conduct a
parade shall apply for a parade permit
from the City Clerk at least twenty
(20) days prior to the scheduled event
unless good cause is shown that
applying for a parade permit less than
twenty (20) days prior to the parade is
necessary. The application shall be in
writing on a form provided by the
Clerk. The parade permit applicant
shall pay any fees required as a
condition of such permit. A parade
permit fee shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the
Council.
D. Where a parade has already been
permitted for the traditional parade
route along Main Street, subsequent
parade permit applicants for that same
time period shall be given a different
time or route for their subsequent
parade in order of receipt by the Clerk.
(Ord. 2000-22, 10/02/2000)
Sec. 1-20. Selling from Vehicles on
Streets, Highways and
Public Rights-of-Way.
No person shall sell or offer for sale or
place or take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise and/or services from a
vending unit, pushcart, vehicle, or other
conveyance which is in a City street,
highway, or public right-of-way, unless
otherwise permitted by the City or by this
Code.
(Ord. 2004-14, 04/05/2004)
Sec. 1-21. Tampering with Parking
Control Devices.
A. Offense: It shall be unlawful for any
person to deface, injure, tamper with,
open, break, destroy, or impair the
usefulness of any parking control
device.
B. Definitions:
1. “Parking Control Device”, for
purpose of this section, shall mean any
motor vehicle immobilization unit
(such as a vehicle boot, wheel locking
mechanism, or the like), tire marking,
or parking meter employed by the City
for the purpose of regulating parking.
2. “Motor Vehicle”, shall mean
every apparatus defined at Idaho Code
Section 49-123(V)(2) for the purposes
of this Code Section.
3. “Parking Meter”, for purpose of
this Section, shall mean a mechanical
device located upon public property,
streets, or sidewalks in a place
designated by the City as a parking
meter zone, which shall record a
certain number of minutes by the use
of a clock mechanism determining the
period of time for which parking
privileges may be extended to the
person depositing money therein.
(Ord. 2000-17, 09/05/2000)
Sec. 1-22. No Posting on Fences or
Buildings or Poles.
A. No person shall post, paint, tack, tape
or otherwise attach or cause to be
attached, any notice, sign, announcement,
or other advertising matter to
any fence, wall, building, tree, bridge,
awning, post, apparatus or other
property not belonging to said person
without first obtaining the consent of
the owner or lessee of such property or
their agent(s) or representative(s). No
person shall post, paint, tack, tape or
otherwise attach or cause to be
attached any notice, sign,
announcement, or other advertising
matter to any telephone or electric
pole within the City.
§ 1-22 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 1-23
B. No notice, sign, announcement, or
other advertising matter shall be
posted on public property or public
right-of-way without prior approval, in
writing, from the governmental entity
owning or controlling such public
property or public right-of-way. This
provision shall not apply to property
or areas which have been otherwise
specifically approved for posting of
notices, signs, announcements, or
other advertising or similar matter by
the City or property owner or their
agent(s) or representative(s).
(Ord. 2009-10, 05/18/2009)
Sec. 1-23. Prohibit Smoking in Bars.
A. Purpose. To provide breathable, clean,
and smoke-free indoor air to protect
the health of residents, visitors,
employees, non-smokers, and patrons
of a bar or a private club within the
City by prohibiting smoking in a bar or
a private club or within twenty feet
(20’) of entrances or exits of a bar or a
private club.
B. Offense.
1. It shall be unlawful for any
person to smoke, or for an owner,
manager, bartender, server, or
employee to allow another to smoke
within a bar or private club or within
twenty feet (20’) of entrances or exits
of a bar or private club within the City,
except in a Contiguous or Adjacent
Outdoor Area.
2. It shall be unlawful for any
person to smoke within twenty feet
(20’) of entrances or exits of any
public place where smoking is
prohibited by the Idaho Indoor Clean
Air Act.
C. Definitions.
1. Bar. Any indoor area open to the
public operated primarily for the sale
and service of alcoholic beverages for
on-premises consumption and where
the service of food is incidental to the
consumption of such alcoholic
beverages or no person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years is permitted,
except as otherwise provided by Idaho
Code. Bar may include, but is not
limited to, any part of a tavern, a
restaurant, nightclub, cocktail lounge,
and cabaret.
2. Contiguous or Adjacent Outdoor
Area. An unenclosed, outdoor area,
owned, leased, occupied, and/or
controlled by a bar or private club
which is contiguous with or adjacent
to such bar or private club and used for
outdoor dining, gathering, or
recreation and which does not allow
smoke to enter into entrances, exits,
windows or ventilation intakes of the
bar or private club with which it is
contiguous or adjacent and which can
be entered only from an interior bar or
private club entrance or exit and not
from the main public entrance or exit
of such bar or private club.
3. Private Club. An organization,
whether incorporated or not, which is
the owner, lessee, or occupant of a
building or portion thereof used
exclusively for such organization’s
purposes at all times; is operated
primarily for a recreational, fraternal,
social, patriotic, political, benevolent,
or athletic purpose; and for the
exclusive use of such organization’s
members and guests.
4. Restaurant. An eating
establishment including, but not
limited to, a coffee shop, cafe,
cafeteria, and private and public
school cafeteria, which gives or offers
for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees, as well as kitchens and
catering facilities in which food is
prepared on the premises for serving
elsewhere.
5. Smoking. The inhaling, exhaling
or burning of tobacco or the carrying
or possession of any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, or pipe of any kind.
D. Administrative Procedure and
Administrative Fine.
In order to eliminate over-burdening
the court system and as a convenience
to the public, a person named on a
§ 1-23 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 1-26
notice of violation may pay the
administrative fine (as established
from time to time by Resolution of the
Council) to the City within fourteen
(14) days of the date of issuance of the
notice of such violation.
E. Penalty.
1. In the event an administrative fine
is not paid within fourteen (14) days of
the issuance of notice of the violation,
a uniform citation alleging an
ordinance violation shall be filed in the
Magistrate Division of the Second
Judicial District Court.
2. Any person found in violation of
this Section shall pay an infraction
penalty in the amount set forth in a
Resolution duly adopted by Council
from time to time, up to and including
such person’s third offense. Upon
conviction for a fourth offense under
this Section, any person found
violating any of the provisions of this
Section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished pursuant to
this Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2009-14, 08/04/2009)
Sec. 1-24. Placement of Materials in
Thoroughfares Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person,
any owner of material, any owner of
property where material originated or came
from, or anyone acting on an owner’s
behalf, to deposit or place in or upon any
public thoroughfare any snow, ice, leaves,
shrubs, branches, grass or other organic or
inorganic substances or materials, without
first obtaining the specific permission or
instruction of the City.
(Ord. 2009-20, 10/05/2009; 2017-11, 08/31/2017)
Sec. 1-25. Fire Hydrant Obstruction.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or
other person responsible for any land,
building, or lot within the City upon which
there is a fire hydrant or which is adjacent
to a fire hydrant to allow any obstruction
(including snow and/or ice displaced by
City snowplows) to interfere with or to
block maintenance, repair or emergency
service access to a fire hydrant.
(Ord. 2009-20, 10/05/2009)
Sec. 1-26. Nuisance Fire Alarms
Prohibited.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this
Subsection, the following terms,
phrases, and words shall have the
following meanings:
1. “Nuisance fire alarm(s)” shall
mean activation or allowing to be
activated a fire alarm, smoke alarm, or
any audible alarm that results in a
response by a local first responder and
that is not the result of a fire or other
emergency. “Nuisance fire alarm(s)”
includes, but is not limited to, a
negligently or accidentally activated
alarm signal(s) that are the result of
faulty, malfunctioning, or improperly
installed or maintained equipment.
“Nuisance fire alarm(s)” shall not
include alarm signal(s) activated by
severe weather conditions or within
the initial thirty (30) day period
following new installation of such
alarm(s) knowingly activated in order
to test such alarm(s).
2. “Local first responder” shall
mean members of the Moscow Fire
Department, Moscow Volunteer Fire
Department, Moscow Police
Department, and/or Moscow
Volunteer Ambulance Company.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person,
owner, or occupier of a premises
within the City which is protected by a
fire and/or smoke alarm or other
audible alarm to cause or allow to be
caused more than two (2) nuisance fire
alarms on such premises within any
twelve (12) month period of time.
C. Penalty. Any person, owner, or
occupier of a premises found in
violation of this Section shall pay an
infraction penalty in the amount set
forth in a Resolution duly adopted by
Council from time to time.
(Ord. 2010-14, 07/19/2010)
§ 2-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 2-1
Chapter 2
ABANDONED CONTAINERS
Sec. 2-1: Unlawful Act Defined
Sec. 2-1. Unlawful Act Defined.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
leave or permit to remain outside of any
dwelling, building or other structure, or
within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, dwelling or other structure under
such person’s control, in a place accessible
to children, any abandoned, unattended or
discarded ice box, refrigerator or other
container which has a door or lid, snaplock
or other locking device which may not be
released from the inside, without first
removing said door or lid, snaplock or
other locking device or by first fastening,
bolting or locking the same in such a
manner that it is impossible to open the
same by the use of the hands.
Ref. Idaho Code § 18-5816
§ 3-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-4
Chapter 3
WEAPONS
Sec. 3-1: Definitions
Sec. 3-2: Concealed Weapons
Sec. 3-3: Discharge of Weapons
Prohibited
Sec. 3-4: Exceptions, Permits
Sec. 3-1. Definitions.
A. Nunchuks or Nunchakus. A weapon
made from two (2) sticks or rods
connected by rope, chain, cord, string
or cable.
B. Sai. A weapon with a sword-like
blade with one (1) or two (2) shorter
prongs on either side of the blade.
C. Throwing Star or Shuriken. A weapon
made in the form of a thin flat metal
star shaped disk with edges that may
be sharpened.
D. Tonfa. A weapon with a short handle
connected to a long stick or rod. The
handle is connected to the stick at a
right angle.
E. Weapon. Includes any instrument
used in the propulsion of shot, shell,
projectile, or bullets or other harmful
objects by the action of gunpowder
exploded within it, or by the action of
compressed air or accelerant within it,
or by the power of springs or other
means of propulsion, launch,
expulsion or release of a projectile,
and including what are commonly
known as air rifles, pellet guns, BB
guns, spud guns, slings or flippers.
(Ord. 98-25, 7/20/98)
Sec. 3-2. Concealed Weapons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry concealed upon or about his or her
person any brass knuckles, revolver, pistol,
dagger, stiletto, gravity knife, sai, throwing
star, nunchuks, or tonfa, or any other
deadly weapon, unless authorized pursuant
to Idaho Code Title 18, Chapter 33.
Ref. Idaho Code § 18-3302
Sec. 3-3. Discharge of Weapons
Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person,
unless authorized pursuant to Idaho Code
Title 18, Chapter 33, to discharge firearms
or weapons of any kind or description
within the City; this Code Section shall
include hand guns, rifles, pellet guns, air
rifles, BB guns, sling shots, flippers, bows
and arrows, and other projectiles;
providing, however, that this Code Section
shall not apply to law enforcement officers
in the discharge of their duties.
(Ord. 84-18, 8/20/84)
Sec. 3-4. Exceptions, Permits.
Any time the City may, upon
application, grant permits to shooting
galleries, gun clubs and others for shooting
within the City limits in fixed localities and
under fixed rules. Such permits shall be in
writing attested by the City, conforming to
such requirements as the Council shall
demand and the permit thus issued shall be
subject to revocation at any time by action
of the City.
(Ord. 84-18, 8/20/84); Ref. Idaho Code § 18-3302(G)
§ 4-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 4-7
Chapter 4
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Sec. 4-1: Grazing in Streets and
Alleys Prohibited
Sec. 4-2: Owner's Permission
Necessary to Graze
Sec. 4-3: Permission Required to
Move Animals
Sec. 4-4: Animals Prohibited on
Sidewalk
Sec. 4-5: Animals at Large Prohibited
Sec. 4-6: Animals to be Captured
Sec. 4-7: Notice of Impoundment
Sec. 4-8: Sale of Impounded Animals
Sec. 4-9: Reclaiming Animals Before
Sale
Sec. 4-10: Impounding Fees
Sec. 4-11: Owner May Receive
Proceeds of Sale
Sec. 4-12: Maintaining Certain Animals
Regulated
Sec. 4-13: Hogs and Pigs
Sec. 4-14: Locations; Structures; Pens;
Enclosures
Sec. 4-15: Exception
Sec. 4-16: Inspection
Sec. 4-17: Loading Pens and Sale
Yards
Sec. 4-18: Exempt Area
Sec. 4-19: Penalties
Sec. 4-1. Grazing in Streets and
Alleys Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
stake by rope or otherwise, for the purpose
of feeding or grazing any animal on, in or
about any street or alley within the City. If
any animal be staked, roped or fastened in
any manner, in or upon any street or alley
for the purpose above mentioned, said
animal shall be deemed a stray and shall be
impounded as herein provided.
Ref. Idaho Code § 25-2112
Sec. 4-2. Owner's Permission
Necessary to Graze.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
graze, stake by rope or otherwise, any
animal on, in or about any vacant ground,
lot or premises or any private premises,
whether vacant or occupied, within the
corporate limits without first having
obtained the written consent and
permission from the owner or occupant of
such lot, land or premises.
Sec. 4-3. Permission Required to
Move Animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
drive or cause to be driven any loose
animals whatever, in, on, through or across
any street or alley within the City without
first having obtained the written permission
from the Chief of Police. Provided,
however, that any person may drive not to
exceed one head of any such loose animal
through or across any street or alley
without first having obtained such written
consent of the said Chief of Police.
Sec. 4-4. Animals Prohibited on
Sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit or allow any animal, while the same
is being driven loose in, on, through or
across any street or alley to walk, tread or
travel upon any of the sidewalks in the
City.
Sec. 4-5. Animals at Large
Prohibited.
Animals shall not be allowed to run at
large or to be herded in any of the streets,
alleys, parks or public places or upon any
private premises except those being driven
through for shipment or other purposes or
unless such owner shall first obtain
permission from the owner of said private
premises.
Ref. Idaho Code § 25-2112
Sec. 4-6. Animals to be Captured.
Any of the animals found at large
within the City may be captured by any
City or law enforcement officer or by any
person and delivered to the Chief of Police
and impounded in a pound; such animals
shall be provided with proper care, food
and water while so confined.
Sec. 4-7. Notice of Impoundment.
The Chief of Police shall give
immediate notice of the capture of such
§ 4-7 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 4-12
animal by posting three (3) notices of sale
containing a description thereof and the
time and place of sale, in a conspicuous
place and shall have a copy of such notice
published in the official newspaper for a
period of ten (10) days.
Ref. Idaho Code § 25-2308
Sec. 4-8. Sale of Impounded
Animals.
If any animal so captured be unclaimed
by the owner thereof at the expiration of
said ten (10) days from the date of such
notice, the Chief of Police shall sell the
same at public auction; and after deducting
the City’s legal fees and all costs and
expenses of capture, keeping and selling,
shall pay the remainder of the proceeds of
such sale to the City.
Sec. 4-9. Reclaiming Animals
Before Sale.
If at any time before such sale the
owner of any animal so captured shall
claim the same, such owner shall be
entitled to the possession thereof upon the
payment of all legal charges and expenses
incident to such capture and keeping.
Sec. 4-10. Impounding Fees.
The City Chief of Police shall be
entitled to receive reasonable compensation
for the capture and keeping of animals and
five percent (5%) of the proceeds of any
sale. The City shall make no charge for
preparing or posting notice of sale.
Ref. Idaho Code § 25-2309
Sec. 4-11. Owner May Receive
Proceeds of Sale.
If the owner of any animal sold under
the provisions of this Chapter shall, at any
time within one (1) year from date of such
sale, make satisfactory proof of ownership,
such owner shall be entitled to receive the
net profit of such sale on deposit in the
City.
Ref. Idaho Code § 25-2207
Sec. 4-12. Maintaining Certain
Animals Regulated.
A. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain
any fowl, rabbits, horses, cows, sheep
or goats within the City, except as
provided in this Chapter or as
specifically provided elsewhere in this
Code.
1. a. Fowl. For purposes of this
subsection, “fowl” shall mean
domesticated birds (galliformes and
anseriformes), and shall include
chickens, ducks, and geese but shall not
include peafowl, guinea fowl,
ostriches, or emus.
i. A person may lawfully
maintain six (6) fowl which are
more than twelve (12) weeks
from hatch per lot of not less
than five thousand (5,000)
square feet and one (1)
additional fowl more than
twelve (12) weeks from hatch
for each additional twelve
hundred fifty (1,250) square
feet per lot up to a total of
twelve (12) fowl more than
twelve (12) weeks from hatch
per lot.
ii. A person may also maintain
up to twenty five (25) fowl not
more than twelve (12) weeks
from hatch, per lot which is of
not less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet, if such
fowl are not intended for sale
and do not comprise a
commercial agricultural use, as
demonstrated by the person
keeping or maintaining such
fowl.
iii. It shall be unlawful for a
person to keep or maintain
male fowl within the City
limits except for a time period
not to exceed twelve (12)
weeks from hatch, as
demonstrated by the person
keeping or maintaining such
male fowl.
iv. In no event shall the coop
and/or run constructed for
containing fowl be less than
twenty five feet (25’) from a
dwelling other than that of the
§ 4-12 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 4-14
person keeping or maintaining
fowl.
v. It shall be unlawful for a
person to keep or maintain
peafowl, guinea fowl,
ostriches, or emus within City
limits.
vi. This subsection shall not
apply to zoning districts which
allow commercial agricultural
uses, or to areas otherwise
exempted by this Code or to
uses specifically permitted by
this Code.
b. Domesticated Turkeys.
Domesticated turkeys are allowed
within City limits pursuant to the
following minimum standards:
i. A person may lawfully
maintain up to a total of three
(3) female domesticated
turkeys which are more than
twenty five (25) weeks from
hatch per lot of not less than
five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
ii. A person may also maintain
up to six (6) domesticated
turkeys not more than twenty
five (25) weeks from hatch, per
lot which is of not less than
five thousand (5,000) square
feet, if such turkeys are not
intended for sale and do not
comprise commercial
agricultural use, as
demonstrated by the person
keeping or maintaining such
turkeys.
iii. In no event shall the coop
and/or run constructed for
maintaining domesticated
turkeys be less than forty feet
(40’) from a dwelling other
than that of the person keeping
or maintaining such turkeys.
iv. This subsection shall not
apply to zoning districts which
allow commercial agricultural
uses, or to areas otherwise
exempted by this Code or for
uses specifically permitted by
this Code.
c. Rabbits. To maintain and keep
rabbits, there must be at least five
thousand (5,000) square feet of real
property for each twenty-five (25)
rabbits, and in no event shall any
person keep or maintain more than fifty
(50) rabbits, and in no event shall the
rabbit hutch, or rabbit run be less than
forty feet (40’) from a dwelling other
than that of the owner.
2. To maintain or keep one (1) cow,
or one (1) horse, or one (1) goat, or one
(1) sheep, the owner must have at least
ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
real property for one (1) animal and
five thousand (5,000) square feet for
each additional animal.
B. Fences enclosing such animals shall be
so constructed as to prevent the animals
from leaving the lot of the person(s)
keeping or maintaining such animals.
(Ord. 2009-23, 11/16/2009)
Sec. 4-13. Hogs and Pigs.
It shall be unlawful to maintain any
hogs or pigs within the City except as
hereinafter specifically provided in this
Chapter.
Sec. 4-14. Locations; Structures;
Pens; Enclosures.
Animal locations, structures, pens,
corrals, and any other premises or
structures used for the keeping of and
maintaining of horses, cows, sheep, goats,
rabbits, chickens, doves and pigeons must
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
free from obnoxious odors and substances.
All persons who keep or maintain any
horses, cows, sheep, goats, rabbits,
chickens, doves, or pigeons shall keep them
confined at all times in enclosures strong
enough, or staked out, or picketed on the
premises, or in such a manner as to prevent
said animals or fowl from going upon the
premises or property of another. It shall be
unlawful for any person keeping or
maintaining any of said animals or fowl to
allow the same to create a disturbance to
the residents in the particular locality by
§ 4-14 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 4-19
creating any noise, odor or damage to the
adjacent property, and the keeping and
maintaining of said animals and fowl shall
not interfere with the peaceful and quiet
enjoyment of such property by such
adjacent owner and residents.
Sec. 4-15. Exception.
When the requirements to maintain an
animal pursuant to this Chapter cannot be
met by the owner, the owner may request a
permit to keep or maintain fowl or animals,
provided the owner submits a statement
signed by more than seventy five percent
(75%) of the property owners within a
radius of two hundred feet (200’) of said
property. The request for the permit will
be acted upon by the Council in a public
meeting.
Sec. 4-16. Inspection.
Whenever the City shall determine that
the requirements of the Chapter, this Code,
or the Idaho Code are not being complied
with, it shall cause a written notice to be
sent to the owner. The owner shall have
forty-eight (48) hours from the time of
receipt of the notice to comply with the
requirements or cause the animal or fowl to
be removed from the property.
Sec. 4-17. Loading Pens and Sale
Yards.
For the purpose of selling, loading and
shipping any horses, cows, pigs, goats,
chickens, and other fowl, it shall be lawful
to keep the same in loading pens provided
for said purpose, but no such animals shall
be kept in such pens within the City, for a
period of more than thirty-six (36) hours
except by written permission of the City.
Sec. 4-18. Exempt Area.
The following described area shall be
exempt from the requirements of Code
Section 10-4-12 through Code Section 10-
4-17: South of the Pullman Road and west
of the projection to the centerline of
Rayburn Street.
Sec. 4-19. Penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of
this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code unless otherwise
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2000-20, 09/18/2000)
§ 5-1 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 5-1
CHAPTER 5
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
Sec. 5-1: Definitions
Sec. 5-2: Dog Registration Required;
Fees
Sec. 5-3: Exceptions
Sec. 5-4: Dog Tag and Collar
Sec. 5-5: Dogs at Large and Tethering
Sec. 5-6: City Animal Shelter
Sec. 5-7: Impounding
Sec. 5-8: Redemption
Sec. 5-9: Disposition of Unclaimed,
Dangerous or Rabid Animals
Sec. 5-10: Citation to Owner
Sec. 5-11: Off-Leash Area Limitations
Sec. 5-12: Nuisance by Animals
Sec. 5-13: Dog Limitations
Sec. 5-14: Wild or Vicious Animals
Sec. 5-15: Rabies Vaccination of Dogs,
Cats, and Ferrets
Sec. 5-16: Trapping Regulations
Sec. 5-17: Other Acts Prohibited
Sec. 5-18: Penalties
Sec. 5-1. Definitions.
Terms as used in this Chapter are
defined as follows, unless the context
otherwise indicates:
A. At Large shall be intended to mean off
the premises of the owner and/or
handler and not under physical control
of the owner and/or handler or a
member of the owner’s and/or
handler’s immediate family or an
agent or employee of the owner by
leash, cord or chain sufficiently strong
to prevent the dog from escaping.
B. Dog. Dog shall be intended to mean
both male and female.
C. Dog Park. An area enclosed with a
minimum of five feet (5’) high fencing
suitable to contain any and all dogs,
and designated by the City as a Dog
Park. Dog Park is intended to be a
place where dogs are permitted to be
off-leash in a controlled environment
with supervision from the dog(s)
owner(s) or handler(s), and shall be
subject to rules enumerated by the
City’s Parks and Recreation
Department.
D. Handler. Person who has assumed
responsibility of such dog, regardless
of ownership and even temporarily,
within City limits, including, but not
limited to, Off-Leash Areas,
designated dog parks, and areas where
the leash law is in effect.
E. Leash shall be intended to mean a
cord, chain or rope of the length to
restrict the dog to the owner's and/or
handler’s property and, when the dog
is off the owner's and/or handler’s
property, the leash shall be not more
than eight feet (8’) in length.
F. Off-Leash Area shall be intended to be
a permissible place for dogs to run at
large under the voice control of their
owner and/or handler and shall be
subject to rules enumerated by the
City’s Parks and Recreation
Department.
G. Owner shall be intended to mean any
person, owning, keeping or harboring
a dog.
H. Tethered shall be intended to mean to
fasten or restrain a dog or other animal
by any means to an object so that it
can range only within a set area.
I. Vicious Animal. Any animal which
has previously attacked or bitten any
person or persons or other animal
without reasonable cause or which has
behaved in such manner that the
person who harbors said animal knows
or should reasonably know the animal
is possessed of tendencies to attack or
bite persons; includes any animal
whose temperament or habits create a
apprehension of injury to persons or
other animals.
J. Wild Animal. Any live monkey or ape,
raccoon, skunk, fox, snake or other
reptile, leopard, wolf, coyote, panther,
tiger, lion, lynx or any other animal or
any bird of prey which can be
normally found in a wild state.
(Ord. 86-30, 11/17/86; 2014-04, 05/05/2014)
§ 5-2 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 5-7
Sec. 5-2. Dog Registration
Required; Fees.
All dogs kept, harbored or maintained
by their owners in the City shall be
registered with the City. Dog identification
tags shall be issued by the Clerk and/or
designated agents upon payment of a
registration fee for each dog. The owner
shall state at the time application is made
for such registration and upon printed forms
provided for such purpose, the owner’s
name and address and a description of the
dog to be registered in such manner that the
dog may be identified with reasonable
certainty, and the name to which the dog
answers. Each registration issued under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be valid for
the lifetime of the animal. Animal
identification tags may also be issued for
animals in the fringe areas outside of the
City. Fees for dog registrations and other
fees shall be set by the Council from time
to time, by resolution.
(Ord. 84-02, 1/9/84)
Sec. 5-3. Exceptions.
A. The above licensing provisions shall
not apply to dogs whose owners are
nonresidents for less than thirty (30)
days within the City. An “assistance
dog” properly trained to assist a
disabled person when such dog is
actually being used by a disabled
person for the purpose of aiding them
shall be licensed without charge.
B. New dog owners and new City
residents may purchase licenses at the
regular fees if the license is purchased
within thirty (30) days of acquisition
of dog or of establishing City
residence. It shall be the owner's
responsibility to show proof of the
date of ownership or establishment of
City residence.
Sec. 5-4. Dog Tag and Collar.
Upon payment of the registration fee,
the City shall issue to the owner a
registration certificate and a metallic tag for
each dog so registered. The number shall
correspond with the number on the
certificate. Each owner shall provide each
dog with a collar to which the identification
tag must be affixed and shall see that the
collar and tag are constantly worn by the
dog. Where a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a
duplicate tag will be issued by the Clerk
upon presentation of receipt showing the
payment of the registration fee and the
payment of a fee to be set by the Council,
from time to time, by resolution, for each
duplicate. Dog tags shall not be
transferable from one dog to another and no
refunds shall be made on any dog
identification fee because of death of the
dog or of the owner leaving the City.
(Ord. 84-02, 1/9/84); Ref. Idaho Code § 25-2803
Sec. 5-5. Dog at Large and
Tethering.
A. No owner and/or handler and/or
keeper of any dog shall allow or let
such dog to run or remain at large
within the City at any time. This
subsection shall not apply to any area
within the City which is designated by
the City as a Dog Park or as an Off-
Leash Area.
B. No owner and/or handler and/or
keeper of any dog shall leave a dog
tethered on public property or in such
a manner as to be on public property.
(Ord. 2001-02, 02/05/01; 2014-04, 05/05/2014)
Sec. 5-6. City Animal Shelter.
The Chief of Police is hereby
authorized and empowered to secure and
maintain a suitable animal shelter for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of
this Chapter.
Sec. 5-7. Impounding.
It shall be the duty of any law
enforcement officer or City agent to
apprehend any dog found at large,
untethered, or unlicensed contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter or any dog or
other animal which has attacked or bitten
any person or other animal and to impound
such animal in the City Animal Shelter or
other suitable place; provided that, if any
fierce, dangerous or vicious animal found at
§ 5-7 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 5-12
large cannot be safely captured and
impounded, such animal may be slain by
any law enforcement officer. The law
enforcement officer so impounding any
animal shall record a description of the
animal, and whether licensed, in a record
file kept for that purpose. If the animal is
licensed and wearing a license tag when
apprehended the law enforcement officer
shall also record the name and address of
the owner and the number of the tag.
(Ord. 86-30, 11/17/86)
Sec. 5-8. Redemption.
The owner of any animal impounded
may reclaim such animal upon the payment
of the license fee, if unpaid, and by
payment of the costs and charges incurred
by the City for impounding or keeping any
animal, and for adoption or euthanasia costs
if applicable.
Sec. 5-9. Disposition of Unclaimed,
Dangerous or Rabid
Animals.
It shall be the duty of the City Chief of
Police to keep all animals impounded
pursuant to this Chapter for a period of ten
(10) days. If at the expiration of ten (10)
days the animal shall not have been
redeemed by the owner, it may be
destroyed or sold for a sum of money
sufficient to discharge the costs and charges
incurred by the City for impounding and
keeping the animal together with the license
fee (if applicable) for the current year if
unpaid. The City Chief of Police or the
Chief's designee has authority to submit
terminally ill, injured or unfit animals, after
a reasonable search has been made for the
owner, to a licensed veterinarian to
determine whether the animal can recover.
If not, the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee may authorize euthanasia of the
animal. Provided, that no animal which
appears to be suffering from rabies nor any
animal of fierce, dangerous or vicious
propensities shall be released from the City
Animal Shelter but shall be destroyed. The
buyer of any animal under the provisions of
this Code Section shall become the owner
of the animal free from any claim or title of
the original owner or harborer.
(Ord. 83-11, 9/6/83)
Sec. 5-10. Citation to Owner.
It is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor for any person to permit a
dog to run or remain at large in violation of
the provisions of this Chapter. It shall be
the duty of every law enforcement officer
who sees a dog at large during a period of
time when said dog should be confined or
restrained by the owner or keeper thereof as
provided herein, to cite the owner of said
dog, if the owner of the dog is known, with
a misdemeanor. In the event that the owner
of the dog is cited with a misdemeanor, the
law enforcement officer is not required to
impound the dog. If the owner of the dog
at large is not known, the dog shall in all
cases be impounded.
Sec. 5-11. Off-Leash Area
Limitations.
A. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for
any owner and/or handler, keeper,
controller or harborer of any
aggressive dog to allow such dog to be
Off-Leash, even in a designated Off-
Leash Area.
B. Dogs outside the permitted boundaries
of the Off-Leash Area who are not on
a leash shall be considered dogs at
large and owners and/or handlers,
keepers, controllers, or harborers of
such dog(s) shall be subject to such
penalty.
C. The leash law is in effect in Off-Leash
Areas during times when the fields are
in use by the Parks and Recreation
Department and/or when there are
closures in the Off-Leash Area.
(Ord. 2014-04, 05/05/2014)
Sec. 5-12. Nuisance by Animals.
A. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for
any owner, keeper, controller or
harborer of any animal to allow or let
his or her animal to discharge such
animal's solid excrement upon public
property or private property other than
§ 5-12 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 5-14
the property of the owner, keeper,
controller or harborer. However if
such owner, keeper, controller or
harborer does immediately thereafter
remove and clean up such animal's
solid excrement from the property, the
nuisance shall be deemed remedied.
B. 1. It shall be unlawful for any
person to own, keep, control or harbor
any animal which by any barking,
howling, whining, crowing or by any
source or cry, disturbs or is likely to
disturb the peace and quiet of any
reasonable person. Provided that no
person shall be prosecuted under this
subsection unless:
a. Written notice of the noise
has been issued by a law
enforcement officer to the
property owner or person in
possession of the property
wherein the animal is located, or
the animal’s owner, keeper,
controller or harborer, or is left at
the premises where the animal is
located, at least twenty-four (24)
hours but not more than thirty
(30) days prior to the filing of a
formal complaint; and
b. The noise upon which such
complaint is issued has been
witnessed by a law enforcement
officer.
2. Nothing contained in this Chapter
shall be interpreted to prohibit or
constrain the right of any person to
proceed with a legal action for
damages and/or to abate any noise or
other nuisance.
C. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished pursuant to this Code and the
Idaho Code.
(Ords. 86-30, 11/17/86; 95-14, 06/29/95)
Sec. 5-13. Dog Limitations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
own, keep, or harbor more than four
(4) dogs over six (6) months old within
the City; except that this provision
shall not apply to dog hospitals and
veterinarians when dogs are kept on
the premises used by such hospital and
veterinarian as their normal place of
business; nor shall these provisions
apply when the person is the owner or
operator of a kennel at a location
permitted for such use by the Zoning
Code.
B. The keeping of more than four (4)
dogs on the premises of the owner
shall be prima facie evidence of
violation of this Code Section and the
burden of proof shall be on the owner
to show the ages of such dogs.
Sec. 5-14. Wild or Vicious Animals.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or permit to be kept on such
person’s premises any wild or vicious
animal for display or exhibition
purposes whether gratuitously or for a
fee. This Code Section shall not be
construed to apply to humane research
programs, zoological parks,
performing animal exhibitions or
circuses.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or permit to be kept any wild
animal as a pet, unless a permit has
been granted by State or Federal
agency or entity having jurisdiction
over such permitting.
C. 1. It shall be unlawful for any
person to harbor or to keep a vicious
animal within the City. Any animal
which has attacked or bitten any
person or other animal, without cause,
may be seized by any law enforcement
officer or other citizen and upon
establishment, to the satisfaction of
any court of competent jurisdiction, of
the vicious character of said animal,
may be killed by a law enforcement
officer or other agent of the City,
County or State.
2. Provided however, this Code
Section shall not apply to animals
under the control of a law enforcement
or military agency, nor to animals
§ 5-14 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 5-16
which are kept for the protection of
property, provided that such animals
are restrained by a cage, fence, or
other adequate means, from contact
with the general public or with persons
who enter the premises with the actual
or implied permission of the owner or
occupant and from any children who
may wander onto the property.
3. Notices of the presence of such
animal are conspicuously displayed
whereby the same may be seen by
passing persons within the vicinity of
where such animal may be kept.
D. Any person owning or harboring any
wild animal or vicious animal shall be
strictly liable for damages caused by
said animal.
E. 1. The Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee shall have the power to order
an investigation pertaining to the
harboring of any vicious animal and
shall have the power to order the
destruction of any vicious animal.
2. The Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee may cause the vicious animal
to be taken into custody for
destruction under written order, which
shall set forth the basis for the
determination that the animal is
vicious. Notice of this decision shall
be left at the residence of the owner or
may be served in such other manner
deemed adequate by the Chief of
Police or the Chief’s designee.
3. The owner of the animal shall
then have two (2) days (excluding
weekends and holidays) to file a
written appeal of the decision with the
Chief of Police. The appeal shall be
heard by the City Supervisor or such
official or hearing officer as the City
Supervisor may designate to conduct a
hearing on the matter within five (5)
days (excluding weekends and
holidays) of the appeal.
4. In determining whether an animal
is vicious, the fact finder may consider
past incidents, provocation for the
bite, whether the attack occurred on
premises where the dog resided, the
legal status of the victim on the
premises and any other fact or
allegation which might have justified
the attack.
5. The written decision of the City
Supervisor or the City Supervisor’s
designee on appeal shall be final
(unless stayed by court action), and
shall be implemented unless the
decision is appealed to the local
district court within two (2) days
(excluding weekends and holidays).
6. Any impound fees incurred
during this period shall be paid for by
the owner of the animal.
F. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished pursuant to this Code and the
Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2009-05, 02/17/2009; 2010-23,
11/01/2010)
Sec. 5-15. Rabies Vaccination of
Dogs, Cats, and Ferrets.
Every dog, cat, and ferret within City
limits, other than in an animal shelter, and
over six (6) months of age shall be
vaccinated against rabies and every owner
of every such dog, cat and/or ferret shall
retain proof of current vaccination.
A dog, cat, or ferret may be granted an
exemption from this requirement when (a) a
licensed veterinarian files a statement with
the City Clerk certifying that such dog, cat,
or ferret should not be vaccinated against
rabies for a valid medical reason, with a
description of and the duration of the
medical reason and (b) the owner of such
animal agrees to prevent the animal from
coming in contact with other animals,
describing how the animal shall be kept,
and prevents the animal from becoming a
threat to public health or a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2010-15, 08/02/2010)
Sec. 5-16. Trapping Regulations.
A. Definitions.
Trap. Any mechanical device or snare
which is designed to hold, capture,
and/or kill an animal including, but not
§ 5-16 TITLE 10 —POLICE REGULATIONS § 5-18
limited to, live traps, steel-jaw
foothold traps, padded jaw traps, bodygripping
(Conibear) traps, snares,
deadfalls, leg-hold type traps, or
similar devices.
B. Unless authorized by the Idaho
Department of Fish and Game
pursuant to Idaho Code Title 36,
Chapter 11, no person shall set a trap
to catch an animal (other than a
mouse, rat, gopher, vole or mole)
within City limits, except a person
specifically authorized by the Council
or by the Chief of Police or designee.
(Ord. 2012-03, 02/06/2012)
Sec. 5-17. Other Acts Prohibited.
A. No person shall willfully open any
door or gate on any private premises or
unleash or coax away any dog or
animal for the purpose of enticing or
enabling any dog or other animal to
leave such private premises and be at
large as defined in this Chapter.
B. No person shall willfully provoke,
mistreat, or abuse any dog or other
animal while confined to its keeper's
premises.
C. No person shall abandon any dog, cat,
or other animal by dropping off or
leaving such animal on any public
street, alley, sidewalk, or in any City
park or playground or other public
place or building, or on the premises
of another person.
(Ord. 86-30, 11/17/86; 2012-03, 02/06/2012)
Sec. 5-18. Penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of
this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code unless otherwise
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2000-20, 09/18/2000; 2012-03, 02/06/2012)
§ 6-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 6-4
Chapter 6
RABIES OR HYDROPHOBIA
Sec. 6-1: Outbreak of Rabies; Dogs at
Large Prohibited
Sec. 6-2: Dogs Having Rabies
Declared a Nuisance
Sec. 6-3: Notice to be Published;
Vaccination
Sec. 6-4: Rabies
Sec. 6-1. Outbreak of Rabies; Dogs
at Large Prohibited.
Whenever an outbreak of rabies
occurs, or when rabies has been diagnosed,
or a rabid dog or animal has been present in
the City, it shall be unlawful for the owner
of any dog, after the last publication of the
notice provided for hereinafter, to permit
the same to run or remain at large on any
street or other public place in the City or on
any premises not enclosed by a dog tight
fence. Provided, a dog may be taken
outside a dog tight fence when led by chain
or leash in such manner as to prevent its
biting any person or animal. It shall be the
duty of every police and health officer to
capture any dog running at large and not
led by chain or leash, as in this Chapter
provided.
Sec. 6-2. Dogs Having Rabies
Declared a Nuisance.
Any animal afflicted with rabies or
any animal bitten by a dog or other rabid
animal suffering from rabies, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and such animal
must be slain by the owner or veterinarian
or any health or law enforcement officer;
excepting that a permit may be issued to
any owner exempting from slaughter any
animal that has been bitten by a supposedly
rabid animal, provided said owner agrees to
securely restrain or muzzle said animal for
a period of three (3) months or will submit
said animal to the Pasteur treatment.
Sec. 6-3. Notice to be Published;
Vaccination.
A. 1. Upon an outbreak of rabies, when
rabies has been diagnosed within
the City or a rabid dog or animal
has been found present, the City
shall publish a notice to that effect
in the official newspaper of the
City for three (3) successive days
and for six (6) weeks after the date
of the last publication of said
notice it shall be unlawful for any
person to violate Code Section 10-
6-1 herein contained;
2. The City shall have authority, when
in its judgment an extension of said
six (6) weeks' time is necessary to
carry into effect the purposes of
this Chapter, by notice given in the
manner provided herein, to extend
said six (6) weeks' period for an
additional six (6) weeks or such
lesser time as the City shall deem
necessary, and to further thereafter
and in the same manner, continue
said six (6) weeks' or less period
until the said quarantine herein
provided for is unnecessary.
B. Punishment under this Code shall not
apply to any owner of a dog thirty (30)
days after said animal has been
vaccinated for rabies by a licensed
veterinarian, a rabies vaccination tag
affixed to said dog's collar by said
veterinarian and a certificate of
vaccination issued to the owner of said
dog.
Sec. 6-4. Rabies.
A law enforcement officer or animal
control officer shall have the authority to
order the owner of any dog which has
bitten any person in such a manner so as to
cause an abrasion of the skin to subject
such dog to the City Animal Shelter for
quarantine for a period of ten (10) days. If
such dog shall be determined free from
rabies, the same shall be returned to the
owner upon payment of the impound fee.
If such fee is not paid, the dog shall be
subject to disposal after proper notice is
given to the owner, provided that the owner
can be located.
(Ords. 904, 4/2/51; 82-1480, 2/1/82; 8630, 11/86;
2000-20, 09/18/2000)
§ 7-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 7-3
Chapter 7
PUBLIC NUISANCES
Sec. 7-1: Public Nuisance Defined
Sec. 7-2: Specific Public Nuisances
Sec. 7-3: Penalty
Sec. 7-1. Public Nuisance Defined.
A public nuisance is a thing, act,
occupation or use of the property which:
A. Shall annoy, injure or endanger the
safety, health, comfort or repose of
any considerable number of persons;
B. Shall offend the public decency;
C. Shall in any way render any
considerable number of persons
insecure in life or in use of property.
Ref. Idaho Code § 52-101, 52-102
Sec. 7-2. Specific Public Nuisances.
The following specific acts, omissions,
places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances:
A. Accumulations of manure, animal or
poultry droppings, rubbish, water or
other materials which are breeding
places for flies, mosquitoes or vermin,
or which are otherwise declared to be
unhealthy by the City.
B. All loud or unusual noises and
annoying vibrations which offend the
peace and quiet of persons of ordinary
sensibilities.
C. All hanging signs, awnings and other
similar structures over the streets or
sidewalks so situated or constructed as
to endanger public safety.
D. Filthy, littered or trash covered cellars,
house yards, factory yards, vacant
areas in rear of stores, vacant lots,
houses, buildings or premises
containing trash, litter, rags,
accumulation of empty barrels, boxes,
crates, packing cases, lumber or
firewood not neatly piled, scrap iron,
tin and other metal not neatly piled or
anything whatsoever in which flies or
rats may breed or multiply or which
may be a fire danger.
E. Any unsightly building, billboard or
other structure or any old, abandoned
or partially destroyed building or
structure or any building or structure
commenced and left unfinished or any
abandoned well or excavation not
properly protected and which may
attract children and endanger them in
the course of play.
F. All places used or maintained as junk
yards or dumping grounds or for the
wrecking or disassembling of
automobiles, trucks or machinery of
any kind, or for the storing or leaving
of worn out, wrecked or abandoned
automobiles, trucks, or machinery of
any kind, or of any parts thereof or for
the storing or leaving of any
machinery or equipment used by
contractors or builders or by other
persons, which said places are kept or
maintained so as to essentially
interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property by
others.
G. Allowing dead fowl or animal bodies
to remain undisposed of longer than
twenty-four (24) hours following their
death.
Sec. 7-3. Penalty.
A. Any person, who shall knowingly
cause or create any public nuisance, or
permit any public nuisance to be
created or to be placed upon or to
remain upon any premises owned or
occupied by such person, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished
pursuant to this Code and the Idaho
Code.
B. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation of this Chapter shall not
excuse the violation, or permit it to
continue and all such persons shall be
required to correct or hereby remedy
such violations or defects within five
(5) days; and when not otherwise
specified, each five (5) days that
prohibited conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Each day's or part of day's continuance
of anything prohibited by this Chapter
shall be a separate offense.
§ 8-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 8-6
Chapter 8
LOST, ABANDONED OR
SEIZED PROPERTY
Sec. 8-1: Public Duty
Sec. 8-2: Lost or Abandoned Property
Sec. 8-3: Children's Property
Sec. 8-4: Property Seized by Police
Sec. 8-5: Disposition of Dangerous or
Worthless Property by the
Police
Sec. 8-6: Return of Lost or
Abandoned Property
Sec. 8-1. Public Duty.
It shall be the duty of every person to
deliver to the Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee any article or object of personal
property which is lost, unclaimed or
abandoned within the City for disposition
in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter and Idaho Code.
Sec. 8-2. Lost or Abandoned
Property.
Any lost or abandoned property,
except property covered by other
provisions of this Chapter or Idaho Code,
may be sold and disposed of, from time to
time, by the Chief of Police in accordance
with the Idaho Code.
Sec. 8-3. Children's Property.
A. At the option of the Chief of Police,
any toys of whatever nature, including
but not limited to bicycles, tricycles,
clothing, and other articles made or
intended for use by children, which
are left unclaimed, may be sold in
accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter or may be given to such needy
and unfortunate children as the Chief
of Police deems appropriate.
Sec. 8-4. Property Seized by Police.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of
Police to hold, pending final disposition of
any charges filed in the District Court
against the owner or possessor thereof, all
articles or personal property seized as
evidence for use in the trial of such
charges. After final disposition of said
charges, said articles, except as the judge
may otherwise direct, shall upon request of
the rightful owner thereof and upon the
presentation of satisfactory proof of
ownership, be turned over to such rightful
owner. In the absence of such request, the
same shall be treated as abandoned
property and disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
Ref. Idaho Code § 55-403
Sec. 8-5. Disposition of Dangerous
or Worthless Property by
the Police.
A. Where lost, abandoned or seized
property consists of burglar tools of
any description, firearms, cartridges,
explosives, armored or bulletproof
clothing, gambling apparatus,
medication, liquor or alcohol, soiled or
bloodied or unsanitary articles or
liquids, unlawful drugs, mixtures or
derivatives, or associated drug
paraphernalia, obscene photographs,
prints, effigies, or statues, poisonous
or deleterious solids or liquids, or any
property which in the opinion of the
Chief of Police is of slight value or the
sale of which might result in injury to
the health or safety of any person, the
Chief of Police may destroy each and
every article of such nature in
accordance with Idaho Code.
B. If, in the opinion of the Chief of
Police, any such firearms, cartridges,
explosives or armored or bulletproof
clothing may be used for departmental
purposes, then the same need not be
offered for sale or destroyed as in this
Code Section provided.
Sec. 8-6. Return of Lost or
Abandoned Property.
Any lost or abandoned property which
is found and turned in to the City by any
person shall be held for a period provided
for by the Idaho Code. If such property
remains unclaimed by the owner, the finder
shall have thirty (30) days to claim the
property, and if so claimed, it shall be
received subject to the rights of the original
owner. If after such period the property
remains unclaimed, it shall be disposed of
in the same manner as other lost or
§ 8-6 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 8-6
abandoned property as provided in this
Chapter or the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 84-20, 9/10/84); Ref. Idaho Code § 14-501 et
seq., § 55-403
§ 9-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 9-4
Chapter 9
BURGLARY AND ROBBERY
ALARMS
Sec. 9-1: Definitions
Sec. 9-2: Fee for False Alarms
Sec. 9-3: New Systems
Sec. 9-4: Administration
Sec. 9-1. Definitions.
A. Alarm System. Any device designed
to detect an unauthorized entry to a
building, place or premises or to signal
an attempted robbery or burglary at a
protected premise and which, when
activated, emits a sound and/or
transmits a signal or message to an
alarm reported to the Moscow Police
Department Communications Center.
Every automatic telephone dialing
alarm device is considered an “alarm
system” within the purview of this
Chapter. Devices which are designed
solely to alert someone physically
located within the protected premises
and which do not register alarms
audible or visible on the outside of the
protected premises, are excluded from
this definition of “alarm system”.
B. Alarm User. Any person or business
utilizing the services of an "alarm
system."
C. False Alarm. An alarm signal or
notification of an alarm indicating an
unauthorized entry or attempted entry
on or into any building, place or
premises or a robbery/burglary or
attempted robbery/burglary at
protected premises necessitating
response by the Moscow Police
Department when such a circumstance
has not in fact occurred.
(Ord. 2000-16, 09/05/2000)
Sec. 9-2. Fee for False Alarms.
Every false alarm generated by any
alarm system shall be billed to the Alarm
User of such alarm system. The alarm user
shall be notified in writing of each false
alarm and shall be required to pay a false
alarm fee for each and every alarm. Said
false alarm fee shall, from time to time, be
set by resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 2000-16, 09/05/2000)
Sec. 9-3. New Systems.
New alarm systems shall have a thirty
(30) day period after the first connection
during which alarms will not be credited as
false alarms in order to permit initial
adjustments to the system.
(Ord. 2000-16, 09/05/2000)
Sec. 9-4. Administration.
The Chief of Police shall have the
authority to require alarm users to maintain
information on file with the Moscow Police
Department so that proper persons may be
notified in the event of any alarm, be it
false or otherwise. Any further fees
necessary to monitor or regulate alarm
systems may be established by the Council
by resolution.
(Ord. 1448, 2/23/81; Ord. 2000-16, 09/05/2000)
§ 10-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 10-1
Chapter 10
PEEPING TOMS PROHIBITED
Sec. 10-1: Peeping Toms Prohibited
Sec. 10-1. Peeping Toms Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
look, peer or peep into, or to be found
loitering around or within view of any
window or other opening not on his or her
own property, watching or looking through
said window or other opening where those
present have some reasonable expectation
of privacy from public view.
It shall also be unlawful to wrongfully
enter a locker room, restroom, or similar
area where those present have some
reasonable expectation of privacy from
public view, and knowingly violate the
privacy of those rightfully present. (Ord. 97-
20, 6/16/97)
§ 11-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 11-2
Chapter 11
NOISE REGULATIONS
Sec. 11-1: Definitions
Sec. 11-2: Public Nuisance Noises
Prohibited
Sec. 11-3: Noise Source Requirements
Sec. 11-4: Snowmobiles
Sec. 11-5: Air Conditioning and
Heating Equipment
Sec. 11-6: Exceptions
Sec. 11-7: Amplified Sound Permit
Sec. 11-8: Measurement Procedures
Sec. 11-9: Violations
Sec. 11-10: Penalties
Sec. 11-1. Definitions.
A. dBA. A logarithmic and
dimensionless unit of measure used in
describing the amplitude of sound,
equal to twenty (20) times the
logarithm to the base ten (10) of the
ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure,
which is twenty (20) micropascals (20
micronewtons per square meter) using
the "A" weighing scale.
B. Noise. Any sound which is loud,
raucous, or boisterous, which
unreasonably disturbs a reasonable
person(s) of normal sensitivities, or
which causes or which tends to cause
an adverse psychological or
physiological effect on reasonable
person(s) of normal sensitivities.
Factors to be considered in
determining whether a sound is loud,
raucous, or boisterous, or whether it
unreasonably disturbs a reasonable
person(s) of normal sensitivities,
include, but are not limited to:
1. The land use, nature, and zoning
of the area from which the sound
emanates and the area where the sound
is received or perceived;
2. the time of day or night the sound
occurs;
3. the duration of the sounds; and
4. whether the sound is recurrent,
intermittent, or constant.
C. Person. Any individual, association,
partnership, peace officer or
employee.
D. Sound Level Meter. An instrument
which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or
time averager, output meter and
weighting network used to measure
sound pressure levels.
(Ord. 2008-01, 01/22/2008)
Sec. 11-2. Public Nuisance Noises
Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person
within the City to knowingly make,
continue, or cause to be made, or to
knowingly allow to be made or to continue,
any noise, as defined in this Chapter. The
following acts, among others, are declared
to be unlawful nuisance noises in violation
of this Code Section, but said enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive; these
acts may constitute a violation even when
the noises created are within the decibel
limits contained elsewhere herein:
A. Loud Speakers, Radios, Phonographs
and Amplifiers. The use, operation, or
permitting the playing, use or
operation of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loud
speaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the production
or reproduction of sound in such
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
or comfort of another person. Such
sound made at a louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for
the person or persons who are in the
room, chamber, vehicle or space
where such device is being operated
shall be prima facie evidence of
violation of this Code Section. This
provision shall regulate amplified
sound, whether it be from stationary
equipment or equipment mounted
within or upon a vehicle. Exceptions
to this provision may be licensed by
the City pursuant to this Chapter.
B. Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc.
1. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, or other vehicle on any
street, public place, or private property
§ 11-2 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 11-5
within the City except as a danger
warning;
2. The creation, by means of such
signaling device, of any unreasonably
loud or harsh sound;
3. The sounding of such device for
an unnecessary or unreasonable period
of time;
4. The use of such signaling device
when traffic is held up for any reason.
C. Yelling, Shouting, Etc. Yelling,
shouting, hooting, whistling, or
singing on the public streets,
particularly between the hours of ten
(10:00) o'clock P.M. and seven (7:00)
o'clock A.M. or at any time or place so
as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of any person in the
vicinity.
D. Whistles. The blowing of any
locomotive whistle or whistle attached
to any stationary boiler or other
stationary whistle except to give
warning of fire or danger, or upon
request of proper City authorities.
E. Exhaust. The discharge into the open
air of the exhaust of any engine except
through a muffler1 or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
F. Vehicles or Loads.
1. The use of any automobile,
motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair
or so loaded in such manner as to
create loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling, or other noise;
2. The creation of any loud or
excessive noise in connection with the
loading, unloading or unpacking of
any vehicle.
G. Noises Near Schools, Courts,
Churches, or Hospitals. The creation
of any excessive noise on any street
adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, church, court or hospital
while the same is in use which
unreasonably interferes with the
operation or workings of such
institution, or which disturbs or
unduly annoys patients of a hospital;
provided that conspicuous signs are
displayed in such streets indicating the
1 See also subsection 10-1-9(A)(4) of this Code.
school, hospital, church, or court is
nearby.
(Ord. 2008-01, 01/22/2008)
Sec. 11-3. Noise Source
Requirements.
A. A noise source (excluding motor
vehicles operating on public highways,
locomotives and railroad cars,
snowmobiles, construction equipment
at construction sites, maintenance of
utility easements, and snow plowing)
within the following zoning districts
shall not exceed the noise levels set
forth below:
1. Industrial Zoning Districts:
Seventy (70) dBA as measured at the
property line of the source.
2. Business and Institutional Zoning
Districts: Sixty-five (65) dBA as
measured on the property line of the
source.
3. Residential and Office Zoning
Districts: Sixty-five (65) dBA during
the daytime (7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.)
and fifty-five (55) dBA at nighttime
(10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.) as
measured at the property line of the
source.
B. Construction equipment being operated
at a construction site shall not exceed a
noise level of eighty-five (85) dBA and
shall not operate during nighttime
hours.
Sec. 11-4. Snowmobiles.
It shall be unlawful to use a
snowmobile in the City unless it is
equipped with a muffler which limits
overall noise emissions to seventy-three
(73) dBA at a distance of fifty (50) feet.
No snowmobile may be operated in a
residential zoning district during nighttime
hours.
Sec. 11-5. Air Conditioning and
Heating Equipment.
Locations of air conditioning and
heating equipment emitting sound or
vibration must be sited to minimize the
impact on adjacent property. The City or
adjacent property owners may require that
such equipment be screened, buffered or
muffled so that the noise does not exceed
§ 11-5 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 11-9
fifty (50) decibels, as measured at the
property line of the complaining property.
Sec. 11-6. Exceptions.
The requirements, prohibitions, and
terms of this Chapter shall not apply to the
following:
A. Emergency work or any authorized
emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call or acting in time
of emergency.
B. To those activities of a temporary
duration, permitted by law and for
which a license or permit therefor has
been granted by the City, including,
but not limited to parades and
fireworks displays.
C. Nonprofessional athletic contests.
D. Sounds originating from trains or
aircraft operating in conformance with
federal, state and local law.
E. Sounds from warning or alarm
systems owned and/or operated by or
under the direction of a unit of
government.
F. Sounds generated by chain saws from
seven (7:00) o'clock A.M. to seven
(7:00) o'clock P.M.
G. Public works and maintenance
activities approved by the City.
(Ord. 98-26, 8/3/98)
Sec. 11-7. Amplified Sound Permit.
A. The City may issue a permit to any
responsible person or organization to
exceed the limitations of this Chapter
at a specified place during specified
hours.
B. The City may issue a permit to any
responsible person or organization to
exceed the limitations of this Chapter
for amplified sound from a speaker
mounted on a vehicle. Such permits
shall be issued only for the hours
between seven (7:00) o'clock A.M.
and nine (9:00) o'clock P.M. Sounds
emanating from such units shall not
exceed eighty-five (85) dBA as
measured ten (10) feet from the
source.
C. Such license shall be a defense to any
criminal action resulting from the
sound emission, but shall not be a
defense to any civil action.
Sec. 11-8. Measurement Procedures.
Sound may be measured by a sound
level meter for purposes of enforcing
provisions of this Chapter. The Chief of
Police shall adopt guidelines establishing
the test procedures and instrumentation to
be utilized for measurement of sound, and a
copy of such guidelines shall be kept on
file with the Clerk.
Sec. 11-9. Violations.
A. Making any sound which violates this
Chapter shall be an unlawful act; a
violation of any provision of this
Chapter shall be a misdemeanor. It
shall be the duty of any person(s) in a
position of ownership, possession or
control of premises to prevent such
premises from being the site of
activities producing noise in violation
of the provisions of this Chapter, or
sound levels in excess of what is
permitted under this Chapter. Failure
or refusal to perform such duty after
knowledge of the violation(s) shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of persons in
positions of leadership or
responsibility with respect to
unincorporated associations, groups,
gatherings and assemblages of people
to prevent such from causing or
making noise in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter, or sound
levels in excess of what is permitted
under this Chapter. Failure or refusal
to perform such duty shall constitute a
violation of this Code Section.
C. Peace officer citation. Any City peace
officer is authorized to issue a citation
upon his or her own observation of a
violation without the necessity of a
citizen complaint. By signing the
citation, the officer is certifying that
he or she has reasonable grounds to
believe that the person cited
committed the offense.
D. Nothing contained in this Chapter
shall be interpreted to constrain the
right of the City or of any person to
proceed with a civil action to abate or
penalize any noise related nuisance.
(Ord. 2008-01, 01/22/2008)
§ 11-10 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 11-10
Sec. 11-10. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished
pursuant to this Code and the Idaho Code
unless otherwise specifically provided for
in this Chapter.
(Ords. 89-07, 3/20/89; 95-14, 6/29/95)
§ 12-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 12-4
Chapter 12
NOXIOUS WEEDS
Sec. 12-1: Definitions
Sec. 12-2: Removal of Weeds, Public
Nuisance Declared
Sec. 12-3: Removal Continuous
Sec. 12-4: City May Remove; Cost
Collected
Sec. 12-5: Penalty
Sec. 12-6: Separate Offense
Sec. 12-7: Labor Authorized
Sec. 12-1. Definitions
Noxious Weed(s). Any plant having
the potential to cause injury to public
health, crops, livestock, land or other
property, and which is designated as
noxious by the Idaho Department of
Agriculture or by Latah County pursuant to
Idaho Code Title 22, Chapter 24.
(Ord. 2010-20, 09/07/2010)
Sec. 12-2. Removal of Weeds, Public
Nuisance Declared.
A. Every person residing or doing
business within the corporate limits of
the City, either as owner, tenant,
lessee or merely as occupant of any
real property within such corporate
limits of the City, shall at all times and
continuously, after being given five
(5) days' notice, destroy, cut down,
weed out, and obliterate all noxious
weeds existing on such real property
and also such person shall keep
continuously cut down, weeded out,
destroyed and obliterated, all noxious
weeds from and off all that part or
portion of said real property that is
between the property line of real
property, so owned, used or occupied
by such person, and the street curb line
of any street or alley immediately
adjacent or contiguous to such real
property; being the sidewalk ground,
as well as the parking ground fronting,
adjacent or contiguous to any such real
property.
B. All noxious weeds are hereby declared
a public nuisance and are prohibited
within the City.
Ref. Idaho Code § 22-2401 et seq. (Ord.
2010-20, 09/07/2010)
Sec. 12-3. Removal Continuous.
All noxious weeds within the
corporate limits of the City shall, at all
times continuously be kept weeded out, cut
down, obliterated and destroyed.
(Ord. 2010-20, 09/07/2010)
Sec. 12-4. City May Remove; Cost
Collected.
A. Every person owning or occupying
real property situated within said
corporate limits of the City shall, after
the notice as provided in Code Section
10-12-2 of this Chapter, keep
continuously destroyed, weeded out,
cut down and obliterated all noxious
weeds in or on any and all such real
property so owned or occupied by
such person, in the manner prescribed
by and in accordance with the
provisions of Code Section 10-12-2 of
this Chapter, and in the event that such
noxious weeds are not so continuously
destroyed, weeded out, cut down and
obliterated, the City may cause such
noxious weeds to be cut down, weeded
out and destroyed and the costs and
charges, plus a nuisance abatement fee
to be set by Resolution of the Council
duly adopted, shall be collected from
the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant
of said real property.
B. Such costs and expenses shall be
collected directly by the City from the
owner, tenant, lessee or occupant, or
shall be collected from the owner or
reputed owner of the real property by
action in the name of the City before
any court of competent jurisdiction as
is provided by law; and said judgment
therefor shall be levied directly against
the real estate involved or any other
property belonging to any of said
parties, or in the discretion of the
Council, when notice has been given
§ 12-4 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 12-7
to the owner or reputed owner of the
real property, shall require the City to
keep an accurate account of the costs
and expenses for destroying, cutting
down, weeding out or obliterating and
shall make a return of the same to the
Council before passage of the annual
appropriation bill and levy of taxes for
such year. The City shall, at the time
of levying the taxes for general City
purposes for the following year, levy
the amount of such costs and expenses
made hereunder and then unpaid, to
the real property where said costs and
expenses were incurred as a special
tax against said real property, and the
special assessments shall be certified
to the County Auditor, and the same
shall be levied and collected in all
respects like any other City taxes upon
real estate. No real property shall be
exempt from the payment of such
special tax.
(Ord. 2010-20, 09/07/2010)
Sec. 12-5. Penalty.
Any person owning or occupying any
real property within such corporate limits
of the City who shall fail, refuse or neglect
to continuously keep weeded out, cut
down, obliterated or destroyed all noxious
weeds in the manner prescribed and
according to the provisions of this Chapter
shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
pursuant to this Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2000-20, 09/18/2000; Ord. 2010-20,
09/07/2010)
Sec. 12-6. Separate Offense.
After five (5) days’ notice, each and
every five (5) days any such person shall
fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the
provisions of this Chapter, shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense, and each of
such separate offenses shall be punishable
as provided in this Code and the Idaho
Code.
Sec. 12-7. Labor Authorized.
The City is hereby given the power
and authority to employ such labor as is
necessary to carry out the provisions of this
Chapter and to collect the expense incurred
thereby.
Ref. Idaho Code § 22-2401 et seq. (Ord. 2010-20,
09/07/2010)
§ 13-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 13-1
Chapter 13
GLUE
Sec. 13-1: Unlawful to Inhale, Breathe
or Drink
Sec. 13-1. Unlawful to Inhale,
Breathe or Drink.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
inhale, breathe or drink any compound,
liquid, chemical, or any other substance
known as glue, adhesive, cement, mucilage,
dope, or any other material or substance or
combination thereof with the intent of
becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed,
irrational, or in any other manner changing,
distorting or disturbing the eyesight,
thinking process, balance, or coordination
of such person. For the purpose of this
Chapter, any such condition so induced
shall be deemed an intoxicated condition.
§ 14-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 14-3
Chapter 14
FAIR HOUSING
Sec. 14-1: Title and Purpose
Sec. 14-2: Policy
Sec. 14-3: Fair Housing Program
Resource Representative
Sec. 14-1. Title and Purpose.
A. This Chapter shall be known as the
"Moscow Fair and Affordable
Housing Ordinance" and will herein
be referred to as "this Chapter."
B. The purpose of this Chapter is to help
determine the existence, nature, causes
and extent of fair housing problems
within the City and to implement a
strategy and identify resources
available to resolve such problems, if
any.
(Ord. 99-05, 2/16/99)
Sec. 14-2. Policy.
It is the policy of the City that no
person shall be subjected to discrimination
because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin
in the sale, rental or advertising of
dwellings, in the provisions of brokerage
services, or in the availability of residential
real estate related transactions.
(Ord. 99-05, 2/16/99)
Sec. 14-3. Fair Housing Program
Resource Representative.
A. The City’s Fair Housing Program
Resource Representative shall be the
Community Development Director
or another member of City staff as
designated by the Mayor.
B. The duties of the Fair Housing
Resource Representative shall include,
but not be limited to:
1. Collecting information regarding
impediments to fair housing and
actions taken to mitigate those
impediments and preparing an
annual City Code Analysis and
Impediments to Fair Housing
Action Plan for the Council
containing such information;
2. Printing and publicizing the City
Code Analysis and Impediments to
Fair Housing and Action Plan
annually and, as it becomes
available, acquiring and
distributing other applicable fair
housing information through local
media and community contacts;
3. Implementing the provisions of
Impediments to Fair Housing
Action Plan and efforts to promote
affordable housing where
appropriate and as directed by the
Council.
4. Collecting information regarding
affordable housing and City's
efforts to mitigate impediments to
affordable housing and preparing
an annual report regarding
affordable housing for the Council.
5. Coordinate public and private
efforts which could provide
opportunities for the development
of affordable housing in the City.
6. Maintaining a list of housing
industry providers, advocates,
realtors, organizations, and
agencies for distribution of fair
housing information, including
posters, brochures, and any other
means which will bring to the
attention of those affected the
knowledge of their respective
responsibilities and rights
concerning equal opportunity in
housing;
7. Maintaining City records
pertaining to activities
affirmatively promoting fair
housing and pertaining to
complaints and inquiries regarding
fair housing;
8. Assisting citizens in locating
agencies and resources which can
process their fair housing
questions, issues, and complaints;
9. Serving as a liaison with other
entities to promote and coordinate
§ 14-3 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 14-3
fair housing activities;
10. Assist the Moscow Fair and
Affordable Housing Commission in
understanding and executing its
duties; and
11. Display fair housing posters and
brochures to inform the public of
its rights and responsibilities.
(Ord. 99-05, 2/16/99)
§ 15-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 15-5
Chapter 15
JUNK VEHICLES
Sec. 15-1: Purpose
Sec. 15-2: Definitions
Sec. 15-3: Abatement and Removal of
Junk Vehicles from Private
Property
Sec. 15-4: Exceptions
Sec. 15-5: Removal and Disposal -
Costs - Liens
Sec. 15-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
promote health and safety be requiring junk
vehicles to be fully enclosed within a legal
structure on private property or to be fenced
or screened to hide junk vehicles and parts
thereof from public view or to be removed
from private property because such
presence of junk vehicles creates potential
health and/or safety problems to adjoining
property owners and to others within the
community. It is not the purpose of this
Chapter to lessen, alter, or otherwise
modify any other provision of this Code or
the Moscow Zoning Code.
Sec. 15-2. Definitions.
A. "Junk vehicle" means a vehicle or part
thereof substantially meeting the
following requirements:
1. Extensively damaged, which may
include any of the following: a
broken window or windshield,
missing one (1) or more wheels,
one (1) or more tires, a motor, or a
transmission;
2. Physically incapable of being
operated legally on a public
highway for whatever reason;
3. Not validly and currently
registered pursuant to Idaho Code.
B. "Vehicle", for the purposes of this
Chapter, has the same definition as
that contained in Idaho Code Section
49-123(2)(a).
(Ord. 2000-27, 11/20/2000)
Sec. 15-3. Abatement and Removal
of Junk Vehicles From
Private Property.
Except as otherwise provided by law,
all junk vehicles placed or present upon
private property within the City are public
nuisances to be abated not more than thirty
(30) days following notice by the City to
the owner of the junk vehicle or to the
owner of the property upon which the junk
vehicle is located, even in cases where
permission has been given for the junk
vehicle to be present on the property.
Sec. 15-4. Exceptions.
A. A junk vehicle or part thereof where
thirty (30) day notice by the City of
the violation has not been given to the
owner of the junk vehicle or to the
owner of the property upon which the
junk vehicle is located.
B. A junk vehicle or part thereof which is
completely enclosed within a structure
or which is behind a screen or fence in
a lawful manner where such junk
vehicle or part thereof is not visible
from the street or other public or
private property; or
C. A junk vehicle or part thereof which is
stored or parked in a lawful manner on
private property in connection with the
lawful business and which is fenced,
screened, or secured according to
applicable laws and ordinances.
Sec. 15-5. Removal and Disposal -
Costs - Liens.
Costs of removal by the City or its
agents may be assessed against the
registered owner of the junk vehicle if the
identity of the owner can be determined,
unless the owner in the transfer of
ownership of the junk vehicle has complied
with the Idaho Code. The costs of removal
by the City or its agents may be assessed
against the owner of the private property on
which the junk vehicle is present.
In addition to, or in lieu of, any other
state or local provisions for the recovery of
costs of removal by the City or its agents,
the City may, after removal of a junk
§ 15-5 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 15-5
vehicle under this Chapter, claim a lien for
the cost of removal and any and all
outstanding fines and collection costs in
accordance with the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2000-27, 11/20/2000)
§ 16-1 TITLE 10 – POLICE REGULATIONS § 16-6
Chapter 16
GRAFFITI
Sec. 16-1: Purpose and Intent
Sec. 16-2: Definition
Sec. 16-3: Graffiti Defacement
Unlawful
Sec. 16-4: Graffiti as Nuisance
Sec. 16-5: Removal of Graffiti by
Perpetrator
Sec. 16-6: Removal of Graffiti by
Property Owner or City
Sec. 16-7: Penalties
Sec. 16-1. Purpose and Intent.
The Council is enacting this Chapter to
help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism
and to establish a program for the reduction
of graffiti and the removal of graffiti from
public and private property.
(Ord. 2007-05, 06/04/2007)
Sec. 16-2. Definition.
For the purposes of this Chapter, Graffiti
shall mean: Any unauthorized inscription,
word, figure, painting or other defacement
that is written, marked, etched, scratched,
sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or
otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property by any graffiti implement,
to the extent that the graffiti was not
authorized in advance by the owner or
occupant of the property, or, despite advance
authorization, is otherwise deemed a public
nuisance.
(Ord. 2007-05, 06/04/2007)
Sec. 16-3. Graffiti Defacement Unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
apply graffiti to any natural or man-made
surface on any City-owned or non-Cityowned
property without the permission of
the City, owner, or occupant.
(Ord. 2007-05, 06/04/2007)
Sec. 16-4. Graffiti as Nuisance.
A. The existence of graffiti on public or
private property in violation of this
Chapter is expressly declared to be a
public nuisance and, therefore, is subject
to the removal and abatement provisions
specified in this Chapter.
B. It is the duty of both the owner of the
property to which the graffiti has been
applied and any person who may be in
possession or who has the right to
possess such property to at all times
keep the property clear of graffiti.
(Ord. 2007-05, 06/04/2007)
Sec. 16-5. Removal of Graffiti by
Perpetrator.
Any person applying graffiti on public
or private property shall have the duty to
remove the graffiti within twenty-four (24)
hours after notice by the City or private
owner of the property involved. Any person
applying graffiti shall be responsible for the
removal or for the payment of such removal.
Failure of any person to remove graffiti or
pay for the removal shall constitute an
additional violation of this Ordinance.
Where graffiti is applied by an
unemancipated minor, the parents or legal
guardian shall also be responsible for such
removal or for the payment for the removal.
(Ord. 2007-05, 06/04/2007)
Sec. 16-6. Removal of Graffiti by
Property Owner or City.
If graffiti is not removed by the
perpetrator according to this Chapter, graffiti
shall be removed pursuant to the following
provisions:
A. Property Owner Responsibility. It is
unlawful for any person who is the
owner or who has primary responsibility
for control of property or for repair or
maintenance of property in the City to
permit property that is defaced with
graffiti to remain defaced for a period of
ten (10) days after service by first class
mail of notice of the defacement. The
notice shall contain the following
information:
1. The street address and legal
description of the property sufficient for
identification of the property;
2. A statement that the property is a
potential graffiti nuisance property with
§ 16-6 TITLE 10 – POLICE REGULATIONS § 16-6
a concise description of the conditions
leading to the finding;
3. A statement that the graffiti must be
removed within ten (10) days after
receipt of the notice and that if the
graffiti is not abated within that time the
City will declare the property to be a
public nuisance; and
4. An information sheet identifying
any graffiti removal assistance programs
and funds available through the City and
private graffiti removal contractors.
B. Right of City to Remove.
1. Use of Public Funds. Whenever the
City becomes aware or is notified and
determines that graffiti is located on
publicly or privately owned property
viewable from a public or place open to
the public, the City shall be authorized
to use graffiti or other public funds for
the removal of the graffiti, or for the
painting or repairing of the graffiti, but
shall not authorize or undertake to
provide for the painting or repair of any
more extensive an area than that where
the graffiti is located, unless the City
Supervisor or designee determines, in
writing, that a more extensive area is
required to be repainted or repaired in
order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement
to the neighborhood or community, or
unless the property owner or responsible
party agrees to pay for the costs of
repainting or repairing the more
extensive area.
2. Right of Entry on Private Property.
Prior to entering upon private property
or property owned by a public entity
other than the City for the purpose of
graffiti removal, the City shall attempt
to secure the consent of the property
owner or responsible party and a release
of the City from liability for property
damage or personal injury. If the
property owner or responsible party fails
to remove the offending graffiti within
the time specified by this Chapter, or if
the City has requested consent to
remove or paint over the offending
graffiti and the property owner or
responsible party has refused consent for
entry on terms acceptable to the City
and consistent with the terms of this
Section, the City shall commence
abatement and cost recovery
proceedings for the graffiti removal
according to the provisions specified
below.
C. Abatement and Cost Recovery
Proceedings.
1. Notice of Due Process Hearing.
The City Supervisor or designee,
serving as the Hearing Officer, shall
provide the property owner of record
and the party responsible for the
maintenance of the property, if a person
different than the owner, not less than
forty-eight (48) hours notice of the
City's intent to hold a due process
hearing at which the property owner or
responsible party shall be entitled to
present evidence and argue that the
property does not constitute a public
nuisance. If the owner of record cannot
be found after a diligent search, the
notice may be served by posting a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place upon the
property for a period of ten (10) days
and publication thereof in the Official
Newspaper.
2. Determination of Hearing Officer.
The determination of the Hearing
Officer after the due process hearing
shall be final and not appealable. If,
after the due process hearing, regardless
of the attendance of the owner or the
responsible party or their respective
agents, the Hearing Officer determines
that the property contains graffiti
viewable from a public or place open to
the public, the Hearing Officer shall
give written notice in an eradication
order that, unless the graffiti is removed
within ten (10) days, the City shall enter
upon the property, cause the removal,
painting over (in such color as shall
meet with the approval of the Hearing
Officer), or such other eradication
thereof as the Hearing Officer
determines appropriate, and shall
provide the owner and the responsible
party thereafter with an accounting of
§ 16-6 TITLE 10 – POLICE REGULATIONS § 16-7
the costs of the eradication effort on a
full cost recovery basis.
3. Eradication Effort. Not sooner than
the time specified in the order of the
Hearing Officer, the City Supervisor or
designee shall implement the eradication
order and shall provide an accounting to
the owner and the responsible party of
the costs thereof.
4. Cost Hearing. The owner or
responsible party may request a cost
hearing before the Hearing Officer on
the eradication accounting, and
appropriate due process must be
extended to the owner or responsible
party. If following the cost hearing or,
if no hearing is requested, after the
implementation of the eradication order,
the Hearing Officer determines that all
or a portion of the costs are
appropriately chargeable to the
eradication effort, the total amount set
forth in the eradication accounting, or an
amount thereof determined as
appropriate by the Hearing Officer, shall
be due and payable by the owner or
responsible party within thirty (30) days.
Any amount of eradication charges
assessed by the Hearing Officer that are
less than the total amount set forth in the
eradication accounting shall be
explained by written letter from the
Hearing Officer to the Council.
5. Lien. As to such property where the
responsible party is the property owner,
if all or any portion of the assessed
eradication charges remain unpaid after
thirty (30) days, the portion thereof that
remains unpaid shall constitute a lien on
the property that was the subject of the
eradication effort.
(Ord. 2007-05, 06/04/2007)
Sec. 16-7. Penalties.
A. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof in a court of competent
jurisdiction, shall be punished pursuant
to this Code and the Idaho Code.
B. In addition to any punishment specified
in this Section, the court may order any
violator to make restitution to the
victim for damages or loss caused
directly or indirectly by the violator's
offense in the amount or manner
determined by the court. In the case of a
minor, the parents or legal guardian
shall be ordered jointly and severely
liable with the minor to make ordered
restitution.
(Ord. 2007-05, 06/04/2007)
§ 17-1 TITLE 10 – POLICE REGULATIONS § 17-3
Chapter 17
PARADE; PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
Sec. 17-1: Definitions
Sec. 17-2: Permit Required
Sec. 17-3: Exceptions
Sec. 17-4: Application
Sec. 17-5: Fees
Sec. 17-6: Police Protection
Sec. 17-7: Standards for Issuance
Sec. 17-8: Non-Discrimination
Sec. 17-9: Notice of Denial of
Application
Sec. 17-10: Alternative Permit
Sec. 17-11: Appeal Procedure
Sec. 17-12: Notice of Permit to Others
Sec. 17-13: Contents of Permit
Sec. 17-14: Duties of Permittee
Sec. 17-15: Prohibitions
Sec. 17-16: Public Conduct During
Parades or Public
Assemblies
Sec. 17-17: Revocation of Permit
Sec. 17-18: Penalties
Sec. 17-1. Definitions.
A. Parade means any march,
demonstration, procession or motorcade
consisting of persons, animals, and/or
vehicles upon streets, parks or other
public grounds within the City with a
common purpose of traveling from one
location to any other location to attract
public attention in a manner which
interferes with the normal flow or
regulation of traffic upon such streets,
parks or other public grounds and which
is intended to express feelings or beliefs
regarding current political, religious, or
social issues. Parade shall include fun
runs, bicycle races, walk-a-thons, and
the like.
B. Parade or public assembly permit
means a permit required by this Chapter.
C. Public assembly means any meeting,
demonstration, picket line, rally or
gathering of persons for a common
purpose as a result of prior planning that
interferes with the normal flow or
regulation of pedestrian and/or vehicular
traffic including, but not limited to, a
block party, wedding, quinceanera, bar
mitzvah, street fair, carnival,
anniversary and the like.
D. Sidewalk means any way or pathway
adjacent to a public right-of-way,
whether within the public right-of-way
or on private property, which is
designed primarily for pedestrian and/or
bicycle use.
E. Street means the entire width between
the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part is
open to the use of the public, extending
to the adjacent property line, including
sidewalks, shoulders, berms and rightsof-
way not intended for motorized
traffic.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-2. Permit Required.
No person shall engage in or conduct
any parade or public assembly unless a
permit is issued by the City pursuant to this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-3. Exceptions.
This Chapter shall not apply to the
following:
A. Funeral processions;
B. Students going to and from school
classes or participating in educational
activities, provided that such conduct is
under the direction and supervision of
the proper school authorities;
C. A governmental agency acting within
the scope of its functions;
D. An event or activity in a portion of a
public park for which no Park Special
Event permit is required;
E. A parade or public assembly which
occurs within the location and pursuant
to a permitted Downtown Special Event
or a permitted Park Special Event; and
F. An event or activity which occurs within
a reserved portion of a City Park as
allowed by the Parks and Recreation
Department.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
§ 17-4 TITLE 10 – POLICE REGULATIONS § 17-4
Sec. 17-4. Application.
A. A person seeking a parade or public
assembly permit shall file an application
with the Clerk on forms provided and
the application shall be signed by the
applicant.
B. For single, non-recurring parades or
public assemblies, an application for a
permit shall be filed with the Clerk at
least ten (10) and not more than one
hundred eighty (180) days before the
parade or public assembly is proposed to
commence. The Clerk may waive the
minimum ten (10) day filing period and
accept an application filed within a
shorter period if, after due consideration
of the date, time, place and nature of the
parade or public assembly, the
anticipated number of participants, and
the City services required in connection
with the event, the City staff determines
that the waiver is not likely to present a
hazard to public safety.
C. For parades or public assemblies held on
a regular or recurring basis at the same
location, an application for a permit
covering all such parades or assemblies
during that calendar year shall be filed
with the Clerk at least sixty (60) and not
more than one hundred eighty (180)
days before the date and time at which
the first such parade or public assembly
is proposed to commence. The Clerk
may waive the minimum sixty (60) day
period after due consideration of the
factors specified in subsection (B)
herein.
D. The application for a parade or public
assembly permit shall set forth the
following information:
1. The name, address and telephone
number of the person seeking to conduct
such parade or public assembly;
2. The names, addresses and telephone
numbers of the headquarters of the
organization for which the parade or
public assembly is to be conducted, if
any, and the authorized and responsible
heads of the organization;
3. The requested date of the parade or
public assembly;
4. The route to be traveled, including
the starting point and the termination
point;
5. The approximate number of
persons, animals, and/or vehicles
constituting such parade or public
assembly and the type of animals and
description of the vehicles, if any;
6. The time when such parade or
public assembly will start and terminate;
7. A statement as to whether the
parade or public assembly will occupy
all or only a portion of the width of the
streets proposed to be traversed;
8. The location of any assembly areas
for such parade or public assembly;
9. The time at which units of the
parade or public assembly will begin to
assemble at any such area;
10. If the parade or public assembly is
designed to be held by, or on behalf of,
any person other than the applicant, the
applicant for such permit shall file a
letter from that person with the Clerk
authorizing the applicant to apply for the
permit on such person’s behalf;
11. The type of public assembly,
including a description of activities
planned during the event;
12. A description of any recording
equipment, sound amplification
equipment, banners, signs, or other
attention-getting devices to be used in
connection with the parade or public
assembly;
13. The approximate number of
participants (spectators are by definition
not participants);
14. The approximate number of
spectators;
15. A designation of any public
facilities or equipment to be utilized;
and
16. Any additional information that the
Clerk finds reasonably necessary to a
fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
§ 17-5 TITLE 10 – POLICE REGULATIONS § 17-7
Sec. 17-5. Fees.
A. A non-refundable fee established from
time to time by duly adopted resolution
of the Council to cover administrative
costs of processing the permit shall be
paid to the City by the applicant when
the application is filed.
B. If the application is for the use of any
City property or if any City services are
required for the parade or public
assembly, the applicant shall pay, prior
to the issuance of a permit, the charges
for those services in accordance with a
schedule of service costs established
from time to time by duly adopted
resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-6. Police Protection.
A. The Chief of Police shall determine
whether and to what extent additional
police protection is reasonably
necessary for the parade or public
assembly for traffic control and public
safety. The Chief of Police shall base
this decision on the size, location,
duration, time and date of the parade or
public assembly, the number of streets
and intersections blocked, and the need
to detour or preempt travel and use of
the streets and sidewalks. The speech
content of the parade or public assembly
shall not be a factor in determining the
amount of police protection necessary.
If possible, without disruption of
ordinary police services or compromise
of public safety, regularly scheduled onduty
personnel will police the parade or
public assembly. If additional police
protection for the parade or public
assembly is deemed necessary by the
Chief of Police, the applicant for the
permit shall be informed. The applicant
then shall have the duty to arrange with
the Chief of Police for protection
deemed necessary by the Chief of Police
at the sole expense of the applicant.
B. Persons engaging in parades or public
assemblies conducted for the sole
purpose of public issue speech protected
under the First Amendment are not
required to pay for any police protection
provided by the City.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-7. Standards for Issuance.
A. The Clerk shall issue a permit as
provided for herein when, from a
consideration of the application and
from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, the Clerk finds
that:
1. The conduct of the parade or public
assembly will not substantially interrupt
the safe and orderly movement of other
pedestrian or vehicular traffic
contiguous to its route or location (such
as during Farmers’ Market);
2. The conduct of the parade or public
assembly will not require the diversion
of so great a number of City police
officers to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous
thereto as to prevent normal police
protection in the City;
3. The concentration of any persons,
animals, and/or vehicles at public
assembly points of the parade or public
assembly will not unduly interfere with
proper fire and police protection of, or
ambulance service to, areas contiguous
to such public assembly areas;
4. The conduct of the parade or public
assembly is not reasonably likely to
cause injury to persons or property;
5. The parade or public assembly is
scheduled to move from its point of
origin to its point of termination
expeditiously and without unreasonable
delays en route;
6. Adequate sanitation and other
required health facilities are or will be
made available in or adjacent to any
public assembly areas;
7. There are sufficient parking places
near the site of the parade or public
assembly to accommodate the number
of vehicles reasonably expected;
8. The application has secured the
police protection, if any, required by this
Chapter;
§ 17-7 TITLE 10 – POLICE REGULATIONS § 17-11
9. Such parade or public assembly is
not for the primary purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event
that is primarily for private profit, and
the parade itself is not primarily for
profit. The prohibition against
advertising any product, goods or event
shall not apply to signs identifying
organizations or sponsors furnishing or
sponsoring exhibits or structures used in
the parade;
10. No parade or public assembly
permit application for the same time and
location is already granted or has been
received and will be granted;
11. No parade or public assembly
permit application for the same time but
different location is already granted or
has been received and will be granted,
and the police resources required for
that prior parade or public assembly are
so great that in combination with the
subsequent proposed application, the
resulting deployment of police services
would have an immediate and adverse
effect upon the welfare and safety of
persons and property; and
12. No event is scheduled elsewhere in
the City where the police resources
required for that event are so great that
the deployment of police services for the
proposed parade or public assembly
would have an immediate and adverse
effect upon the welfare and safety of
persons and property.
B. No permit shall be granted that allows
for the erection or placement of any
structure, whether permanent or
temporary, on a City street, sidewalk, or
right-of-way unless advance approval
for the erection or placement of the
structure is obtained from the Clerk.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-8. Non-Discrimination.
The Clerk shall uniformly consider each
application upon its merits and shall not
discriminate in granting or denying permits
under this Chapter based upon political,
religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual
orientation or gender related grounds.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-9. Notice of Denial of Application.
The Clerk shall act promptly upon a
timely filed application for a parade or
public assembly permit but in no event shall
grant or deny a permit less than forty eight
(48) hours prior to the event unless such
application is filed less than forty eight (48)
hours prior to the event. In such case,
notification shall occur as soon as possible
following the grant or denial. If the Clerk
disapproves the application, the Clerk shall
notify the applicant either by personal
delivery or certified mail at least forty eight
(48) hours prior to the event and shall state
the reasons for denial.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-10. Alternative Permit.
A. The Clerk, in denying an application for
a parade or public assembly permit, may
authorize the conduct of the parade or
public assembly at a date, time, location,
or route different from that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to
accept an alternate permit shall, within
five (5) days after notice of the action of
the Clerk, file a written notice of
acceptance with the Clerk.
B. An alternate parade or public assembly
permit shall conform to the requirements
of, and shall have the effect of, a parade
or public assembly permit issued under
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-11. Appeal Procedure.
A. Any applicant shall have the right to
appeal the denial of a parade or
public assembly permit to the
Council. The denied applicant shall
make the appeal within five (5) days
after receipt of the denial by filing a
written notice with the Clerk and a
copy of the notice with the Clerk.
The Council shall act upon the
appeal at the next scheduled
§ 17-11 TITLE 10 – POLICE REGULATIONS § 17-15
meeting following receipt of the notice
of appeal.
B. At the consideration of the appeal before
the Council, the applicant or person
appealing shall be entitled to appear in
person and offer evidence pertinent to
the denial or may appear through legal
counsel. The Clerk legal counsel and/or
other City personnel shall likewise be
entitled to appear at the appeal and offer
evidence in support of the denial.
Failure by applicant, person appealing,
or their representative to appear before
Council at the time scheduled to
consider such an appeal shall result in
the automatic denial of such appeal.
C. In the event that the Council rejects an
applicant’s appeal, the applicant may
file an immediate request for review
with a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-12. Notice of Permit to Others.
Upon the issuance of a parade or public
assembly permit, the Clerk will send a copy
thereof to the following:
A. Mayor;
B. City Supervisor;
C. Police Chief
D. Fire Chief;
E. City Engineer
F. Parks and Recreation Director; and
F. City Attorney.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-13. Contents of Permit.
Each parade or public assembly permit
shall state the following information:
A. Starting and approximate ending time;
B. The portions of the streets that may be
occupied by the parade or public
assembly;
C. The maximum length of the parade; and
D. Such other information as the City staff
shall find necessary to the enforcement
of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-14. Duties of Permittee.
A. A permittee hereunder shall comply
with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and
ordinances.
B. The parade or public assembly chair or
other person heading such activity shall
carry the parade or public assembly
permit upon his or her person during the
conduct of the parade or public
assembly.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-15. Prohibitions.
The following prohibitions shall apply
to all parades and public assemblies:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
stage, present, or conduct any parade or
public assembly without first having
obtained a permit as herein provided;
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to
participate in a parade or public
assembly for which the person knows a
permit has not been granted;
C. It shall be unlawful for any person in
charge of, or responsible for the conduct
of, a duly licensed parade or public
assembly to knowingly fail to comply
with any condition of the permit;
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in any parade or public assembly
activity that would constitute a
substantial hazard to the public safety or
that would materially interfere with or
endanger the public peace or rights of
residents to the peaceful enjoyment of
their property;
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry any sign, poster, plaque, or notice,
whether or not mounted on a length of
material as specified in subsection (e) of
this Section, unless such sign, poster,
plaque, or notice is constructed or made
of a cloth, paper, or cardboard material;
F. It shall be unlawful for any person in
any parade to throw any object from a
float, automobile, or animal during such
parade; and
§ 17-15 TITLE 10 – POLICE REGULATIONS § 17-18
G. It shall be unlawful for any person
participating in a parade or public
assembly to utilize sound amplification
equipment at decibel levels which
exceed those limits allowed by this
Code.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-16. Public Conduct During
Parades or Public
Assemblies.
A. No person shall unreasonably hamper,
obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
parade or public assembly or with any
person, vehicle or animal participating
or used in a permitted parade or public
assembly.
B. No driver of a vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles or persons
comprising a permitted parade or public
assembly when such vehicles or persons
are in motion.
C. The Chief of Police or City Engineer
shall have the authority, when
reasonably necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a
street constituting a part of the route of a
parade or public assembly. The Chief of
Police or City Engineer shall post signs
to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended
any vehicle in violation thereof and the
Chief of Police is authorized to tow any
vehicle found in violation of such
posting. The registered owner shall be
liable for any fees or fines resulting
from the towing of such vehicle. No
person shall be liable for parking on a
street not properly posted pursuant to
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-17. Revocation of Permit.
The Clerk or Chief of Police shall have
the authority to revoke a parade or public
assembly permit instantly upon violation of
any condition or standard for issuance as set
forth in this Chapter or when a public
emergency arises where City resources
required for that emergency are so great that
deployment of police services for the parade
or public assembly would have an
immediate and adverse effect upon the
welfare and safety of persons or property.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
Sec. 17-18. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished
pursuant to this Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2005-05, 01/18/2005)
§ 18-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 18-2
Chapter 18
UNSOLICITED PUBLICATIONS
Sec. 18-1: Definitions
Sec. 18-2: Obligations of Publisher(s)
and Distributor(s)
Sec. 18-3: Removal of Unsolicited
Publications
Sec. 18-4: Removal/Proper Delivery of
Poorly Delivered Publications
Sec. 18-5: Exceptions
Sec. 18-6: Penalty
Sec. 18-1. Definitions.
A. Deliver/Delivery. Distribute, deposit,
dispose, disseminate, throw, cast or
place, or cause or permit to Deliver,
distribute, deposit, dispose,
disseminate, throw, cast or place, a
Publication, directly or indirectly by a
Publisher or a Distributor, contractor,
agent, employee or otherwise.
B. Distributor. An entity or person who
engages in the business of circulating
or Delivering a Publication (including a
newspaper).
C. No Delivery. A request made by the
owner or occupant of a premises within
City limits to a Publisher or Distributor
that an Unsolicited Publication of the
Publisher not be Delivered to such
owner’s or occupant’s premises.
D. Publication. Any printed material,
without regard to its content, whether
printed in broadsheet, tabloid or other
sheet or booklet form, and shall include
without limitation a telephone
directory, a catalog, a newspaper of
general circulation, including a
newspaper or newspaper advertising
insert duly entered with the United
States Postal Service in accordance
with statute or regulation; any
collection of advertising or solicitations
appended together in booklet or
magazine form; and any newspaper,
telephone directory, catalog or other
Publication distributed without
recipient’s cost or subscription.
E. Publisher. An entity or person who
engages in the business of printing and
issuing for circulation, or causing to be
printed and issued for circulation, a
Publication.
F. Unsolicited Publication. A Publication
to which no owner or occupant of the
premises to which it is delivered
currently subscribes or has not
requested.
(Ord. 2012-11, 06/18/2012; 2012-22,
11/19/2012)
Sec. 18-2. Obligations of Publisher(s)
and Distributor(s).
A. Publisher. Every Publisher Delivering
or causing Delivery of an Unsolicited
Publication within the City shall do the
following:
1. Provide reasonable methods,
including but not limited to, facsimile,
e-mail, regular mail, and hand
Delivery, etc., to allow an owner and/or
occupant of premises located within the
City to communicate to the Publisher in
written form that they do not wish to
receive the Unsolicited Publication
issued by the Publisher (i.e., a No
Delivery request). Notice of all such
methods shall be regularly included in,
on, or with the Unsolicited Publications
issued by the Publisher.
2. Implement a process whereby the
addresses of all persons making No
Delivery requests pursuant to this
Chapter are timely communicated to
any and all applicable Distributors
responsible for distributing the
Unsolicited Publication issued by the
Publisher.
3. Timely communicate the addresses
of all persons making requests for No
Delivery made pursuant to this Chapter
to all applicable Distributors.
4. Implement and communicate to a
person requesting No Delivery a
process for tracking No Delivery
requests made pursuant to this Chapter,
including, by way of example, the
assignment of a tracking number or
some other reference system, in order
to allow every person making such No
Delivery requests to reference same in
the event there is the need for followup
or for further communication.
§ 18-2 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 18-5
5. Implement and utilize a process to
timely follow up with all applicable
Distributors to ensure compliance with
No Delivery requests made pursuant to
this Chapter.
6. Upon written request, provide the
City with contact information for any
applicable Distributor to allow the City
to follow up with that Distributor on
any complaint received by the City
regarding Delivery of an Unsolicited
Publication after making a No Delivery
request pursuant to this Chapter.
B. Distributor.
1. Any Distributor Delivering or
causing Delivery of an Unsolicited
Publications within the City shall:
a. Implement and utilize a
process for tracking and executing a
Publisher’s direction regarding No
Delivery requests made pursuant to this
Chapter.
b. Not Deliver to any owner’s or
occupant’s premises where such owner
or occupant has made a written request
for No Delivery and such No Delivery
request has been communicated to the
Distributor by the Publisher pursuant to
this Chapter.
c. Upon written request, provide
the City with facts and details related to
complaints received regarding Delivery
of an Unsolicited Publication after
receiving a No Delivery request
pursuant to this Chapter.
d. Take corrective measures
requested by the City after the City’s
completion of investigation into
complaints received regarding Delivery
of an Unsolicited Publication after a No
Delivery request pursuant to this
Chapter.
2. In making Deliveries, Distributors
shall place all Publications on the porch
or within four feet (4’) of the main
entrance(s) of the dwelling(s) or
business(es) to which the Distributor
intends Delivery.
3. Unsolicited Publications (other
than those in properly located and
maintained newspaper boxes or racks,
placed on a porch; or within four feet
[4’] of the main dwelling(s) entrance(s)
to dwelling(s) and/or business(es) on
the property) shall not be placed by
Distributors on streets, sidewalks,
public rights-of-way, or other public
property and shall not be distributed by
placing them at intervals along a block,
or by placing several near the entrance
to a multi-unit building, other than in
direct relation to the number of
Publications requested by the owners
or occupants of the block or building.
(Ord. 2012-11, 06/18/2012; 2012-22,
11/19/2012)
Sec. 18-3. Removal of Unsolicited
Publications.
If the Unsolicited Publication can be
located, the Distributor thereof shall remove
any Unsolicited Publication Delivered in
violation of this Chapter within twenty four
(24) hours following notice and demand by
the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the premises
for such removal.
(Ord. 2012-11, 06/18/2012; 2012-22, 11/19/2012)
Sec. 18-4. Removal/Proper Delivery of
Poorly Delivered
Publications.
If a Publication (whether or not
Unsolicited) can be located, the Distributor
thereof shall remove it or place it on the
porch or within four feet (4’) of the main
dwelling(s) or entrance(s) to dwelling(s)
and/or business(es) on the property within
twenty four (24) hours following notice and
demand by the owner(s) or occupant(s) of
the premises for removal or placement
pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2012-22, 11/19/2012)
Sec. 18-5. Exceptions.
A. This Chapter shall not regulate the
content of any Publication or activities
the City is prohibited from regulating
by the First Amendment to the United
States Constitution or the Idaho
Constitution.
B. This Chapter shall not prohibit
Delivery of a Publication or
Unsolicited Publication by the United
States Postal Service.
C. Unless a person has duly requested “No
Delivery” of an Unsolicited
Publication, as defined by this Chapter,
§ 18-5 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 18-6
this Chapter shall not prohibit Delivery
of a Publication by:
1. Handing or transmitting it directly
to an owner or occupant then present
on the property;
2. Placing it within a receptacle or
container expressly maintained by the
owner(s) or occupant(s) of property for
the receipt of newspaper or other
Publication; or
3. Placing it on the porch or within
four feet (4’) of the main entrance(s) to
dwelling(s) and/or business(es) on the
property.
D. Requests made by owners or residents
for temporary cessation of Publication
Deliveries are not regulated by this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2012-11, 06/18/2012; 2012-22,
11/19/2012)
Sec. 18-6. Penalty.
A. Each violation of this Chapter shall
constitute a separate and independent
violation from any other violation of
this Chapter by the Publisher and/or
Distributor.
B. Each failure to remove an Unsolicited
Publication within twenty four (24)
hours following a notice and demand
by the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the
premises, shall constitute a separate
infraction.
C. Each failure to remove a Publication
which has not been placed on the porch
or within four feet (4’) of the main
dwelling(s) or entrance(s) on the
property within twenty four (24) hours
following a notice and demand by the
owner(s) or occupant(s) of the
premises, shall constitute a separate
infraction.
D. Any person violating the provisions of
this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of
an infraction and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished pursuant to
this Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2012-11, 06/18/2012; 2012-22,
11/19/2012)
§ 19-1 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 19-2
Chapter 19
NON-DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT AND HOUSING
PRACTICES
Sec. 19-1: Purpose and Declaration of
Policy
Sec. 19-2: Definitions
Sec. 19-3: Prohibited Discriminatory
Acts
Sec. 19-4: Exceptions
Sec. 19-5: Penalty
Sec. 19-6: Unlawful Intimidation,
Retaliation, and Interference
Sec. 19-1. Purpose and Declaration of
Policy
A. The City has determined that
discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation and/or gender
identity/expression shall be prohibited,
as set out in this Chapter, in order to help
ensure that all persons, regardless of
sexual orientation and/or gender
expression/identity, are afforded equal
opportunities for employment, in
housing, commercial property, and in the
use of public accommodations.
B. It is hereby declared that every person in
the City has the right to work and to earn
wages through gainful employment, has
the right to seek housing, and has the
right to enjoy public accommodation and
hospitality.
C. It is hereby declared to be the public
policy of the City to foster employment
of all persons in accordance with their
abilities. Discriminatory employment
practices are detrimental because they
impede the social and economic progress
of a city by preventing all of the city's
occupants from contributing to the
cultural, spiritual, social, and
commercial life of the community. Such
contributions are fundamental
components of the City's growth,
vitality, and prosperity.
D. It is the intent of this Chapter that all
persons be treated fairly and equally. It
is the express intent of this Chapter to
foster and support fair and equal
treatment under the law to all people in
the City. The denial of fair and equal
treatment under the law due to sexual
orientation and/or gender
identity/expression is detrimental to the
health, safety, and welfare of the city's
occupants, and such damages a city's
economic well-being.
E. This Chapter shall be deemed an
exercise of the police power of the City
for the protection of the public welfare,
prosperity, health and peace of the City,
its residents, occupants, and the
community at large.
F. The prohibitions against discriminatory
acts, as provided for in this Chapter, are
intended to supplement state and federal
civil rights laws and regulations
prohibiting discrimination in the areas of
employment, public accommodations,
and housing; therefor, this Chapter shall
not apply to complaints alleging
discrimination on a basis proscribed
under state or federal law (e.g. race,
color, religious creed, ancestry, age, sex,
national origin, familial status, veteran’s
status, and/or disability).
G. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to
alter or abridge other rights, protections,
or privileges secured under state and/or
federal law. This Chapter shall not
create a private cause of action, nor shall
it create any right or remedy that is the
same or substantially equivalent to
remedy provided under federal or state
law.
H. This Chapter shall not create any special
rights or privileges which would not be
available to all of the City’s citizens
because every person has a sexual
orientation and a gender identity.
I. This Chapter shall be construed and
applied in a manner consistent with First
Amendment jurisprudence regarding the
freedom of speech and exercise of
religion.
(Ord. 2013-06, 04/01/2013)
Sec. 19-2. Definitions.
A. Deny. Any act which, directly or
indirectly, by any person or their agent
or employee, results or is intended to or
§ 19-2 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 19-2
calculated to result in whole or in part in
any discrimination, distinction,
restriction, or unequal treatment or
representation. It also includes, but is
not limited to, requiring a person to pay
a larger sum than the uniform rates
charged other persons, or the refusing or
withholding from persons admission,
patronage, custom, presence,
frequenting, dwelling, staying, or
lodging in any place of public resort,
accommodation, assemblage, or
amusement except for conditions and
limitations established by law and
applicable alike to all persons, regardless
of sexual orientation and/or gender
expression/identity,
B. Discrimination. Any direct or indirect
exclusion, distinction, segregation,
limitation, refusal, denial, or other
differentiation in the treatment of a
person because of a person’s actual or
perceived sexual orientation or gender
identity/expression or because of a
person’s association with any such
person. “Discrimination” shall not mean
and shall not be interpreted to require or
to grant or to accord any preferential
treatment to any person because of that
person’s sexual orientation or gender
expression/identity.
C. Educational Institution. A public or
private institution, including an
academy; college; elementary or
secondary school; extension course;
kindergarten; nursery; school system;
university; business; nursing,
professional, secretarial, technical, or
vocational school; or agent of such an
educational institution.
D. Full Enjoyment. The right to use, rent or
purchase real property; any service,
commodity or article of personal
property offered or sold by any person or
establishment to the public; and the
admission of any person to
accommodations, advantages, facilities
or privileges of any place of public
resort, accommodation, assemblage or
amusement; free from acts directly or
indirectly causing persons of any
particular sexual orientation and/or
gender identity/expression to be treated
as not welcome, accepted, desired or
solicited.
E. Gender Identity/Expression. Actual or
perceived gender-related characteristics,
identity, appearance, expression or
behavior of a person, regardless of such
person's biological or assigned sex at
birth.
F. Housing Accommodation. A building or
portion of a building (as defined in the
Zoning Code), whether constructed or to
be constructed, that is or will be used as
the home, domicile, residence, or
sleeping quarters for occupants.
G. Otherwise Qualified. A person who
possesses the following bona fide job
related qualifications required by an
employer for any particular job, job
classification, or position: education;
training; ability; character; integrity;
disposition to work; adherence to
reasonable rules and regulations; and
other bona fide job related qualifications
required by an employer.
H. Place of Public Resort, Accommodation,
Assemblage or Amusement. Any public
place, licensed or unlicensed, kept for
gain, hire or reward, or where charges
are made for admission, service,
occupancy or use of any property or
facilities, whether conducted for the
entertainment, housing or lodging of
transient guests, or for the benefit, use or
accommodation of those seeking health,
recreation or rest, or for the sale of goods
and merchandise, or for the rendering of
personal services, or for public
conveyance or transportation on land,
water or in the air, including the stations
and terminals thereof and the
garaging/storing of vehicles, or where
food or beverages of any kind are sold
for consumption on the premises, or
where public amusement, entertainment,
sports or recreation of any kind is
offered with or without charge, or where
medical service or care is made
available, or where the public gathers,
congregates, or assembles for
amusement, recreation or public
purposes, or public halls, public
elevators and public washrooms of
buildings and structures occupied by two
(2) or more tenants, or by the owner and
§ 19-2 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 19-5
one (1) or more tenants, or any public
library or any educational institution
wholly or partially supported by public
funds, or schools of special instruction,
or nursery schools, or day care facilities
or children's camps. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to include,
or apply to, any institute, bona fide club,
or place of accommodation, which is by
its nature distinctly private, provided that
where public use is permitted, such use
shall be covered by this definition. This
definition excludes any educational
facility operated or maintained by a bona
fide religious or sectarian institution.
I. Sexual Orientation. Actual or perceived
homosexuality, heterosexuality, and/or
bisexuality.
(Ord. 2013-06, 04/01/2013)
Sec. 19-3. Prohibited Discriminatory
Acts.
The following acts are prohibited:
A. Employment. To deny to a person
otherwise qualified the right to work
because of sexual orientation and/or
gender identity/expression by:
1. failing or refusing to hire;
2. discharging from employment;
3. barring from employment;
4. discriminating against a person in
compensation or in other terms or
conditions of employment; or
5. otherwise discriminating against a
person with respect to employment.
B. Use. To deny to or to discriminate
against any person because of sexual
orientation and/or gender
identity/expression, the full enjoyment of
any of the accommodations, advantages,
facilities or privileges of any place of
public resort, accommodation,
assemblage, or amusement.
C. Housing. To deny to or discriminate
against a person because of sexual
orientation and/or gender
identity/expression in the sale, purchase,
lease or rental of any housing
accommodation, or to otherwise
discriminate in the terms and conditions,
maintenance, improvement or repair of
any housing accommodation.
(Ord. 2013-06, 04/01/2013)
Sec. 19-4. Exceptions.
A. This Chapter shall not apply to:
1. A religious corporation, association,
educational institution, or society, trust
or any entity or association which is a
wholly owned or controlled subsidiary or
agency of any religious corporation,
association, society, trust or corporation
sole.
2. An expressive association whose
employment of a person protected by
this Chapter would significantly burden
such association’s rights of expressive
association under Boy Scouts of
America v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640 (2000).
3. The United States government, any
of its departments or agencies, or any
corporation wholly owned by it; or the
state of Idaho or any of its departments,
agencies, or political subdivisions,
except the City of Moscow, Idaho.
B. This Chapter shall not apply to:
1. the rental of a dwelling unit within a
two (2) family dwelling where the owner
of the two (2) family dwelling, or a
relative of the owner, resides within one
(1) of such dwelling unit(s), as such
terms are defined by the Zoning Code; or
2. the rental of rooms within a
Boarding House, as defined by the
Zoning Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2013-06, 04/01/2013)
Sec. 19-5. Penalty.
A. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished pursuant to this Code.
B. A violation may be reduced to an
infraction, payable by a fine as set from
time to time by Resolution of the
Council, if the defendant engages in
corrective actions, which may include,
but are not limited to the following:
sensitivity training for the defendant
and/or the defendant’s employees; the
defendant’s agreement to adopt and
pursue a policy of nondiscrimination in
its practices; and/or the defendant’s
agreement to not engage in
discriminatory practices in the future.
§ 19-5 TITLE 10 — POLICE REGULATIONS § 19-7
There shall be no right to a trial by jury
for an infraction.
C. A complaint filed under the provisions of
this Chapter shall be filed within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the alleged
discriminatory conduct.
(Ord. 2013-06, 04/01/2013)
Sec. 19-6. Unlawful Intimidation,
Retaliation, and
Interference.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm,
damage, or otherwise penalize another
person for opposing an unlawful practice, for
filing a complaint, for assisting, or
participating in the investigation in any
manner, or participating in mediation related
to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2013-06, 04/01/2013)
Sec. 19-7. No Private Right of Action
or Money Damages.
There is no private right or cause of
action created by this Chapter. No money
damages are available to any person based
on this Chapter.
(Ord. 2013-06, 04/01/2013)
§ 1-1 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 1-6
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS, GENERAL
PROVISIONS AND PENALTIES
Sec. 1-1: Definitions
Sec. 1-2: Adoption by Reference
Sec. 1-3: Speed Limit
Sec. 1-4: Authority of Police and Fire
Department Officials
Sec. 1-5: Police Department to
Investigate Accidents
Sec. 1-6: Emergency and
Experimental Regulations
Sec. 1-7: Authority to Restrict
Direction of Movement on
Streets During Certain
Periods
Sec. 1-8: Authority to Designate
Crosswalks and Establish
Safety Zones
Sec. 1-9: Authority to Mark Traffic
Lanes
Sec. 1-10: Authority to Restrict Use of
Streets by Certain Vehicles
Sec. 1-11: Driving on Divided Streets
or Highways
Sec. 1-12: Restricted Turning
Movements
Sec. 1-13: Barriers, Barricades or
Warning Signals
Sec. 1-14: Heavy Loads, Machinery,
Lugs and Flanges
Sec. 1-15: When Permits Required for
Parades and Processions
Sec. 1-16: Penalties
Sec. 1-1. Definitions
The City hereby adopts definitions
contained in Idaho Code Title 49 for the
purposes of enforcement of Title 11 of this
Code unless otherwise specifically defined.
Sec. 1-2. Adoption by Reference.
Pursuant to Idaho Code Section 49-
208(4), the Idaho Rules of the Road are
hereby adopted as and for the Traffic
Ordinance of the City with like effect as if
recited at length.
Sec. 1-3. Speed Limit.
The speed limit in all areas of the City
shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour
unless the area is otherwise posted. It shall
be unlawful to exceed the posted speed
limits within the City.
Ref. Idaho Code § 49-208(2)(a)
Sec. 1-4. Authority of Police and
Fire Department Officials.
A. It shall be the duty of the Police
Department and such officers and
employees as are assigned by the
Chief of Police to enforce all street
traffic laws of this City and all the
State vehicle laws applicable to traffic
in this City.
B. The Police Department and/or such
officers and employees as are assigned
by the Chief of Police are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal in conformance
with traffic laws; provided that, in the
event of a fire or other emergency or
to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police
Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic
laws.
C. Officers, volunteers, and employees of
the Fire Department, when at the
scene of a fire, may direct or assist the
police in directing traffic through or in
the immediate vicinity.
Ref. Idaho Code § 49-205(3)
Sec. 1-5. Police Department to
Investigate Accidents.
It shall be the duty of the Police
Department to investigate traffic accidents,
to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of
those persons charged with violations of
law causing or contributing to such
accidents.
Sec. 1-6. Emergency and
Experimental Regulations.
A. The Chief of Police by and with the
approval of the City Engineer is
hereby empowered to make
§ 1-6 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 1-13
regulations necessary to make
effective the provisions of the traffic
ordinances of this City and to make
and enforce temporary or experimental
regulations to cover emergencies or
special conditions. No such temporary
or experimental regulation shall
remain in effect for more than ninety
(90) days.
B. The City Engineer may test traffic
control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
Ref. Idaho Code § 49-208(1)(t)
Sec. 1-7. Authority to Restrict
Direction of Movement on
Streets During Certain
Periods.
A. The City Engineer is hereby
authorized to determine and designate
streets, parts of streets or specific
lanes, thereon upon which vehicular
traffic shall proceed in one direction
during one period and the opposite
direction during another period of the
day and shall place and maintain
appropriate markings, signs, barriers
or other devices to give notice thereof.
B. The City Engineer may erect signs
temporarily designating lanes to be
used by traffic moving in a particular
direction, regardless of the center line
of the roadway.
Sec. 1-8. Authority to Designate
Crosswalks and Establish
Safety Zones.
A. The City Engineer is hereby
authorized to designate and maintain,
by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections where in
the City Engineer’s opinion there is
particular danger to pedestrians
crossing the roadway and at such other
places as he may deem necessary.
B. To establish safety zones of such kind
and character and at such places as the
City Engineer may deem necessary for
the protection of pedestrians.
Ref. Idaho Code § 49-208(1)(o)(n)
Sec. 1-9. Authority to Mark Traffic
Lanes.
The City Engineer is hereby
authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the
roadway of any street or highway where a
regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
Ref. Idaho Code § 49-208(1)(b)
Sec. 1-10. Authority to Restrict Use
of Streets by Certain
Vehicles.
The City Engineer is hereby
authorized to determine and designate those
heavily traveled streets upon which shall be
prohibited the use of the roadway by motor
driven cycles, bicycles, horse drawn
vehicles or other non-motorized traffic and
shall erect appropriate signs giving notice
thereof.
Ref. Idaho Code § 49-208(1)(k)
Sec. 1-11. Driving on Divided Streets
or Highways.
Whenever any street or highway has
been divided into two (2) or more roadways
by leaving an intervening space or by a
physical barrier or clearly indicated
dividing section so constructed as to
impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle
shall be driven only upon the right hand
roadway and no vehicle shall be driven
over, across or within any such dividing
space, barrier or section, except through an
opening in such physical barrier or dividing
section or space or at a cross over or
intersection established by the City.
Sec. 1-12. Restricted Turning
Movements.
It shall be unlawful for any driver of
any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction except
when such movement can be made with
safety and without interfering with other
traffic.
Sec. 1-13. Barriers, Barricades or
Warning Signals.
No person shall ride or drive any
motor vehicle or any bicycle or any other
vehicle over, across or upon any pavement,
curbing or sidewalk which has been newly
laid or across which barriers, barricades or
§ 1-13 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 1-16
warning signals have been placed, or on or
over any street or sidewalk which has been
closed to traffic, or across or near which
barriers or signs have been erected showing
said street or sidewalk to be closed.
Sec. 1-14. Heavy Loads, Machinery,
Lugs and Flanges.
A. No person shall drive or operate any
vehicle of such weight or size or in
such condition, or so constructed or
loaded, as to cause delay in traffic, or
cause accident, or cause injury to any
person's property or to the street.
B. No machine or machinery of any kind
having lugs or flanges upon its wheels
upon which its weight is borne or any
cutting machine or machinery with
disks touching the surface of the
street, shall be moved or propelled
over or upon any paved street in the
City, except that planks of not less
than two (2) inches in thickness be
first laid upon the pavement, and such
machine or machinery be entirely
resting, moved or propelled upon such
planks.
Sec. 1-15. When Permits Required
for Parades and
Processions.
It shall be unlawful for any parade or
the like containing persons or vehicles to
occupy, march or proceed along any street
except in accordance with a permit issued
by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth.
Sec. 1-16. Penalties.
A. Any person violating the provisions of
this Chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished pursuant to
this Code and the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2000-20, 09/18/2000)
§ 2-1 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 2-7

Chapter 2
WALKWAYS AND BIKE PATHS
Sec. 2-1: Purpose
Sec. 2-2: Definitions
Sec. 2-3: Bike Path and Walkway
Map
Sec. 2-4: Restrictions on Use
Sec. 2-5: Exemptions
Sec. 2-6: Notice of Restriction
Sec. 2-7: Penalties
Sec. 2-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
promote public safety by regulating the use
of motorized vehicles on bike paths and
pedestrian walkways within the City.
Sec. 2-2. Definitions.
Except as hereinafter provided the
definitions for terms contained herein as
adopted under Idaho Code 49-101 through
49-124 shall be used.
A. Bike Route. Any area on a public
street designated for bicycle use.
B. Restricted Bike Paths And Pedestrian
Walkways. Paved pathways
designated primarily for pedestrian
and/or bicycle use and specifically
designated as such on the City Bike
Paths and Pedestrian Walkways map,
and any revision thereto.
Sec. 2-3. Bike Path and Walkway
Map.
A map of the City designated "Bike
Paths and Pedestrian Walkways" and dated
February 5, 1991, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein. Three (3) copies of
this map shall be available for viewing by
the public at the office of the Clerk. The
Council may, from time to time, adopt
revisions of this map by resolution.
Sec. 2-4. Restrictions on Use.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for
any person to operate or permit to be
present a motorized vehicle upon any
restricted bike path or pedestrian walkway
identified pursuant to this Chapter.
	
		
Sec. 2-5. Exemptions.
A person is exempt from the
restrictions of this Chapter where the
operator of a motorized vehicle has
displayed in the vehicle a permit to allow
such person to operate a motorized vehicle
on the restricted bike path or pedestrian
walkway or has such written permission
from the City, or the owner of the property
if the restricted bike path or pedestrian
walkway is on property not owned by the
City. Emergency police and fire vehicles
are exempted from restrictions in this
Chapter. A motorized wheelchair or
similar conveyance operated by a disabled
person is also exempted from this Chapter
Sec. 2-6. Notice of Restriction.
All restricted bike paths and
pedestrian walkways shall post notice of
the restrictions in this Chapter. Pedestrians
shall have the right-of-way over all but
emergency vehicles.
Sec. 2-7. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction,
shall be punished pursuant to this Code and
the Idaho Code.
§ 3-1 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 3-5
Chapter 3
BICYCLES
Sec. 3-1: Definitions
Sec. 3-2: License Required
Sec. 3-3: License Receipt and Bicycle
Plate; Issuance
Sec. 3-4: License Fees and Renewal
Sec. 3-5: Sale or Transfer of Bicycle
Sec. 3-6: Change of Address
Sec. 3-7: License Receipt or Bicycle
Plate; Replacement
Sec. 3-8: Lost or Stolen Plates
Sec. 3-9: Enforcement
Sec. 3-10: Violation; Impoundment
Sec. 3-11: Tampering Prohibited
Sec. 3-12: Penalties
Sec. 3-1. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter the following
words shall have the following meanings:
A. Bicycle License Receipt. The
ownership card issued by the Police
Department upon receipt of the
designated license fee.
B. Bicycle Plate. The license tag or decal
designated by the City to be
permanently affixed to the bicycle and
which bears a unique number
permanently assigned to that bicycle
by the City.
C. Licensing Agency or Agent. That
party or parties designated by the
Council as the official licensing
agency or agent for bicycles in the
City. For purposes of this Chapter, the
Police Department shall be deemed as
the licensing agency. The Chief of
Police shall have the authority to
recommend for appointment by the
Council any person to assist the City
in the capacity of bicycle licensing
agent. Each licensing agency or agent
shall license bicycles for persons
residing in the City only; all other
bicycle license applicants shall be
referred to their representative city or
jurisdiction of residency.
Sec. 3-2. License Required.
A. No person residing in the City shall
ride or propel any bicycle on any
public street, sidewalk, alley, bicycle
lane, path, or any other public
property, or, have in such person’s
possession a bicycle which has not
been licensed according to the terms
and provisions of this Chapter.
B. Students of the University of Idaho
living within the City shall be
considered residents for the purposes
of this Chapter.
Sec. 3-3. License Receipt and
Bicycle Plate; Issuance.
A. Upon the payment of the appropriate
license fee under the provisions of this
Chapter, the City shall provide the
person applying for a license with a
license receipt bearing the owner's
name, address, telephone number,
bicycle plate number, the bicycle
manufacturer, type and frame number
and any other descriptive material
concerning the bicycle deemed
necessary by the City and the
provisions of this Chapter.
B. At the time of licensing, the bicycle
owner shall be issued a permanent
license plate bearing the unique
number permanently assigned to that
bicycle by the City. The bicycle
license shall remain in effect as long
as it is properly affixed to the bicycle.
Sec. 3-4. License Fees and Renewal.
The City shall collect a fee established
by the Council for every bicycle license
issued. This fee may be amended from
time to time by resolution of the Council.
Sec. 3-5. Sale or Transfer of Bicycle.
Whenever any person sells, trades,
disposes of, or otherwise transfers any
bicycle license under the provisions of this
Chapter, such person shall endorse upon
the license receipt previously issued for
such a bicycle a written transfer, setting
forth the name, address and telephone
§ 3-5 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 3-12
number of the transferee, the date of
transfer, the signature of the transferor, and
shall deliver such license receipt, so
endorsed, to the City within ten (10) days
of the date of transfer and shall thereby
apply for a transfer of the license on the
bicycle.
Sec. 3-6. Change of Address.
Whenever any bicycle licensee
changes his or her place of residence, such
licensee shall notify the City of such
change of address within ten (10) days.
Sec. 3-7. License Receipt or Bicycle
Plate; Replacement.
If any license receipt issued under the
provisions of this Chapter is lost or stolen,
the licensee of said bicycle shall
immediately notify the City, and within ten
(10) days after such notification shall apply
to the City for a duplicate license receipt,
whereupon, the City shall issue to licensee
a duplicate license receipt upon payment of
a new licensing fee.
Sec. 3-8. Lost or Stolen Plates.
If any bicycle plate issued under the
provisions of this Chapter is lost or stolen,
the licensee shall immediately notify the
City of such loss, and shall within ten (10)
days apply to the City for a new bicycle
plate, whereupon, the City shall issue such
licensee a new bicycle plate, upon payment
to the City of a new license fee.
Sec. 3-9. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee shall be granted the authority to
enforce and carry out the provisions of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 82-1486, 3/1/82)
Sec. 3-10. Violation; Impoundment.
A. The City shall have the right to
impound and retain possession of any
bicycle in violation of the provisions
of this Chapter, and may retain
possession of such bicycle until the
provisions of this Chapter are
complied with.
B. A fee for impoundment and storage
may be charged to the bicycle owner.
The fee shall be set from time to time
by resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 86-23, 6/16/86)
Sec. 3-11. Tampering Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
tamper with, destroy, mutilate or alter any
license receipt under the provisions of this
Chapter. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove, destroy, mutilate or in
any way alter or tamper with any bicycle
plate, sticker, or marking issued under the
provisions of this Chapter.
Sec. 3-12. Penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of
this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished pursuant to this Code and the
Idaho Code.
(Ord. 82-1486, 3/1/82)
Bicycle Ordinances 901; 82-486, 3/1/82; 86-23,
6/16/86, 91-04, 2/4/91
(Ord. 2000-20, 09/18/2000)
§ 4-1 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 4-3
Chapter 4
INFRACTIONS
Sec. 4-1: Purpose
Sec. 4-2: Nuisance, Trespass; Owner
Responsible
Sec. 4-3: Limited Parking
Sec. 4-4: City Engineer; Designation
and Signs
Sec. 4-5: Forty Eight Hour Parking
Sec. 4-6: Angle Parking
Sec. 4-7: Permit for Loading or
Unloading at an Angle to the
Curb
Sec. 4-8: Stopping, Standing or
Parking Prohibited; No
Signs Required
Sec. 4-9: Parking in Alleys
Sec. 4-10: All Night Parking Prohibited
Sec. 4-11: Repairing Vehicle on Street
Sec. 4-12: Prohibited Parking; Trucks,
Trailers and Other Vehicles
Sec. 4-13: Disability Parking
Sec. 4-14: Removal of Vehicle
Sec. 4-15: Procedure of Payment
Sec. 4-16: Fire Lanes
Sec. 4-17: Boarding or Alighting from
Vehicles
Sec. 4-18: Unlawful Riding
Sec. 4-19: Persons Propelling Push
Carts or Riding Animals to
Obey Traffic Regulations
Sec. 4-20: Use of Coasters, Roller
Skates and Similar Devices
Restricted
Sec. 4-21: Bus Stops
Sec. 4-22: Air Compression Brakes
Sec. 4-23: Farmer's Market Parking
Sec. 4-24: Parking Prohibited on
Sidewalks and Tree Lawns
Sec. 4-25: Violation
Sec. 4-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to
ensure that right of ways and other public
properties are utilized in a manner
consistent with the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City and
consistently with the City's responsibility
and its proprietary interest in the public
rights of way of the City and other public
properties.
Sec. 4-2. Nuisance, Trespass; Owner
Responsible.
A. Any vehicle parked in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. It is further
declared that any vehicle parking on
City property, including public rights
of way in violation of this provision of
this Chapter shall be considered to be
trespassing on public property. It is
further declared that the registered
owner of the vehicle shall be deemed
the party responsible for the unlawful
use of such vehicle as to the
provisions of this Chapter and shall be
prima facie responsible for any
violation as to the unattended standing
or parking of such vehicle.
B. Exceptions: Any charge under this
Chapter shall be dismissed when the
person charged has made a
documented, bona fide sale or transfer
of the vehicle and has delivered
possession thereof through the
purchaser, and has advised the Police
Department, within twenty (20) days
of notice of the violation, of the name
and address of the purchaser along
with proof of the date of sale.
(Ord. 85-16, 12/2/85)
Sec. 4-3. Limited Parking.
A. Where, in the public interest, the
Council determines that various
parking areas on public rights-of-way
or property should have limited time
duration parking, or utilize coinoperated
parking meters, or have
restricted hours on parking, the
Council may, by resolution, regulate
and restrict public parking in such
manner as it determines to be in the
public interest. Maps setting forth
areas where parking is limited shall be
on file in the office of the Clerk and in
§ 4-3 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 4-5
the police station and shall serve as
additional notice of such
limitations.
(Ord. 83-3, 4/4/83)
B. 1. The Chief of Police or the
Chief’s designee is authorized to
issue temporary parking permits to
any person who shall provide proof
acceptable to the Chief or the
Chief’s designee demonstrating that
he or she is continuously
performing construction,
remodeling, or similar activity for
the limited duration of such activity
upon application and payment in
advance of a fee to be set by
Resolution for each parking space
and for each 24-hour period for
which the temporary parking permit
is requested. Such temporary
parking permit shall not be valid
for a period longer than ten (10)
consecutive days unless upon reapplication
and issuance of a permit
as set forth herein.
2. Such temporary permit shall
exempt the permit holder from
complying with any parking
regulations as specified on the
temporary permit. Such permit
shall not exempt the permit holder
from complying with regulations
for disability parking zones, fire
hydrants, pedestrian areas, or
yellow curb zones.
3. Such permit holder shall
prominently display the temporary
parking permit in a manner that it
can be readily seen and shall not
violate any of the special terms or
conditions of such permit or other
applicable restrictions.
(Ord. 97-32, 9/8/97)
Sec. 4-4. City Engineer; Designation
and Signs.
A. The City Engineer is hereby
authorized to designate such parking
areas as are necessary for the purpose
of limited parking for, but not limited
to the following purposes; disability
parking; loading zones; bus stop
zones; taxi zones; parking relating to
emergency or medical services; permit
parking areas or where the stopping or
parking of vehicles would create
hazardous conditions or cause unusual
delay in traffic. An applicant may
appeal a denial by the Engineer to the
Council.
B. The City Engineer is hereby
authorized to prohibit parking on
narrow streets.
C. The City Engineer is hereby
authorized to erect such signs as are
necessary to provide notice to the
driving public of such zones.
D. The City Engineer Is hereby
authorized to cause curbs to be painted
to provide notice that the space or area
adjacent to the curb is a no parking
area. Parking adjacent to a curb which
is painted yellow or red shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter.
This Section shall be applicable to
private property as well as public
property.
(Ord. 85-16, 12/2/85)
Sec. 4-5. Forty-Eight Hour Parking.
No person who owns or has
possession of, custody or control of any
vehicle shall park or leave standing such
vehicle upon any street or alley for a period
in excess of forty eight (48) consecutive
hours. In the event a vehicle is parked or
left standing upon a street in excess of this
time period, and in addition to the other
remedies contained in this Chapter any law
enforcement officer or person authorized
by the Chief of Police may remove the
vehicle from the street in the manner and
subject to the requirements of the Idaho
Code.
§ 4-6 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 4-11
Sec. 4-6. Angle Parking.
A. On those streets which have been
signed or marked by the City Engineer
for angle parking, no person shall park
or stand a vehicle other than at the
angle to the curb or edge of the
roadway indicated by such signs or
markings.
B. On those streets which have been
signed or marked by the City Engineer
for angle parking, no person shall park
or stand a vehicle backed to the curb
except as provided by permit pursuant
to this Chapter.
Sec. 4-7. Permit for Loading or
Unloading at an Angle to
the Curb.
A. The Chief of Police is authorized to
issue special permits for the backing
of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose
of loading or unloading merchandise
or materials subject to the terms and
conditions of such permit. Such
permits may be issued either to the
owner or lessee of real property or to
the owner of the vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee
or other person to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any such
permit.
Sec. 4-8. Stopping, Standing or
Parking Prohibited; No
Signs Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with law or the
direction of a law enforcement officer or a
traffic control device in any of the
following places:
A. In any place where prohibited by
Idaho Code.
B. In any place where signs have been
erected at the direction of the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 2011-02, 03/21/2011)
Sec. 4-9. Parking in Alleys.
It shall be a violation of this Chapter
for any person to park a vehicle within any
alley of the City. However it shall not be
unlawful for a vehicle to remain stationary
within an alley for the minimum period of
time necessary to load or unload such
vehicle, if the only reasonable location
from which said vehicle may be loaded or
unloaded would be such alley.
Sec. 4-10. All Night Parking
Regulated.
A downtown zone which regulates
parking between the hours of three o'clock
(3:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. is
hereby established.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
park a vehicle on a public street within the
regulated downtown parking zone adopted
by the Council from time to time by
Resolution of the Council, except as
otherwise allowed in such zone between
the hours of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day. It shall
be a defense to this subsection that the
person parking a vehicle in violation of this
subsection was responding to an emergency
at the time such vehicle was parked. A
map designating the boundary of said
regulated downtown parking zone shall be
set forth in a Resolution duly adopted by
Council from time to time. A Copy of said
map shall remain on file with the Clerk.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the
City from issuing permits or waivers
otherwise authorized by this Code.
(Ord. 83-03, 3/21/83; 2009-16, 07/20/2009)
Sec. 4-11. Repairing Vehicle on
Street.
No construction, repairing,
overhauling, remodeling or other type of
work other than in case of extreme
emergency shall be performed on any
vehicle or other property upon any street,
alley, park, parking lot or other public
property or place within the City.
§ 4-12 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 4-19
Sec. 4-12. Prohibited Parking;
Trucks, Trailers and Other
Vehicles.
A. No person shall park or leave standing
on any public street, or on a public
off-street parking area, any of the
following vehicles:
1. Any truck tractor as defined by
Idaho Code.
2. Any trailer not attached to a
motor vehicle (other than a
recreational vehicle as defined in
Idaho Code).
3. Any bus as defined by Idaho
Code.
4. Any motor truck as defined by
Idaho Code with not less than two (2)
of the following three (3) features:
a. A diameter of the wheel rim
of seventeen inches (17") or more;
b. More than two (2) axles;
c. More than two (2) wheels on
any one axle.
5. Farm machines.
6. Special purpose machines.
7. Any unlicensed vehicle.
8. Any vehicle with an expired
license.
9. Any vehicle not having the proper
permit while in a “permit parking
area.”
(Ord. 85-16, 12/2/85)
B. It shall be a defense to this Section
that a proscribed vehicle is: (a)
temporarily mechanically disabled for
a period of less than seventy-two (72)
hours immediately preceding the
issuance of a citation; (b) currently
loading or unloading persons and/or
property, or (c) parked or left standing
in connection with and in the aid or
the performance of a service to or on
property in the block in which such
vehicle is parked or left standing and
the physical presence of the vehicle is
necessary to such service.
Sec. 4-13. Disability Parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
stop, stand or park a vehicle in a designated
disability parking space or area as defined
in Idaho Code Section 49-410, unless the
(an) occupant has complied with Idaho
Code Section 49-410. This Section shall
apply to both public and private parking
areas which are properly designated.
(Ord. 86-22, 6/16/86)
Sec. 4-14. Removal of Vehicle.
The Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee may remove and impound any
unlawfully parked vehicle or cause the
registered owner to be issued with a
citation, or both.
Sec. 4-15. Procedure of Payment.
For public convenience and to avoid
burdening the judicial system, any person
receiving a citation for any violation of this
Chapter may make payment in satisfaction
of such violation to the City in accordance
with fees, which may, from time to time,
be adopted by the Council by Resolution.
(Ord. 83-03, 4/4/83)
Sec. 4-16. Fire Lanes.
It shall be a violation of this Chapter
for any vehicle to park in a fire lane, either
on public or private property.
(Ord. 85-16, 12/2/85)
Sec. 4-17. Boarding or Alighting
from Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
board or alight from any vehicle while such
vehicle is in motion.
Sec. 4-18. Unlawful Riding.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
ride any vehicle upon any portion of
such vehicle not designated or
intended for the use of passengers.
B. This provision shall not apply to
persons riding within vehicles in areas
intended for merchandise.
Sec. 4-19. Persons Propelling Push
Carts or Riding Animals to
Obey Traffic Regulations.
Every person propelling any push cart
or driving any animal drawn vehicle or
riding an animal upon a roadway shall be
§ 4-19 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 4-24
subject to the provisions of this Chapter
applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions which by their very
own nature can have no application.
Sec. 4-20. Use of Coasters, Roller
Skates and Similar Devices
Restricted.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person
upon roller skates or riding any
coaster, toy vehicle or similar device
to go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and
when crossing such person shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable
to pedestrians.
B. This Chapter shall not apply upon any
street while set aside as a play street.
Sec. 4-21. Bus Stops.
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand
or park such vehicles upon any street
at any place other than at a bus stand
so designated.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop
such vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or
unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand or
passenger loading zone so designated
except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus
stop, bus stand or passenger loading
zone on a public street in such a
manner that the bus when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage
shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not farther
than eighteen (18) inches from the
curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly
impede the movement of other
vehicular traffic.
Sec. 4-22. Air Compression Brakes.
The use of air compression brakes
(also known as Jake Brakes) by trucks
within the City is hereby prohibited and
shall be unlawful, except under emergency
circumstances where use of air
compression brakes is necessary to prevent
an accident or injury to persons or property.
(Ord. 87-09, 9/21/87)
Sec. 4-23. Farmers Market Parking
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to
park or leave standing a vehicle in the
Farmers Market Parking Zone, as
defined herein, between the hours of
three o’clock (3:00) a.m. and two
o’clock (2:00) p.m. local time every
Saturday in the months of May through
October annually. It shall be a defense
to this Section that a vehicle has been
specifically authorized by the City to
be present in the Farmers Market
Parking Zone.
B. For purposes of this Section, “Farmers
Market Parking Zone” shall mean
every portion of a public right-of-way
or City controlled property located
within the Farmers Market boundaries,
as established from time to time by
Resolution of the Council.
C. In addition to any other remedies
contained in this Section, any law
enforcement officer or person
authorized by the Chief of Police may
remove the vehicle from the Farmers
Market Parking Zone in the manner
and subject to the requirements of the
Idaho Code, including the towing of
the vehicle.
(Ord. 2002-08, 03/18/2002; 2009-17,
07/20/2009; 2010-07, 04/05/2010; 2012-18,
08/20/2012)
Sec. 4-24. Parking Prohibited on
Sidewalks and Tree Lawns
A. Definitions. For purposes of this
Subsection, the following terms,
phrases, and words shall have the
following meanings:
1. Sidewalk. Any concrete,
asphaltic paving or brick material
adjacent to a public street, whether
within the public right-of-way or on
private property, which is designed for
pedestrian use.
§ 4-24 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 4-25
2. Tree Lawn. That portion of the
public right-of-way lying between the
street and private property lines which
is generally unimproved and which
may be planted with grass or other
vegetation.
B. Except for emergency or City
authorized vehicles, no person shall
park or stand a vehicle on a sidewalk
or tree lawn.
(Ord. 2007-12, 10/01/2007)
Sec. 4-25. Violation.
Any violation of any provision of this
Chapter shall be considered an infraction,
punishable pursuant to this Code and the
Idaho Code. Each limited time period for
which a vehicle is parked shall constitute a
separate violation of this Chapter (if a
vehicle is parked more than six (6) hours in
a three (3) hour limited parking zone, two
(2) separate violations have taken place).
Either the registered owner of the vehicle
or the driver, if known, may be cited.
However, only one (1) citation may be
issued for each violation.
(Ord. 2007-12, 10/01/2007)
§ 5-1 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 5-3
Chapter 5
SNOW REMOVAL PROCLAMATION
Sec. 5-1: Purpose
Sec. 5-2: Definitions
Sec. 5-3: Parking Prohibited on Snow
Route Streets When Snow
Removal Proclamation in Effect
Sec. 5-4: Snow Removal Proclamation
Sec. 5-5: No Effect on Other Parking
Restrictions
Sec. 5-6: Removal of Vehicles
Sec. 5-7: Payment of Towing and/or
Storage Fees
Sec. 5-8: Violations; Penalties
Sec. 5-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this Chapter are to
make the removal of snow and ice from
certain public streets safe, economical, and
more efficient; to reduce or to avoid
collisions of snow removal equipment with
motor vehicles, motorcycles, trailers, etc.;
and to provide an efficient and systematic
utilization of snow removal equipment when
a Snow Removal Proclamation is in effect..
Sec. 5-2. Definitions.
A. Motor Vehicle: Every selfpropelled
device in, upon or by which any
person or property is or may be transported
or drawn upon a public street, public rightof-
way, or highway, except vehicles or
devices used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks.
B. Motorcycle: A motor vehicle
having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on no more than
three (3) wheels in contact with the ground.
C. Trailer: Every vehicle without
motive power designed to carry persons or
property and which is drawn by a motor
vehicle.
Sec. 5-3. Parking Prohibited On Snow Route Streets When Snow Removal Proclamation
In Effect.
Parking of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, trailer or other conveyance or object shall be
prohibited on the following Snow Route streets within the City when a Snow Removal
Proclamation is in effect: (Snow Route Map)
Snow Route Street From To
“A” St. Farm Rd. Main St.
“D” St. Main St. Eisenhower St.
“F” St. Hayes St. Orchard Ave.
Farm Rd. Pullman Rd.(SH 8) “A” St.
Hayes St. Sixth St. “F” St.
Jackson St. (Hwy. 95) Main St. (North Couplet) Troy Rd. (South Couplet)
Lauder Ave. Taylor Ave. Main St.
Line St. Pullman Rd.(SH 8) “A” St.
Main St. (Hwy 95) North City Limit “A” St. (North Couplet)
Main St. (Hwy 95) Troy Rd. (South Couplet) South City Limit
Mountain View Rd. Thatuna Ave. Palouse River Dr.
Orchard Ave. “F” St. Highland Dr.
Pullman Rd. (SH 8) State Line (West City Limit) Lieuallen St.
Robinson Park Rd. White Ave. East City Limit
Sixth St. Deakin Ave. Mountain View Rd.
Styner Ave. Main St. Troy Rd.(SH 8)
Taylor Ave. Blake Ave. Lauder Ave.
Third St. Lieuallen St. Hayes St.
Troy Rd. (SH 8) Jackson St. (South Couplet) Mountain View Rd.
Washington St. (Hwy. 95) Troy Rd.(South Couplet) Main St. (North Couplet)
White Ave. Troy Rd.(SH 8) Robinson Park Rd.
§ 5-3 TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC § 5-8
A map of Snow Route streets where parking
is prohibited when a Snow Removal
Proclamation is in effect shall be available
for review by the public at the office of the
City Clerk and of the Public Works
department during regular City business
hours.
Sec. 5-4. Snow Removal
Proclamation.
A. Proclamation Issuance and
Rescission. The Mayor may issue a Snow
Removal Proclamation when snow fall has
accumulated or is expected to accumulate on
public streets and public properties of the
City in an amount sufficient to pose a hazard
to the health, safety, and/or welfare of the
inhabitants and/or property of the City. Such
Snow Removal Proclamation shall order the
Snow Removal Proclamation parking
restrictions in this Chapter be in effect and
shall state the specific date and time when
such restrictions shall go into effect. The
Mayor may rescind a Snow Removal
Proclamation at any time with or without the
consent of the Council. The Council may
rescind a Snow Removal Proclamation at any
time by a majority vote.
B. Notice of Proclamation. Parking
restrictions in this Chapter shall become
effective upon the date and time stated in the
Snow Removal Proclamation, provided, that,
in no event shall such restrictions become
effective before the expiration of not less
than twelve (12) hours following the first
time when the Snow Removal Proclamation
is broadcast at least once by any radio or
television station serving a general audience
within the City or before eight o’clock (8:00)
a.m. of the day following the date on which
the Snow Removal Proclamation is first
published in the official newspaper of the
City, whichever is sooner.
Sec. 5-5. No Effect on Other Parking
Restrictions.
This Chapter is intended to alter parking
regulations in this Code only to the extent
necessary to comply with the contents of this
Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter (including
issuance of a Snow Removal Proclamation)
shall alter parking regulations in the
Regulated Downtown Parking Zone adopted
by Resolution of the Council
Sec. 5-6. Removal of Vehicles.
Any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or
trailer parked upon any public Snow Route
street in violation of this Chapter may be
removed at any time at the direction of a City
peace officer and may also be towed and
stored in any public or private storage lot
without prior notice to the owner or operator
of such motor vehicle, motorcycle, or trailer.
Sec. 5-7. Payment of Towing and/or
Storage Fees.
The owner or operator of any motor
vehicle, motorcycle, or trailer towed to or
stored in a private storage lot pursuant to this
Chapter shall be responsible for all
reasonable towing and storage charges
related to storage of such motor vehicle,
motorcycle, or trailer. Charges shall be paid
to the private towing company before the
motor vehicle, motorcycle, or trailer is
released. If the motor vehicle, motorcycle,
or trailer is towed to a storage lot owned,
controlled, or leased by the City, the
appropriate towing charge shall be paid to
the City. If the motor vehicle, motorcycle, or
trailer is stored on City property, a
reasonable storage fee shall be paid to the
City.
Sec. 5-8. Violations; Penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of
this Chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished pursuant to this Code
and the Idaho Code.
B. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation of this Chapter shall not
excuse such violation or permit such
violation to continue.
C. Each twenty four (24) hour period or
part thereof, following notice of the
Snow Removal Proclamation provided
in this Chapter, shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2009-22, 10/19/2009)
TITLE 11 — TRAFFIC
 



